
Produced by Mike Lough





A BOOK OF REMARKABLE CRIMINALS

By H.B. Irving


TO MY FRIEND

E. V. LUCAS



"For violence and hurt tangle every man in their toils, and for the most
part fall on the head of him from whom they had their rise; nor is it
easy for one who by his act breaks the common pact of peace to lead a
calm and quiet life."

Lucretius on the Nature of Things.


Transcriber's Note:

The upper outside corner of page 15 and 16 has been torn from the
hardcopy. The spots are marked with?? and a best guess at missing words
is in brackets. Footnotes have been moved from end of page to end of
paragraph positions, sequentially numbered.


Contents

     INTRODUCTION

     THE LIFE OF CHARLES PEACE:

     I. HIS EARLY YEARS
     II. PEACE IN LONDON
     III. HIS TRIAL AND EXECUTION

     THE CAREER OF ROBERT BUTLER:

     I. THE DUNEDIN MURDERS
     II. THE TRIAL OF BUTLER
     III. HIS DECLINE AND FALL

     M. DERUES:

     I. THE CLIMBING LITTLE GROCER
     II. THE GAYE OF BLUFF

     DR. CASTAING:

     I. AN UNHAPPY COINCIDENCE
     II. THE TRIAL OF DR. CASTAING

     PROFESSOR WEBSTER


     THE MYSTERIOUS MR. HOLMES:

     I. HONOUR AMONGST THIEVES
     II THE WANDERING ASSASSIN

     PARTNERSHIP IN CRIME:

     I. THE WIDOW GRAS
        1. THE CHARMER
        2. THE WOUNDED PIGEON
     II. VITALIS AND MARIE BOYER
     III. THE FENAYROU CASE
     IV. EYRAUD AND BOMPARD





A BOOK OF REMARKABLE CRIMINALS




Introduction

"The silent workings, and still more the explosions, of human passion
which bring to light the darker elements of man's nature present to the
philosophical observer considerations of intrinsic interest; while
to the jurist, the study of human nature and human character with its
infinite varieties, especially as affecting the connection between
motive and action, between irregular desire or evil disposition and
crime itself, is equally indispensable and difficult."--_Wills on
Circumstantial Evidence_.

I REMEMBER my father telling me that sitting up late one night talking
with Tennyson, the latter remarked that he had not kept such late
hours since a recent visit of Jowett. On that occasion the poet and
the philosopher had talked together well into the small hours of the
morning. My father asked Tennyson what was the subject of conversation
that had so engrossed them. "Murders," replied Tennyson. It would have
been interesting to have heard Tennyson and Jowett discussing such a
theme. The fact is a tribute to the interest that crime has for many
men of intellect and imagination. Indeed, how could it be otherwise?
Rob history and fiction of crime, how tame and colourless would be the
residue! We who are living and enduring in the presence of one of the
greatest crimes on record, must realise that trying as this period of
the world's history is to those who are passing through it, in the hands
of some great historian it may make very good reading for posterity.
Perhaps we may find some little consolation in this fact, like the
unhappy victims of famous freebooters such as Jack Sheppard or Charley
Peace.

But do not let us flatter ourselves. Do not let us, in all the pomp and
circumstance of stately history, blind ourselves to the fact that the
crimes of Frederick, or Napoleon, or their successors, are in essence no
different from those of Sheppard or Peace. We must not imagine that
the bad man who happens to offend against those particular laws which
constitute the criminal code belongs to a peculiar or atavistic type,
that he is a man set apart from the rest of his fellow-men by mental or
physical peculiarities. That comforting theory of the Lombroso school
has been exploded, and the ordinary inmates of our prisons shown to be
only in a very slight degree below the average in mental and physical
fitness of the normal man, a difference easily explained by the
environment and conditions in which the ordinary criminal is bred.

A certain English judge, asked as to the general characteristics of the
prisoners tried before him, said: "They are just like other people;
in fact, I often think that, but for different opportunities and other
accidents, the prisoner and I might very well be in one another's
places." "Greed, love of pleasure," writes a French judge, "lust,
idleness, anger, hatred, revenge, these are the chief causes of crime.
These passions and desires are shared by rich and poor alike, by the
educated and uneducated. They are inherent in human nature; the germ is
in every man."

Convicts represent those wrong-doers who have taken to a particular form
of wrong-doing punishable by law. Of the larger army of bad men
they represent a minority, who have been found out in a peculiarly
unsatisfactory kind of misconduct. There are many men, some lying,
unscrupulous, dishonest, others cruel, selfish, vicious, who go through
life without ever doing anything that brings them within the scope of
the criminal code, for whose offences the laws of society provide no
punishment. And so it is with some of those heroes of history who have
been made the theme of fine writing by gifted historians.

Mr. Basil Thomson, the present head of the Criminal Investigation
Department, has said recently that a great deal of crime is due to a
spirit of "perverse adventure" on the part of the criminal. The same
might be said with equal justice of the exploits of Alexander the Great
and half the monarchs and conquerors of the world, whom we are taught
in our childhood's days to look up to as shining examples of all that a
great man should be. Because crimes are played on a great stage instead
of a small, that is no reason why our moral judgment should be suspended
or silenced. Class Machiavelli and Frederick the Great as a couple of
rascals fit to rank with Jonathan Wild, and we are getting nearer a
perception of what constitutes the real criminal. "If," said Frederick
the Great to his minister, Radziwill, "there is anything to be gained
by it, we will be honest; if deception is necessary, let us be cheats."
These are the very sentiments of Jonathan Wild.

Crime, broadly speaking, is the attempt by fraud or violence to possess
oneself of something belonging to another, and as such the cases of it
in history are as clear as those dealt with in criminal courts. Germany
to-day has been guilty of a perverse and criminal adventure, the outcome
of that false morality applied to historical transactions, of which
Carlyle's life of Frederick is a monumental example. In that book
we have a man whose instincts in more ways than one were those of a
criminal, held up for our admiration, in the same way that the same
writer fell into dithyrambic praise over a villain called Francia, a
former President of Paraguay. A most interesting work might be written
on the great criminals of history, and might do something towards
restoring that balance of moral judgment in historical transactions, for
the perversion of which we are suffering to-day.

In the meantime we must be content to study in the microcosm of ordinary
crime those instincts, selfish, greedy, brutal which, exploited often
by bad men in the so-called cause of nations, have wrought such havoc
to the happiness of mankind. It is not too much to say that in every
man there dwell the seeds of crime; whether they grow or are stifled
in their growth by the good that is in us is a chance mysteriously
determined. As children of nature we must not be surprised if our
instincts are not all that they should be. "In sober truth," writes
John Stuart Mill, "nearly all the things for which men are hanged or
imprisoned for doing to one another are nature's everyday performances,"
and in another passage: "The course of natural phenomena being replete
with everything which when committed by human beings is most worthy of
abhorrence, anyone who endeavoured in his actions to imitate the natural
course of things would be universally seen and acknowledged to be the
wickedest of men."

Here is explanation enough for the presence of evil in our natures, that
instinct to destroy which finds comparatively harmless expression in
certain forms of taking life, which is at its worst when we fall
to taking each other's. It is to check an inconvenient form of the
expression of this instinct that we punish murderers with death. We must
carry the definition of murder a step farther before we can count
on peace or happiness in this world. We must concentrate all our
strength on fighting criminal nature, both in ourselves and in the
world around us. With the destructive forces of nature we are waging a
perpetual struggle for our very existence. Why dissipate our strength by
fighting among ourselves? By enlarging our conception of crime we move
towards that end. What is anti-social, whether it be written in the
pages of the historian or those of the Newgate Calendar, must in the
future be regarded with equal abhorrence and subjected to equally sure
punishment. Every professor of history should now and then climb down
from the giddy heights of Thucydides and Gibbon and restore his moral
balance by comparing the acts of some of his puppets with those of their
less fortunate brethren who have dangled at the end of a rope. If this
war is to mean anything to posterity, the crime against humanity must be
judged in the future by the same rigid standard as the crime against the
person.

The individual criminals whose careers are given in this book have been
chosen from among their fellows for their pre-eminence in character or
achievement. Some of the cases, such as Butler, Castaing and Holmes, are
new to most English readers.

Charles Peace is the outstanding popular figure in nineteenth-century
crime. He is the type of the professional criminal who makes crime a
business and sets about it methodically and persistently to the end.
Here is a man, possessing many of those qualities which go to make the
successful man of action in all walks of life, driven by circumstances
to squander them on a criminal career. Yet it is a curious circumstance
that this determined and ruthless burglar should have suffered for what
would be classed in France as a "crime passionel." There is more than
a possibility that a French jury would have found extenuating circumstances in the murder of Dyson. The fate of Peace is only another instance of the wrecking a strong man's career by his passion for a woman. In Albert Butler we have the criminal by conviction, a conviction which finds the ground ready prepared
for its growth in the natural laziness and idleness of the man's
disposition. The desire to acquire things by a short cut, without taking
the trouble to work for them honestly, is perhaps the most fruitful of
all sources of crime. Butler, a bit of a pedant, is pleased to
justify his conduct by reason and philosophy--he finds in the acts of
unscrupulous monarchs an analogy to his own attitude towards life. What
is good enough for Caesar Borgia is good enough for Robert Butler. Like
Borgia he comes to grief; criminals succeed and criminals fail. In the
case of historical criminals their crimes are open; we can estimate the
successes and failures. With ordinary criminals, we know only those
who fail. The successful, the real geniuses in crime, those whose guilt
remains undiscovered, are for the most part unknown to us. Occasionally
in society a man or woman is pointed out as having once murdered
somebody or other, and at times, no doubt, with truth. But the matter
can only be referred to clandestinely; they are gazed at with awe or
curiosity, mute witnesses to their own achievement. Some years ago James
Payn, the novelist, hazarded the reckoning that one person in every five
hundred was an undiscovered murderer. This gives us all a hope, almost
a certainty, that we may reckon one such person at least among our
acquaintances.(1)


     (1) The author was one of three men discussing this subject in a London
club. They were able to name six persons of their various acquaintance
who were, or had been, suspected of being successful murderers.


Derues is remarkable for the extent of his social ambition, the daring
and impudent character of his attempts to gratify it, the skill, the
consummate hypocrisy with which he played on the credulity of honest
folk, and his flagrant employment of that weapon known and recognised
to-day in the most exalted spheres by the expressive name of "bluff."
He is remarkable, too, for his mirth and high spirits, his genial
buffoonery; the merry murderer is a rare bird.

Professor Webster belongs to that order of criminal of which Eugene Aram
and the Rev. John Selby Watson are our English examples, men of culture
and studious habits who suddenly burst on the astonished gaze of
their fellowmen as murderers. The exact process of mind by which these
hitherto harmless citizens are converted into assassins is to a great
extent hidden from us.

Perhaps Webster's case is the clearest of the three. Here we have a
selfish, self-indulgent and spendthrift gentleman who has landed himself
in serious financial embarrassment, seeking by murder to escape from an
importunate and relentless creditor. He has not, apparently, the moral
courage to face the consequences of his own weakness. He forgets the
happiness of his home, the love of those dear to him, in the desire to
free himself from a disgrace insignificent{sic} in comparison with that
entailed by committing the highest of all crimes. One would wish to
believe that Webster's deed was unpremeditated, the result of a sudden
gust of passion caused by his victim's acrimonious pursuit of his
debtor. But there are circumstances in the case which tell powerfully
against such a view. The character of the murderer seems curiously
contradictory; both cunning and simplicity mark his proceedings; he
makes a determined attempt to escape from the horrors of his situation
and shows at the same time a curious insensibility to its real gravity.
Webster was a man of refined tastes and seemingly gentle character,
loved by those near to him, well liked by his friends.

The mystery that surrounds the real character of Eugene Aram is greater,
and we possess little or no means of solving it. From what motive this
silent, arrogant man, despising his ineffectual wife, this reserved and
moody scholar stooped to fraud and murder the facts of the case help us
little to determine. Was it the hope of leaving the narrow surroundings
of Knaresborough, his tiresome belongings, his own poor way of life,
and seeking a wider field for the exercise of those gifts of scholarship
which he undoubtedly possessed that drove him to commit fraud in company
with Clark and Houseman, and then, with the help of the latter,
murder the unsuspecting Clark? The fact of his humble origin makes
his association with so low a ruffian as Houseman the less remarkable.
Vanity in all probability played a considerable part in Aram's
disposition. He would seem to have thought himself a superior person,
above the laws that bind ordinary men. He showed at the end no
consciousness of his guilt. Being something of a philosopher, he had
no doubt constructed for himself a philosophy of life which served to
justify his own actions. He was a deist, believing in "one almighty
Being the God of Nature," to whom he recommended himself at the last in
the event of his "having done amiss." He emphasised the fact that his
life had been unpolluted and his morals irreproachable. But his views
as to the murder of Clark he left unexpressed. He suggested as
justification of it that Clark had carried on an intrigue with his
neglected wife, but he never urged this circumstance in his defence, and
beyond his own statement there is no evidence of such a connection.

The Revd. John Selby Watson, headmaster of the Stockwell Grammar School,
at the age of sixty-five killed his wife in his library one Sunday
afternoon. Things had been going badly with the unfortunate man. After
more than twenty-five years' service as headmaster of the school at a
meagre salary of L400 a year, he was about to be dismissed; the
number of scholars had been declining steadily and a change in the
headmastership thought necessary; there was no suggestion of his
receiving any kind of pension. The future for a man of his years
was dark enough. The author of several learned books, painstaking,
scholarly, dull, he could hope to make but little money from literary
work. Under a cold, reserved and silent exterior, Selby Watson concealed
a violence of temper which he sought diligently to repress. His wife's
temper was none of the best. Worried, depressed, hopeless of his future,
he in all probability killed his wife in a sudden access of rage,
provoked by some taunt or reproach on her part, and then, instead of
calling in a policeman and telling him what he had done, made clumsy and
ineffectual efforts to conceal his crime. Medical opinion was divided as
to his mental condition. Those doctors called for the prosecution could
find no trace of insanity about him, those called for the defence said
that he was suffering from melancholia. The unhappy man would appear
hardly to have realised the gravity of his situation. To a friend who
visited him in prison he said: "Here's a man who can write Latin, which
the Bishop of Winchester would commend, shut up in a place like this."
Coming from a man who had spent all his life buried in books and knowing
little of the world the remark is not so greatly to be wondered at.
Profound scholars are apt to be impatient of mundane things. Professor
Webster showed a similar want of appreciation of the circumstances of a
person charged with wilful murder. Selby Watson was convicted of murder
and sentenced to death. The sentence was afterwards commuted to one of
penal servitude for life, the Home Secretary of the day showing by
his decision that, though not satisfied of the prisoner's insanity, he
recognised certain extenuating circumstances in his guilt.(2)


     (2) Selby Watson was tried at the Central Criminal Court January, 1872.


In Castaing much ingenuity is shown in the conception of the crime,
but the man is weak and timid; he is not the stuff of which the great
criminal is made; Holmes is cast in the true mould of the instinctive
murderer. Castaing is a man of sensibility, capable of domestic
affection; Holmes completely insensible to all feelings of humanity.
Taking life is a mere incident in the accomplishment of his schemes;
men, women and children are sacrificed with equal mercilessness to the
necessary end. A consummate liar and hypocrite, he has that strange
power of fascination over others, women in particular, which is often
independent altogether of moral or even physical attractiveness. We
are accustomed to look for a certain vastness, grandeur of scale in the
achievements of America. A study of American crime will show that it
does not disappoint us in this expectation. The extent and audacity of
the crimes of Holmes are proof of it.

To find a counterpart in imaginative literature to the complete criminal
of the Holmes type we must turn to the pages of Shakespeare. In the
number of his victims, the cruelty and insensibility with which he
attains his ends, his unblushing hypocrisy, the fascination he can
exercise at will over others, the Richard III. of Shakespeare shows how
clearly the poet understood the instinctive criminal of real life. The
Richard of history was no doubt less instinctively and deliberately an
assassin than the Richard of Shakespeare. In the former we can trace
the gradual temptation to crime to which circumstances provoke him. The
murder of the Princes, if, as one writer contends, it was not the work
of Henry VII.--in which case that monarch deserves to be hailed as
one of the most consummate criminals that ever breathed and the worthy
father of a criminal son--was no doubt forced to a certain extent on
Richard by the exigencies of his situation, one of those crimes to which
bad men are driven in order to secure the fruits of other crimes. But
the Richard of Shakespeare is no child of circumstance. He espouses
deliberately a career of crime, as deliberately as Peace or Holmes or
Butler; he sets out "determined to prove a villain," to be "subtle,
false and treacherous," to employ to gain his ends "stern murder in the
dir'st degree." The character is sometimes criticised as being overdrawn
and unreal. It may not be true to the Richard of history, but it is very
true to crime, and to the historical criminal of the Borgian or Prussian
type, in which fraud and violence are made part of a deliberate system
of so-called statecraft.

Shakespeare got nearer to what we may term the domestic as opposed to
the political criminal when he created Iago. In their envy and dislike
of their fellowmen, their contempt for humanity in general, their
callousness to the ordinary sympathies of human nature, Robert Butler,
Lacenaire, Ruloff are witnesses to the poet's fidelity to criminal
character in his drawing of the Ancient. But there is a weakness in
the character of Iago regarded as a purely instinctive and malignant
criminal; indeed it is a weakness in the consistency of the play. On two
occasions Iago states explicitly that Othello is more than suspected of
having committed adultery with his wife, Emilia, and that therefore he
has a strong and justifiable motive for being revenged on the Moor.
The thought of it he describes as "gnawing his inwards." Emilia's
conversation with Desdemona in the last act lends some colour to the
correctness of Iago's belief. If this belief be well-founded it
must greatly modify his character as a purely wanton and mischievous
criminal, a supreme villain, and lower correspondingly the character
of Othello as an honourable and high-minded man. If it be a morbid
suspicion, having no ground in fact, a mental obsession, then Iago
becomes abnormal and consequently more or less irresponsible. But this
suggestion of Emilia's faithlessness made in the early part of the play
is never followed up by the dramatist, and the spectator is left in
complete uncertainty as to whether there be any truth or not in
Iago's suspicion. If Othello has played his Ancient false, that is an
extenuating circumstance in the otherwise extraordinary guilt of Iago,
and would no doubt be accorded to him as such, were he on trial before a
French jury.

The most successful, and therefore perhaps the greatest, criminal in
Shakespeare is King Claudius of Denmark. His murder of his brother by
pouring a deadly poison into his ear while sleeping, is so skilfully
perpetrated as to leave no suspicion of foul play. But for a
supernatural intervention, a contingency against which no murderer could
be expected to have provided, the crime of Claudius would never have
been discovered. Smiling, jovial, genial as M. Derues or Dr. Palmer,
King Claudius might have gone down to his grave in peace as the bluff
hearty man of action, while his introspective nephew would in all
probability have ended his days in the cloister, regarded with amiable
contempt by his bustling fellowmen. How Claudius got over the great
difficulty of all poisoners, that of procuring the necessary poison
without detection, we are not told; by what means he distilled the
"juice of cursed hebenon"; how the strange appearance of the late
King's body, which "an instant tetter" had barked about with "vile and
loathsome crust," was explained to the multitude we are left to imagine.
There is no real evidence to show that Queen Gertrude was her lover's
accomplice in her husband's murder. If that had been so, she would
no doubt have been of considerable assistance to Claudius in the
preparation of the crime. But in the absence of more definite proof
we must assume Claudius' murder of his brother to have been a solitary
achievement, skilfully carried out by one whose genial good-fellowship
and convivial habits gave the lie to any suggestion of criminality.
Whatever may have been his inward feelings of remorse or self-reproach,
Claudius masked them successfully from the eyes of all. Hamlet's
instinctive dislike of his uncle was not shared by the members of the
Danish court. The "witchcraft of his wit," his "traitorous gifts,"
were powerful aids to Claudius, not only in the seduction of his
sister-in-law, but the perpetration of secret murder.

The case of the murder of King Duncan of Scotland by Macbeth and his
wife belongs to a different class of crime. It is a striking example of
dual crime, four instances of which are given towards the end of this
book. An Italian advocate, Scipio Sighele, has devoted a monograph to
the subject of dual crime, in which he examines a number of cases in
which two persons have jointly committed heinous crimes.(3) He finds
that in couples of this kind there is usually an incubus and a succubus,
the one who suggests the crime, the other on whom the suggestion works
until he or she becomes the accomplice or instrument of the stronger
will; "the one playing the Mephistophelian part of tempter, preaching
evil, urging to crime, the other allowing himself to be overcome by his
evil genius." In some cases these two roles are clearly differentiated;
it is easy, as in the case of Iago and Othello, Cassius and Brutus, to
say who prompted the crime. In others the guilt seems equally divided
and the original suggestion of crime to spring from a mutual tendency
towards the adoption of such an expedient. In Macbeth and his wife we
have a perfect instance of the latter class. No sooner have the witches
prophesied that Macbeth shall be a king than the "horrid image" of
the suggestion to murder Duncan presents itself to his mind, and, on
returning to his wife, he answers her question as to when Duncan is
to leave their house by the significant remark, "To-morrow--as he
proposes." To Lady Macbeth from the moment she has received her
husband's letter telling of the prophecy of the weird sisters, murder
occurs as a means of accomplishing their prediction. In the minds
of Macbeth and his wife the suggestion of murder is originally an
auto-suggestion, coming to them independently of each other as soon as
they learn from the witches that Macbeth is one day to be a king. To
Banquo a somewhat similar intimation is given, but no foul thought of
crime suggests itself for an instant to his loyal nature. What Macbeth
and his wife lack at first as thorough-going murderers is that complete
insensibility to taking human life that marks the really ruthless
assassin. Lady Macbeth has the stronger will of the two for the
commission of the deed. It is doubtful whether without her help Macbeth
would ever have undertaken it. But even she, when her husband hesitates
to strike, cannot bring herself to murder the aged Duncan with her own
hands because of his resemblance as he sleeps to her father. It is only
after a deal of boggling and at serious risk of untimely interruption
that the two contrive to do the murder, and plaster with blood the
"surfeited grooms." In thus putting suspicion on the servants of Duncan
the assassins cunningly avert suspicion from themselves, and Macbeth's
killing of the unfortunate men in seeming indignation at the discovery
of their crime is a master-stroke of ingenuity. "Who," he asks in a
splendid burst of feigned horror, "can be wise, amazed, temperate and
furious, loyal and natural in a moment?" At the same time Lady Macbeth
affects to swoon away in the presence of so awful a crime. For the time
all suspicion of guilt, except in the mind of Banquo, is averted from
the real murderers. But, like so many criminals, Macbeth finds it
impossible to rest on his first success in crime. His sensibility grows
dulled; he "forgets the taste of fear"; the murder of Banquo and his
son is diabolically planned, and that is soon followed by the outrageous
slaughter of the wife and children of Macduff. Ferri, the Italian writer
on crime, describes the psychical condition favourable to the commission
of murder as an absence of both moral repugnance to the crime itself and
the fear of the consequences following it. In the murder of Duncan, it
is the first of these two states of mind to which Macbeth and his wife
have only partially attained. The moral repugnance stronger in the
man has not been wholly lost by the woman. But as soon as the crime is
successfully accomplished, this repugnance begins to wear off until the
King and Queen are able calmly and deliberately to contemplate those
further crimes necessary to their peace of mind. But now Macbeth, at
first the more compunctious of the two, has become the more ruthless;
the germ of crime, developed by suggestion, has spread through his whole
being; he has begun to acquire that indifference to human suffering with
which Richard III. and Iago were gifted from the first. In both
Macbeth and Lady Macbeth the germ of crime was latent; they wanted only
favourable circumstances to convert them into one of those criminal
couples who are the more dangerous for the fact that the temptation
to crime has come to each spontaneously and grown and been fostered by
mutual understanding, an elective affinity for evil. Such couples are
frequent in the history of crime. Eyraud and Bompard, Mr. and Mrs.
Manning, Burke and Hare, the Peltzer brothers, Barre and Lebiez, are
instances of those collaborations in crime which find their counterpart
in history, literature, drama and business. Antoninus and Aurelius,
Ferdinand and Isabella, the De Goncourt brothers, Besant and Rice,
Gilbert and Sullivan, Swan and Edgar leap to the memory.


     (3) "Le Crime a Deux," by Scipio Sighele (translated from the Italian),
Lyons, 1893.

In the cases of Eyraud and Bompard, both man and woman are idle, vicious
criminals by instinct. They come together, lead an abandoned life,
sinking lower and lower in moral degradation. In the hour of need, crime
presents itself as a simple expedient for which neither of them has any
natural aversion. The repugnance to evil, if they ever felt it, has
long since disappeared from their natures. The man is serious, the woman
frivolous, but the criminal tendency in both cases is the same; each
performs his or her part in the crime with characteristic aptitude.
Mrs. Manning was a creature of much firmer character than her husband,
a woman of strong passions, a redoubtable murderess. Without her
dominating force Manning might never have committed murder. But he was a
criminal before the crime, more than suspected as a railway official of
complicity in a considerable train robbery; in his case the suggestion
of murder involved only the taking of a step farther in a criminal
career. Manning suffered from nerves almost as badly as Macbeth; after
the deed he sought to drown the prickings of terror and remorse by heavy
drinking Mrs. Manning was never troubled with any feelings of this kind;
after the murder of O'Connor the gratification of her sexual passion
seemed uppermost in her mind; and she met the consequences of her crime
fearlessly. Burke and Hare were a couple of ruffians, tempted by what
must have seemed almost fabulous wealth to men of their wretched
poverty to commit a series of cruel murders. Hare, with his queer,
Mephistophelian countenance, was the wickeder of the two. Burke became
haunted as time went on and flew to drink to banish horror, but Hare
would seem to have been free from such "compunctious visitings of
Nature." He kept his head and turned King's evidence.

In the case of the Peltzer brothers we have a man who is of good social
position, falling desperately in love with the wife of a successful
barrister. The wife, though unhappy in her domestic life, refuses to
become her lover's mistress; marriage is the only way to secure her. So
Armand Peltzer plots to murder the husband. For this purpose he calls in
the help of a brother, a ne'er-do-well, who has left his native country
under a cloud. He sends for this dubious person to Europe, and there
between them they plan the murder of the inconvenient husband. Though
the idea of the crime comes from the one brother, the other receives the
idea without repugnance and enters wholeheartedly into the commission of
the murder. The ascendency of the one is evident, but he knows his
man, is sure that he will have no difficulty in securing the other's
co-operation in his felonious purpose. Armand Peltzer should have lived
in the Italy of the Renaissance.

The crime was cunningly devised, and methodically and successfully
accomplished. Only an over-anxiety to secure the fruits of it led to its
detection. Barre and Lebiez are a perfect criminal couple, both young
men of good education, trained to better things, but the one idle,
greedy and vicious, the other cynical, indifferent, inclined at best to
a lazy sentimentalism. Barre is a needy stockbroker at the end of his
tether, desperate to find an expedient for raising the wind, Lebiez
a medical student who writes morbid verses to a skull and lectures on
Darwinism. To Barre belongs the original suggestion to murder an old
woman who sells milk and is reputed to have savings. But his friend
and former schoolfellow, Lebiez, accepts the suggestion placidly, and
reconciles himself to the murder of an unnecessary old woman by the
same argument as that used by Raskolnikoff in "Crime and Punishment" to
justify the killing of his victim.

In all the cases here quoted the couples are essentially criminal
couples. From whichever of the two comes the first suggestion of crime,
it falls on soil already prepared to receive it; the response to the
suggestion is immediate. In degree of guilt there is little or nothing
to choose between them. But the more interesting instances of dual crime
are those in which one innocent hitherto of crime, to whom it is morally
repugnant, is persuaded by another to the commission of a criminal act,
as Cassius persuades Brutus; Iago, Othello. Cassius is a criminal
by instinct. Placed in a social position which removes him from the
temptation to ordinary crime, circumstances combine in his case to bring
out the criminal tendency and give it free play in the projected murder
of Caesar. Sour, envious, unscrupulous, the suggestion to kill Caesar
under the guise of the public weal is in reality a gratification
to Cassius of his own ignoble instincts, and the deliberate
unscrupulousness with which he seeks to corrupt the honourable metal,
seduce the noble mind of his friend, is typical of the man's innate
dishonesty. Cassius belongs to that particular type of the envious
nature which Shakespeare is fond of exemplifying with more or less
degree of villainy in such characters as Iago, Edmund, and Don John,
of which Robert Butler, whose career is given in this book, is a living
instance. Cassius on public grounds tempts Brutus to crime as subtly as
on private grounds Iago tempts Othello, and with something of the same
malicious satisfaction; the soliloquy of Cassius at the end of the
second scene of the first act is that of a bad man and a false friend.
Indeed, the quarrel between Brutus and Cassius after the murder of
Caesar loses much of its sincerity and pathos unless we can forget for
the moment the real character of Cassius. But the interest in the cases
of Cassius and Brutus, Iago and Othello, lies not so much in the
nature of the prompter of the crime. The instances in which an honest,
honourable man is by force of another's suggestion converted into a
criminal are psychologically remarkable. It is to be expected that we
should look in the annals of real crime for confirmation of the truth to
life of stories such as these, told in fiction or drama.

The strongest influence, under which the naturally non-criminal person
may be tempted in violation of instinct and better nature to the
commission of a crime, is that of love or passion. Examples of this kind
are frequent in the annals of crime. There is none more striking than
that of the Widow Gras and Natalis Gaudry. Here a man, brave, honest, of
hitherto irreproachable character, is tempted by a woman to commit the
most cruel and infamous of crimes. At first he repels the suggestion;
at last, when his senses have been excited, his passion inflamed by the
cunning of the woman, as the jealous passion of Othello is played on and
excited by Iago, the patriotism of Brutus artfully exploited by Cassius,
he yields to the repeated solicitation and does a deed in every way
repugnant to his normal character. Nothing seems so blinding in its
effect on the moral sense as passion. It obscures all sense of humour,
proportion, congruity; the murder of the man or woman who stands in
the way of its full enjoyment becomes an act of inverted justice to
the perpetrators; they reconcile themselves to it by the most perverse
reasoning until they come to regard it as an act, in which they may
justifiably invoke the help of God; eroticism and religion are often
jumbled up together in this strange medley of conflicting emotions.

A woman, urging her lover to the murder of her husband, writes of the
roses that are to deck the path of the lovers as soon as the crime is
accomplished; she sends him flowers and in the same letter asks if he
has got the necessary cartridges. Her husband has been ill; she hopes
that it is God helping them to the desired end; she burns a candle
on the altar of a saint for the success of their murderous plan.(4) A
jealous husband setting out to kill his wife carries in his pockets,
beside a knife and a service revolver, a rosary, a medal of the Virgin
and a holy image.(5) Marie Boyer in the blindness of her passion and
jealousy believes God to be helping her to get rid of her mother.


     (4) Case of Garnier and the woman Aveline, 1884.

     (5) Case of the Comte
de Cornulier: "Un An de Justice," Henri Varennes, 1901.


A lover persuades the wife to get rid of her husband. For a whole year
he instils the poison into her soul until she can struggle no longer
against the obsession; he offers to do the deed, but she writes that she
would rather suffer all the risks and consequences herself. "How many
times," she writes, "have I wished to go away, leave home, but it meant
leaving my children, losing them for ever.. that made my lover jealous,
he believed that I could not bring myself to leave my husband. But if my
husband were out of the way then I would keep my children, and my
lover would see in my crime a striking proof of my devotion." A curious
farrago of slavish passion, motherly love and murder.(6)


     (6) Case of Madame Weiss and the engineer Roques. If I may be permitted
the reference, there is an account of this case and that of Barre and
Lebiez in my book "French Criminals of the Nineteenth Century."


There are some women such as Marie Boyer and Gabrielle Fenayrou, who may
be described as passively criminal, chameleon-like, taking colour from
their surroundings. By the force of a man's influence they commit a
dreadful crime, in the one instance it is matricide, in the other the
murder of a former lover, but neither of the women is profoundly vicious
or criminal in her instincts. In prison they become exemplary, their
crime a thing of the past.

Gabrielle Fenayrou during her imprisonment, having won the confidence
of the religious sisters in charge of the convicts, is appointed head
of one of the workshops. Marie Boyer is so contrite, exemplary in her
behaviour that she is released after fifteen years' imprisonment. In
some ways, perhaps, these malleable types of women, "soft paste" as one
authority has described them, "effacees" in the words of another, are
the most dangerous material of all for the commission of crime, their
obedience is so complete, so cold and relentless.

There are cases into which no element of passion enters, in which one
will stronger than the other can so influence, so dominate the weaker as
to persuade the individual against his or her better inclination to an
act of crime, just as in the relations of ordinary life we see a man
or woman led and controlled for good or ill by one stronger than
themselves. There is no more extraordinary instance of this than the
case of Catherine Hayes, immortalised by Thackeray, which occurred
as long ago as the year 1726. This singular woman by her artful
insinuations, by representing her husband as an atheist and a murderer,
persuaded a young man of the name of Wood, of hitherto exemplary
character, to assist her in murdering him. It was unquestionably the
sinister influence of Captain Cranstoun that later in the same century
persuaded the respectable Miss Mary Blandy to the murder of her father.
The assassin of an old woman in Paris recounts thus the arguments used
by his mistress to induce him to commit the crime: "She began by telling
me about the money and jewellery in the old woman's possession which
could no longer be of any use to her"--the argument of Raskolnikoff--"I
resisted, but next day she began again, pointing out that one killed
people in war, which was not considered a crime, and therefore one
should not be afraid to kill a miserable old woman. I urged that the old
woman had done us no harm, and that I did not see why one should kill
her; she reproached me for my weakness and said that, had she been
strong enough, she would soon have done this abominable deed herself.
'God,' she added, 'will forgive us because He knows how poor we are.'"
When he came to do the murder, this determined woman plied her lover
with brandy and put rouge on his cheeks lest his pallor should betray
him.(7)


     (7) Case of Albert and the woman Lavoitte, Paris, 1877.


There are occasions when those feelings of compunction which troubled
Macbeth and his wife are wellnigh proof against the utmost powers of
suggestion, or, as in the case of Hubert and Prince Arthur, compel the
criminal to desist from his enterprise.

A man desires to get rid of his father and mother-in-law. By means of
threats, reproaches and inducements he persuades another man to commit
the crime. Taking a gun, the latter sets out to do the deed; but he
realises the heinousness of it and turns back. "The next day," he says,
"at four o'clock in the morning I started again. I passed the village
church. At the sight of the place where I had celebrated my first
communion I was filled with remorse. I knelt down and prayed to God to
make me good. But some unknown force urged me to the crime. I started
again--ten times I turned back, but the more I hesitated the stronger
was the desire to go on." At length the faltering assassin arrived at
the house, and in his painful anxiety of mind shot a servant instead of
the intended victims.(8)


     (8) Case of Porcher and Hardouin cited in Despine. "Psychologie
Naturelle."


In a town in Austria there dwelt a happy and contented married couple,
poor and hard-working. A charming young lady, a rich relation and an
orphan, comes to live with them. She brings to their modest home wealth
and comfort. But as time goes on, it is likely that the young lady will
fall in love and marry. What then? Her hosts will have to return
to their original poverty. The idea of how to secure to himself the
advantages of his young kinswoman's fortune takes possession of the
husband's mind. He revolves all manner of means, and gradually murder
presents itself as the only way. The horrid suggestion fixes itself
in his mind, and at last he communicates it to his wife. At first she
resists, then yields to the temptation. The plan is ingenious. The wife
is to disappear to America and be given out as dead. The husband will
then marry his attractive kinswoman, persuade her to make a will in his
favour, poison her and, the fortune secured, rejoin his wife. As if
to help this cruel plan, the young lady has developed a sentimental
affection for her relative. The wife goes to America, the husband
marries the young lady. He commences to poison her, but, in the presence
of her youth, beauty and affection for him, relents, hesitates to commit
a possibly unnecessary crime. He decides to forget and ignore utterly
his wife who is waiting patiently in America. A year passes. The
expectant wife gets no sign of her husband's existence. She comes back
to Europe, visits under a false name the town in which her faithless
husband and his bride are living, discovers the truth and divulges the
intended crime to the authorities. A sentence of penal servitude for
life rewards this perfidious criminal.(9)


     (9) Case of the Scheffer couple at Linz, cited by Sighele.


Derues said to a man who was looking at a picture in the Palais de
Justice: "Why study copies of Nature when you can look at such a
remarkable original as I?" A judge once told the present writer that he
did not go often to the theatre because none of the dramas which he saw
on the stage, seemed to him equal in intensity to those of real life
which came before him in the course of his duties. The saying that truth
is stranger than fiction applies more forcibly to crime than to
anything else. But the ordinary man and woman prefer to take their crime
romanticised, as it is administered to them in novel or play. The true
stories told in this book represent the raw material from which works
of art have been and may be yet created. The murder of Mr. Arden of
Faversham inspired an Elizabethan tragedy attributed by some critics
to Shakespeare. The Peltzer trial helped to inspire Paul Bourget's
remarkable novel, "Andre Cornelis." To Italian crime we owe Shelley's
"Cenci" and Browning's "The Ring and the Book." Mrs. Manning was the
original of the maid Hortense in "Bleak House." Jonathan Wild, Eugene
Aram, Deacon Brodie, Thomas Griffiths Wainewright have all been made
the heroes of books or plays of varying merit. But it is not only in its
stories that crime has served to inspire romance. In the investigation
of crime, especially on the broader lines of Continental procedure, we
can track to the source the springs of conduct and character, and come
near to solving as far as is humanly possible the mystery of human
motive. There is always and must be in every crime a terra incognita
which, unless we could enter into the very soul of a man, we cannot hope
to reach. Thus far may we go, no farther. It is rarely indeed that a man
lays bare his whole soul, and even when he does we can never be quite
sure that he is telling us all the truth, that he is not keeping back
some vital secret. It is no doubt better so, and that it should be left
to the writer of imagination to picture for us a man's inmost soul. The
study of crime will help him to that end. It will help us also in the
ethical appreciation of good and evil in individual conduct, about which
our notions have been somewhat obscured by too narrow a definition
of what constitutes crime. These themes, touched on but lightly and
imperfectly in these pages, are rich in human interest.

And so it is hardly a matter for surprise that the poet and the
philosopher sat up late one night talking about murders.




The Life of Charles Peace


"Charles Peace, or the Adventures of a Notorious Burglar," a large
volume published at the time of his death, gives a full and accurate
account of the career of Peace side by side with a story of the Family
Herald type, of which he is made the hero. "The Life and Trial of
Charles Peace" (Sheffield, 1879), "The Romantic Career of a Great
Criminal" (by N. Kynaston Gaskell, London 1906), and "The Master
Criminal," published recently in London give useful information. I have
also consulted some of the newspapers of the time. There is a delightful
sketch of Peace in Mr. Charles Whibley's "Book of Scoundrels."

I

HIS EARLY YEARS

Charles Peace told a clergyman who had an interview with him in prison
shortly before his execution that he hoped that, after he was gone, he
would be entirely forgotten by everybody and his name never mentioned
again.

Posterity, in calling over its muster-roll of famous men, has refused
to fulfil this pious hope, and Charley Peace stands out as the one
great personality among English criminals of the nineteenth century. In
Charley Peace alone is revived that good-humoured popularity which
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries fell to the lot of Claude
Duval, Dick Turpin and Jack Sheppard. But Peace has one grievance
against posterity; he has endured one humiliation which these heroes
have been spared. His name has been omitted from the pages of the
"Dictionary of National Biography." From Duval, in the seventeenth,
down to the Mannings, Palmer, Arthur Orton, Morgan and Kelly, the
bushrangers, in the nineteenth century, many a criminal, far less
notable or individual than Charley Peace, finds his or her place in that
great record of the past achievements of our countrymen. Room has
been denied to perhaps the greatest and most naturally gifted criminal
England has produced, one whose character is all the more remarkable for
its modesty, its entire freedom from that vanity and vaingloriousness
so common among his class.

The only possible reason that can be suggested for so singular an
omission is the fact that in the strict order of alphabetical succession
the biography of Charles Peace would have followed immediately on that
of George Peabody. It may have been thought that the contrast was too
glaring, that even the exigencies of national biography had no right
to make the philanthropist Peabody rub shoulders with man's constant
enemy, Peace. To the memory of Peace these few pages can make but
poor amends for the supreme injustice, but, by giving a particular and
authentic account of his career, they may serve as material for
the correction of this grave omission should remorse overtake those
responsible for so undeserved a slur on one of the most unruly of
England's famous sons.

From the literary point of view Peace was unfortunate even in the hour
of his notoriety. In the very year of his trial and execution, the
Annual Register, seized with a fit of respectability from which it
has never recovered, announced that "the appetite for the strange and
marvellous" having considerably abated since the year 1757 when the
Register was first published, its "Chronicle," hitherto a rich mine of
extraordinary and sensational occurrences, would become henceforth a
mere diary of important events. Simultaneously with the curtailment
of its "Chronicle," it ceased to give those excellent summaries of
celebrated trials which for many years had been a feature of its
volumes. The question whether "the appetite for the strange and
marvellous" has abated in an appreciable degree with the passing of time
and is not perhaps keener than it ever was, is a debatable one. But
it is undeniable that the present volumes of the Annual Register have
fallen away dismally from the variety and human interest of their
predecessors. Of the trial and execution of Peace the volume for 1879
gives but the barest record.

Charles Peace was not born of criminal parents. His father, John
Peace, began work as a collier at Burton-on-Trent. Losing his leg in an
accident, he joined Wombwell's wild beast show and soon acquired some
reputation for his remarkable powers as a tamer of wild animals. About
this time Peace married at Rotherham the daughter of a surgeon in
the Navy. On the death of a favourite son to whom he had imparted
successfully the secrets of his wonderful control over wild beasts of
every kind, Mr. Peace gave up lion-taming and settled in Sheffield as a
shoemaker.

It was at Sheffield, in the county of Yorkshire, already famous in the
annals of crime as the county of John Nevison and Eugene Aram, that
Peace first saw the light. On May 14, 1832, there was born to John Peace
in Sheffield a son, Charles, the youngest of his family of four. When he
grew to boyhood Charles was sent to two schools near Sheffield, where
he soon made himself remarkable, not as a scholar, but for his singular
aptitude in a variety of other employments such as making paper models,
taming cats, constructing a peep-show, and throwing up a heavy ball of
shot which he would catch in a leather socket fixed on to his forehead.

The course of many famous men's lives has been changed by what appeared
at the time to be an unhappy accident. Who knows what may have been the
effect on Charles Peace's subsequent career of an accident he met with
in 1846 at some rolling mills, in which he was employed? A piece of red
hot steel entered his leg just below the knee, and after eighteen months
spent in the Sheffield Infirmary he left it a cripple for life. About
this time Peace's father died. Peace and his family were fond of
commemorating events of this kind in suitable verse; the death of John
Peace was celebrated in the following lines:

     "In peace he lived;
         In peace he died;
     Life was our desire,
         But God denied."


Of the circumstances that first led Peace to the commission of crime we
know nothing. How far enforced idleness, bad companionship, according to
some accounts the influence of a criminally disposed mother, how far
his own daring and adventurous temper provoked him to robbery, cannot
be determined accurately. His first exploit was the stealing of an old
gentleman's gold watch, but he soon passed to greater things. On October
26, 1851, the house of a lady living in Sheffield was broken into and a
quantity of her property stolen. Some of it was found in the possession
of Peace, and he was arrested. Owing no doubt to a good character for
honesty given him by his late employer Peace was let off lightly with a
month's imprisonment.

After his release Peace would seem to have devoted himself for a time to
music, for which he had always a genuine passion. He taught himself to
play tunes on a violin with one string, and at entertainments which he
attended was described as "the modern Paganini." In later life when he
had attained to wealth and prosperity the violin and the harmonium were
a constant source of solace during long winter evenings in Greenwich and
Peckham. But playing a one-stringed violin at fairs and public-houses
could not be more than a relaxation to a man of Peace's active temper,
who had once tasted what many of those who have practised it, describe
as the fascination of that particular form of nocturnal adventure known
by the unsympathetic name of burglary. Among the exponents of the art
Peace was at this time known as a "portico-thief," that is to say one
who contrived to get himself on to the portico of a house and from that
point of vantage make his entrance into the premises. During the
year 1854 the houses of a number of well-to-do residents in and about
Sheffield were entered after this fashion, and much valuable property
stolen. Peace was arrested, and with him a girl with whom he was keeping
company, and his sister, Mary Ann, at that time Mrs. Neil. On October
20, 1854, Peace was sentenced at Doncaster Sessions to four years' penal
servitude, and the ladies who had been found in possession of the
stolen property to six months apiece. Mrs. Neil did not long survive her
misfortune. She would seem to have been married to a brutal and drunken
husband, whom Peace thrashed on more than one occasion for ill-treating
his sister. After one of these punishments Neil set a bulldog on to
Peace; but Peace caught the dog by the lower jaw and punched it into a
state of coma. The death in 1859 of the unhappy Mrs. Neil was lamented
in appropriate verse, probably the work of her brother:

     "I was so long with pain opprest
         That wore my strength away;
     It made me long for endless rest
         Which never can decay."


On coming out of prison in 1858, Peace resumed his fiddling, but it was
now no more than a musical accompaniment to burglary. This had become
the serious business of Peace's life, to be pursued, should necessity
arise, even to the peril of men's lives. His operations extended beyond
the bounds of his native town. The house of a lady living in Manchester
was broken into on the night of August 11, 1859, and a substantial booty
carried away. This was found the following day concealed in a hole in
a field. The police left it undisturbed and awaited the return of
the robber. When Peace and another man arrived to carry it away, the
officers sprang out on them. Peace, after nearly killing the officer
who was trying to arrest him, would have made his escape, had not other
policemen come to the rescue. For this crime Peace was sentenced to six
years' penal servitude, in spite of a loyal act of perjury on the part
of his aged mother, who came all the way from Sheffield to swear that he
had been with her there on the night of the crime.

He was released from prison again in 1864, and returned to Sheffield.
Things did not prosper with him there, and he went back to Manchester.
In 1866 he was caught in the act of burglary at a house in Lower
Broughton. He admitted that at the time he was fuddled with whisky;
otherwise his capture would have been more difficult and dangerous.
Usually a temperate man, Peace realised on this occasion the value
of sobriety even in burglary, and never after allowed intemperance to
interfere with his success. A sentence of eight years' penal servitude
at Manchester Assizes on December 3, 1866, emphasised this wholesome
lesson.

Whilst serving this sentence Peace emulated Jack Sheppard in a daring
attempt to escape from Wakefield prison. Being engaged on some repairs,
he smuggled a small ladder into his cell. With the help of a saw made
out of some tin, he cut a hole through the ceiling of the cell, and was
about to get out on to the roof when a warder came in. As the latter
attempted to seize the ladder Peace knocked him down, ran along the
wall of the prison, fell off on the inside owing to the looseness of the
bricks, slipped into the governor's house where he changed his clothes,
and there, for an hour and a half, waited for an opportunity to escape.
This was denied him, and he was recaptured in the governor's bedroom.
The prisons at Millbank, Chatham and Gibraltar were all visited by Peace
before his final release in 1872. At Chatham he is said to have taken
part in a mutiny and been flogged for his pains.

On his liberation from prison Peace rejoined his family in Sheffield.
He was now a husband and father. In 1859 he had taken to wife a widow
of the name of Hannah Ward. Mrs. Ward was already the mother of a
son, Willie. Shortly after her marriage with Peace she gave birth to a
daughter, and during his fourth term of imprisonment presented him with
a son. Peace never saw this child, who died before his release. But,
true to the family custom, on his return from prison the untimely death
of little "John Charles" was commemorated by the printing of a funeral
card in his honour, bearing the following sanguine verses:

     "Farewell, my dear son, by us all beloved,
     Thou art gone to dwell in the mansions above.
     In the bosom of Jesus Who sits on the throne
     Thou art anxiously waiting to welcome us home."


Whether from a desire not to disappoint little John Charles, for some
reason or other the next two or three years of Peace's career would seem
to have been spent in an endeavour to earn an honest living by picture
framing, a trade in which Peace, with that skill he displayed in
whatever he turned his hand to, was remarkably proficient. In Sheffield
his children attended the Sunday School. Though he never went to church
himself, he was an avowed believer in both God and the devil. As he
said, however, that he feared neither, no great reliance could be placed
on the restraining force of such a belief to a man of Peace's daring
spirit. There was only too good reason to fear that little John Charles'
period of waiting would be a prolonged one.

In 1875 Peace moved from Sheffield itself to the suburb of Darnall. Here
Peace made the acquaintance--a fatal acquaintance, as it turned out--of
a Mr. and Mrs. Dyson. Dyson was a civil engineer. He had spent some
years in America, where, in 1866, he married.

Toward the end of 1873 or the beginning of 1874, he came to England with
his wife, and obtained a post on the North Eastern Railway. He was a
tall man, over six feet in height, extremely thin, and gentlemanly in
his bearing. His engagement with the North Eastern Railway terminated
abruptly owing to Dyson's failing to appear at a station to which he had
been sent on duty.

It was believed at the time by those associated with Dyson that this
unlooked-for dereliction of duty had its cause in domestic trouble.
Since the year 1875, the year in which Peace came to Darnall, the
domestic peace of Mr. Dyson had been rudely disturbed by this same ugly
little picture-framer who lived a few doors away from the Dysons'
house. Peace had got to know the Dysons, first as a tradesman, then as
a friend. To what degree of intimacy he attained with Mrs. Dyson it is
difficult to determine. In that lies the mystery of the case Mrs. Dyson
is described as an attractive woman, "buxom and blooming"; she was
dark-haired, and about twenty-five years of age. In an interview with
the Vicar of Darnall a few days before his execution, Peace asserted
positively that Mrs. Dyson had been his mistress. Mrs. Dyson as
strenuously denied the fact. There was no question that on one occasion
Peace and Mrs. Dyson had been photographed together, that he had given
her a ring, and that he had been in the habit of going to music halls
and public-houses with Mrs. Dyson, who was a woman of intemperate
habits.

Peace had introduced Mrs. Dyson to his wife and daughter, and on one
occasion was said to have taken her to his mother's house, much to the
old lady's indignation. If there were not many instances of ugly men who
have been notably successful with women, one might doubt the likelihood
of Mrs. Dyson falling a victim to the charms of Charles Peace. But
Peace, for all his ugliness, could be wonderfully ingratiating when he
chose. According to Mrs. Dyson, Peace was a demon, "beyond the power of
even a Shakespeare to paint," who persecuted her with his attentions,
and, when he found them rejected, devoted all his malignant energies
to making the lives of her husband and herself unbearable. According to
Peace's story he was a slighted lover who had been treated by Mrs. Dyson
with contumely and ingratitude.

Whether to put a stop to his wife's intimacy with Peace, or to protect
himself against the latter's wanton persecution, sometime about the end
of June, 1876, Dyson threw over into the garden of Peace's house a card,
on which was written: "Charles Peace is requested not to interfere with
my family." On July 1 Peace met Mr. Dyson in the street, and tried to
trip him up. The same night he came up to Mrs. Dyson, who was talking
with some friends, and threatened in coarse and violent language to
blow out her brains and those of her husband. In consequence of
these incidents Mr. Dyson took out a summons against Peace, for whose
apprehension a warrant was issued. To avoid the consequences of this
last step Peace left Darnall for Hull, where he opened an eating-shop,
presided over by Mrs. Peace.

But he himself was not idle. From Hull he went to Manchester on
business, and in Manchester he committed his first murder. Entering the
grounds of a gentleman's home at Whalley Range, about midnight on
August 1, he was seen by two policemen. One of them, Constable Cock,
intercepted him as he was trying to escape.

Peace took out his revolver and warned Cock to stand back. The policeman
came on. Peace fired, but deliberately wide of him. Cock, undismayed,
drew out his truncheon, and made for the burglar. Peace, desperate,
determined not to be caught, fired again, this time fatally. Cock's
comrade heard the shots, but before he could reach the side of the dying
man, Peace had made off. He returned to Hull, and there learned shortly
after, to his intense relief, that two brothers, John and William
Habron, living near the scene of the murder, had been arrested and
charged with the killing of Constable Cock.

If the Dysons thought that they had seen the last of Peace, they were
soon to be convinced to the contrary. Peace had not forgotten his
friends at Darnall. By some means or other he was kept informed of all
their doings, and on one occasion was seen by Mrs. Dyson lurking near
her home. To get away from him the Dysons determined to leave Darnall.
They took a house at Banner Cross, another suburb of Sheffield, and
on October 29 moved into their new home. One of the first persons Mrs.
Dyson saw on arriving at Banner Cross was Peace himself. "You see,"
he said, "I am here to annoy you, and I'll annoy you wherever you go."
Later, Peace and a friend passed Mr. Dyson in the street. Peace took out
his revolver. "If he offers to come near me," said he, "I will make him
stand back." But Mr. Dyson took no notice of Peace and passed on. He had
another month to live.

Whatever the other motives of Peace may have been--unreasoning passion,
spite, jealousy, or revenge it must not be forgotten that Dyson, by
procuring a warrant against Peace, had driven him from his home in
Sheffield. This Peace resented bitterly. According to the statements of
many witnesses, he was at this time in a state of constant irritation
and excitement on the Dyson's account. He struck his daughter because
she alluded in a way he did not like to his relations with Mrs. Dyson.
Peace always believed in corporal chastisement as a means of keeping
order at home. Pleasant and entertaining as he could be, he was feared.
It was very dangerous to incur his resentment. "Be sure," said his wife,
"you do nothing to offend our Charley, or you will suffer for it." Dyson
beyond a doubt had offended "our Charley." But for the moment Peace was
interested more immediately in the fate of John and William Habron,
who were about to stand their trial for the murder of Constable Cock at
Whalley Range.

The trial commenced at the Manchester Assizes before Mr. Justice (now
Lord) Lindley on Monday, November 27. John Habron was acquitted.

The case against William Habron depended to a great extent on the fact
that he, as well as his brother, had been heard to threaten to "do for"
the murdered man, to shoot the "little bobby." Cock was a zealous young
officer of twenty-three years of age, rather too eager perhaps in
the discharge of his duty. In July of 1876 he had taken out summonses
against John and William Habron, young fellows who had been several
years in the employment of a nurseryman in Whalley Range, for being
drunk and disorderly. On July 27 William was fined five shillings,
and on August 1, the day of Cock's murder, John had been fined half
a sovereign. Between these two dates the Habrons had been heard to
threaten to "do for" Cock if he were not more careful. Other facts
relied upon by the prosecution were that William Habron had inquired
from a gunsmith the price of some cartridges a day or two before the
murder; that two cartridge percussion caps had been found in the pocket
of a waistcoat given to William Habron by his employer, who swore that
they could not have been there while it was in his possession; that the
other constable on duty with Cock stated that a man he had seen lurking
near the house about twelve o'clock on the night of the murder appeared
to be William Habron's age, height and complexion, and resembled him in
general appearance; and that the boot on Habron's left foot, which was
"wet and sludgy" at the time of his arrest, corresponded in certain
respects with the footprints of the murderer. The prisoner did not
help himself by an ineffective attempt to prove an alibi. The Judge was
clearly not impressed by the strength of the case for the prosecution.
He pointed out to the jury that neither the evidence of identification
nor that of the footprint went very far. As to the latter, what evidence
was there to show that it had been made on the night of the murder? If
it had been made the day before, then the defence had proved that it
could not have been Habron's. He called their attention to the facts
that Habron bore a good character, that, when arrested on the night of
the murder, he was in bed, and that no firearms had been traced to him.
In spite, however, of the summing-up the jury convicted William Habron,
but recommended him to mercy. The Judge without comment sentenced him to
death. The Manchester Guardian expressed its entire concurrence with the
verdict of the jury. "Few persons," it wrote, "will be found to dispute
the justice of the conclusions reached." However, a few days later
it opened its columns to a number of letters protesting against the
unsatisfactory nature of the conviction. On December 6 a meeting of
some forty gentlemen was held, at which it was resolved to petition Mr.
Cross, the Home Secretary, to reconsider the sentence. Two days before
the day of execution Habron was granted a respite, and later his
sentence commuted to one of penal servitude for life. And so a tragic
and irrevocable miscarriage of justice was happily averted.

Peace liked attending trials. The fact that in Habron's case he was the
real murderer would seem to have made him the more eager not to miss so
unique an experience. Accordingly he went from Hull to Manchester,
and was present in court during the two days that the trial lasted. No
sooner had he heard the innocent man condemned to death than he left
Manchester for Sheffield--now for all he knew a double murderer.

It is a question whether, on the night of November 28, Peace met Mrs.
Dyson at an inn in one of the suburbs of Sheffield. In any case, the
next morning, Wednesday, the 29th, to his mother's surprise Peace walked
into her house. He said that he had come to Sheffield for the fair.
The afternoon of that day Peace spent in a public-house at Ecclesall,
entertaining the customers by playing tunes on a poker suspended from
a piece of strong string, from which he made music by beating it with
a short stick. The musician was rewarded by drinks. It took very little
drink to excite Peace. There was dancing, the fun grew fast and furious,
as the strange musician beat out tune after tune on his fantastic
instrument.

At six o'clock the same evening a thin, grey-haired,
insignificant-looking man in an evident state of unusual excitement
called to see the Rev. Mr. Newman, Vicar of Ecclesall, near Banner
Cross. Some five weeks before, this insignificant-looking man had
visited Mr. Newman, and made certain statements in regard to the
character of a Mr. and Mrs. Dyson who had come to live in the parish.
The vicar had asked for proof of these statements. These proofs his
visitor now produced. They consisted of a number of calling cards and
photographs, some of them alleged to be in the handwriting of Mrs.
Dyson, and showing her intimacy with Peace. The man made what purported
to be a confession to Mr. Newman. Dyson, he said, had become jealous of
him, whereupon Peace had suggested to Mrs. Dyson that they should give
her husband something to be jealous about. Out of this proposal their
intimacy had sprung. Peace spoke of Mrs. Dyson in terms of forgiveness,
but his wrath against Dyson was extreme. He complained bitterly that
by taking proceedings against him, Dyson had driven him to break up his
home and become a fugitive in the land. He should follow the Dysons, he
said, wherever they might go; he believed that they were at that moment
intending to take further proceedings against him. As he left, Peace
said that he should not go and see the Dysons that night, but would call
on a friend of his, Gregory, who lived next door to them in Banner Cross
Terrace. It was now about a quarter to seven.

Peace went to Gregory's house, but his friend was not at home. The lure
of the Dysons was irresistible. A little after eight o'clock Peace was
watching the house from a passageway that led up to the backs of the
houses on the terrace. He saw Mrs. Dyson come out of the back door,
and go to an outhouse some few yards distant. He waited. As soon as
she opened the door to come out, Mrs. Dyson found herself confronted
by Peace, holding his revolver in his hand. "Speak," he said, "or I'll
fire." Mrs. Dyson in terror went back. In the meantime Dyson, hearing
the disturbance, came quickly into the yard. Peace made for the passage.
Dyson followed him. Peace fired once, the shot striking the lintel
of the passage doorway. Dyson undaunted, still pursued. Then Peace,
according to his custom, fired a second time, and Dyson fell, shot
through the temple. Mrs. Dyson, who had come into the yard again on
hearing the first shot, rushed to her husband's side, calling out:
"Murder! You villain! You have shot my husband." Two hours later Dyson
was dead.

After firing the second shot Peace had hurried down; the passage into
the roadway. He stood there hesitating a moment, until the cries of Mrs.
Dyson warned him of his danger. He crossed the road, climbed a wall,
and made his way back to Sheffield. There he saw his mother and brother,
told them that he had shot Mr. Dyson, and bade them a hasty good-bye.
He then walked to Attercliffe Railway Station, and took a ticket for
Beverley. Something suspicious in the manner of the booking-clerk made
him change his place of destination. Instead of going to Beverley that
night he got out of the train at Normanton and went on to York. He spent
the remainder of the night in the station yard. He took the first train
in the morning for Beverley, and from there travelled via Collingham
to Hull. He went straight to the eating-house kept by his wife, and
demanded some dinner. He had hardly commenced to eat it when he heard
two detectives come into the front shop and ask his wife if a man called
Charles Peace was lodging with her. Mrs. Peace said that that was
her husband's name, but that she had not seen him for two months. The
detectives proposed to search the house. Some customers in the shop told
them that if they had any business with Mrs. Peace, they ought to go
round to the side door. The polite susceptibility of these customers
gave Peace time to slip up to a back room, get out on to an adjoining
roof, and hide behind a chimney stack, where he remained until the
detectives had finished an exhaustive search. So importunate were the
officers in Hull that once again during the day Peace had to repeat this
experience. For some three weeks, however, he contrived to remain in
Hull. He shaved the grey beard he was wearing at the time of Dyson's
murder, dyed his hair, put on a pair of spectacles, and for the first
time made use of his singular power of contorting his features in such
a way as to change altogether the character of his face. But the hue and
cry after him was unremitting. There was a price of L100 on his head,
and the following description of him was circulated by the police:


"Charles Peace wanted for murder on the night of the 29th inst. He is
thin and slightly built, from fifty-five to sixty years of age. Five
feet four inches or five feet high; grey (nearly white) hair, beard and
whiskers. He lacks use of three fingers of left hand, walks with his
legs rather wide apart, speaks somewhat peculiarly as though his
tongue were too large for his mouth, and is a great boaster. He is
a picture-frame maker. He occasionally cleans and repairs clocks and
watches and sometimes deals in oleographs, engravings and pictures. He
has been in penal servitude for burglary in Manchester. He has lived in
Manchester, Salford, and Liverpool and Hull."


This description was altered later and Peace's age given as forty-six.
As a matter of fact he was only forty-four at this time, but he looked
very much older. Peace had lost one of his fingers. He said that it had
been shot off by a man with whom he had quarrelled, but it was believed
to be more likely that he had himself shot it off accidentally in
handling one of his revolvers. It was to conceal this obvious means of
identification that Peace made himself the false arm which he was in the
habit of wearing. This was of gutta percha, with a hole down the middle
of it into which he passed his arm; at the end was a steel plate to
which was fixed a hook; by means of this hook Peace could wield a fork
and do other dexterous feats.

Marked man as he was, Peace felt it dangerous to stay longer in Hull
than he could help. During the closing days of the year 1876 and the
beginning of 1877, Peace was perpetually on the move. He left Hull for
Doncaster, and from there travelled to London. On arriving at King's
Cross he took the underground railway to Paddington, and from there a
train to Bristol. At the beginning of January he left Bristol for Bath,
and from Bath, in the company of a sergeant of police, travelled by
way of Didcot to Oxford. The officer had in his custody a young woman
charged with stealing L40. Peace and the sergeant discussed the case
during the journey. "He seemed a smart chap," said Peace in relating
the circumstances, "but not smart enough to know me." From Oxford he
went to Birmingham, where he stayed four or five days, then a week in
Derby, and on January 9th he arrived in Nottingham.

Here Peace found a convenient lodging at the house of one, Mrs. Adamson,
a lady who received stolen goods and on occasion indicated or organised
suitable opportunities for acquiring them.

She lived in a low part of the town known as the Marsh. It was at
her house that Peace met the woman who was to become his mistress and
subsequently betray his identity to the police. Her maiden name was
Susan Gray.

She was at this time about thirty-five years of age, described as
"taking" in appearance, of a fair complexion, and rather well educated.
She had led a somewhat chequered married life with a gentleman named
Bailey, from whom she continued in receipt of a weekly allowance until
she passed under the protection of Peace. Her first meeting with her
future lover took place on the occasion of Peace inviting Mrs. Adamson
to dispose of a box of cigars for him, which that good woman did at a
charge of something like thirty per cent. At first Peace gave himself
out to Mrs. Bailey as a hawker, but before long he openly acknowledged
his real character as an accomplished burglar. With characteristic
insistence Peace declared his passion for Mrs. Bailey by threatening
to shoot her if she did not become his. Anxious friends sent for her to
soothe the distracted man. Peace had been drowning care with the help
of Irish whiskey. He asked "his pet" if she were not glad to see him, to
which the lady replied with possible sarcasm: "Oh, particularly, very,
I like you so much." Next day Peace apologised for his rude behaviour
of the previous evening, and so melted the heart of Mrs. Bailey that she
consented to become his mistress, and from that moment discarding the
name of Bailey is known to history as Mrs. Thompson.

Life in Nottingham was varied pleasantly by burglaries carried out with
the help of information supplied by Mrs. Adamson. In the June of 1877
Peace was nearly detected in stealing, at the request of that worthy,
some blankets, but by flourishing his revolver he contrived to get
away, and, soon after, returned for a season to Hull. Here this hunted
murderer, with L100 reward on his head, took rooms for Mrs. Thompson and
himself at the house of a sergeant of police. One day Mrs. Peace, who
was still keeping her shop in Hull, received a pencilled note saying, "I
am waiting to see you just up Anlaby Road." She and her stepson, Willie
Ward, went to the appointed spot, and there to their astonishment stood
her husband, a distinguished figure in black coat and trousers, top
hat, velvet waistcoat, with stick, kid gloves, and a pretty little fox
terrier by his side. Peace told them of his whereabouts in the town, but
did not disclose to them the fact that his mistress was there also. To
the police sergeant with whom he lodged, Peace described himself as
an agent. But a number of sensational and successful burglaries at
the houses of Town Councillors and other well-to-do citizens of Hull
revealed the presence in their midst of no ordinary robber. Peace had
some narrow escapes, but with the help of his revolver, and on one
occasion the pusillanimity of a policeman, he succeeded in getting away
in safety. The bills offering a reward for his capture were still to
be seen in the shop windows of Hull, so after a brief but brilliant
adventure Peace and Mrs. Thompson returned to Nottingham.

Here, as the result of further successful exploits, Peace found a reward
of L50 offered for his capture. On one occasion the detectives came
into the room where Peace and his mistress were in bed. After politely
expressing his surprise at seeing "Mrs. Bailey" in such a situation,
one of the officers asked Peace his name. He gave it as John Ward, and
described himself as a hawker of spectacles. He refused to get up and
dress in the presence of the detectives who were obliging enough to go
downstairs and wait his convenience. Peace seized the opportunity to
slip out of the house and get away to another part of the town. From
there he sent a note to Mrs. Thompson insisting on her joining him.
He soon after left Nottingham, paid another brief visit to Hull, but
finding that his wife's shop was still frequented by the police, whom he
designated freely as "a lot of fools," determined to quit the North for
good and begin life afresh in the ampler and safer field of London.


II

PEACE IN LONDON


Peace's career in London extended over nearly two years, but they were
years of copious achievement. In that comparatively short space of time,
by the exercise of that art, to his natural gifts for which he had now
added the wholesome tonic of experience, Peace passed from a poor and
obscure lodging in a slum in Lambeth to the state and opulence of a
comfortable suburban residence in Peckham. These were the halcyon days
of Peace's enterprise in life. From No. 25 Stangate Street, Lambeth, the
dealer in musical instruments, as Peace now described himself, sallied
forth night after night, and in Camberwell and other parts of South
London reaped the reward of skill and vigilance in entering other
people's houses and carrying off their property. Though in the beginning
there appeared to be but few musical instruments in Stangate Street to
justify his reputed business, "Mr. Thompson," as he now called himself,
explained that he was not wholly dependent on his business, as Mrs.
Thompson "had money."

So successful did the business prove that at the Christmas of 1877 Peace
invited his daughter and her betrothed to come from Hull and spend
the festive season with him. This, in spite of the presence of Mrs.
Thompson, they consented to do. Peace, in a top hat and grey ulster,
showed them the sights of London, always inquiring politely of a
policeman if he found himself in any difficulty. At the end of the visit
Peace gave his consent to his daughter's marriage with Mr. Bolsover,
and before parting gave the young couple some excellent advice. For more
reasons than one Peace was anxious to unite under the same roof Mrs.
Peace and Mrs. Thompson. Things still prospering, Peace found himself
able to remove from Lambeth to Crane Court, Greenwich, and before long
to take a couple of adjoining houses in Billingsgate Street in the
same district. These he furnished in style. In one he lived with Mrs.
Thompson, while Mrs. Peace and her son, Willie, were persuaded after
some difficulty to leave Hull and come to London to dwell in the other.

But Greenwich was not to the taste of Mrs. Thompson. To gratify her
wish, Peace, some time in May, 1877, removed the whole party to a house,
No. 5, East Terrace, Evelina Road, Peckham. He paid thirty pounds a year
for it, and obtained permission to build a stable for his pony and trap.
When asked for his references, Peace replied by inviting the agent to
dine with him at his house in Greenwich, a proceeding that seems to have
removed all doubt from the agent's mind as to the desirability of the
tenant.

This now famous house in Peckham was of the ordinary type of suburban
villa, with basement, ground floor, and one above; there were steps up
to the front door, and a bow window to the front sitting-room. A garden
at the back of the house ran down to the Chatham and Dover railway line.
It was by an entrance at the back that Peace drove his horse and trap
into the stable which he had erected in the garden. Though all living
in the same house, Mrs. Peace, who passed as Mrs. Ward, and her son,
Willie, inhabited the basement, while Peace and Mrs. Thompson occupied
the best rooms on the ground floor. The house was fitted with Venetian
blinds. In the drawing-room stood a good walnut suite of furniture; a
Turkey carpet, gilded mirrors, a piano, an inlaid Spanish guitar, and,
by the side of an elegant table, the beaded slippers of the good
master of the house completed the elegance of the apartment. Everything
confirmed Mr. Thompson's description of himself as a gentleman of
independent means with a taste for scientific inventions. In association
with a person of the name of Brion, Peace did, as a fact, patent an
invention for raising sunken vessels, and it is said that in pursuing
their project, the two men had obtained an interview with Mr. Plimsoll
at the House of Commons. In any case, the Patent Gazette records the
following grant:


"2635 Henry Fersey Brion, 22 Philip Road, Peckham Rye, London, S.E., and
John Thompson, 5 East Terrace, Evelina Road, Peckham Rye, London, S.E.,
for an invention for raising sunken vessels by the displacement of water
within the vessels by air and gases."


At the time of his final capture Peace was engaged on other inventions,
among them a smoke helmet for firemen, an improved brush for washing
railway carriages, and a form of hydraulic tank. To the anxious
policeman who, seeing a light in Mr. Thompson's house in the small hours
of the morning, rang the bell to warn the old gentleman of the possible
presence of burglars, this business of scientific inventions was
sufficient explanation.

Socially Mr. Thompson became quite a figure in the neighbourhood. He
attended regularly the Sunday evening services at the parish church, and
it must have been a matter of anxious concern to dear Mr. Thompson that
during his stay in Peckham the vicarage was broken into by a burglar and
an unsuccessful attempt made to steal the communion plate which was kept
there.

Mr. Thompson was generous in giving and punctual in paying. He had his
eccentricities. His love of birds and animals was remarkable. Cats,
dogs, rabbits, guinea-pigs, canaries, parrots and cockatoos all found
hospitality under his roof. It was certainly eccentricity in Mr.
Thompson that he should wear different coloured wigs; and that his dark
complexion should suggest the use of walnut juice. His love of music was
evinced by the number of violins, banjoes, guitars, and other musical
instruments that adorned his drawing-room. Tea and music formed the
staple of the evening entertainments which Mr. and Mrs. Thompson would
give occasionally to friendly neighbours. Not that the pleasures of
conversation were neglected wholly in favour of art. The host was
a voluble and animated talker, his face and body illustrating
by appropriate twists and turns the force of his comments. The
Russo-Turkish war, then raging, was a favourite theme of Mr. Thompson's.
He asked, as we are still asking, what Christianity and civilisation
mean by countenancing the horrors of war. He considered the British
Government in the highest degree guilty in supporting the cruel Turks, a
people whose sobriety seemed to him to be their only virtue, against
the Christian Russians. He was confident that our Ministers would be
punished for opposing the only Power which had shown any sympathy with
suffering races. About ten o'clock Mr. Thompson, whose health, he said,
could not stand late hours, would bid his guests good night, and by
half-past ten the front door of No. 5, East Terrace, Evelina Road, would
be locked and bolted, and the house plunged in darkness.

Not that it must be supposed that family life at No. 5, East Terrace,
was without its jars. These were due chiefly to the drunken habits of
Mrs. Thompson. Peace was willing to overlook his mistress' failing
as long as it was confined to the house. But Mrs. Thompson had an
unfortunate habit of slipping out in an intoxicated condition, and
chattering with the neighbours. As she was the repository of many a
dangerous secret the inconvenience of her habit was serious. Peace was
not the man to hesitate in the face of danger. On these occasions
Mrs. Thompson was followed by Peace or his wife, brought back home and
soundly beaten. To Hannah Peace there must have been some satisfaction
in spying on her successful rival, for, in her own words, Peace never
refused his mistress anything; he did not care what she cost him in
dress; "she could swim in gold if she liked." Mrs. Thompson herself
admitted that with the exception of such punishment as she brought on
herself by her inebriety, Peace was always fond of her, and treated her
with great kindness. It was she to whom he would show with pride the
proceeds of his nightly labours, to whom he would look for a smile when
he returned home from his expeditions, haggard and exhausted

Through all dangers and difficulties the master was busy in the practice
of his art. Night after night, with few intervals of repose, he would
sally forth on a plundering adventure. If the job was a distant one, he
would take his pony and trap. Peace was devoted to his pony, Tommy,
and great was his grief when at the end of six months' devotion to duty
Tommy died after a few days' sickness, during which his master attended
him with unremitting care. Tommy had been bought in Greenwich for
fourteen guineas, part of a sum of two hundred and fifty pounds which
Peace netted from a rich haul of silver and bank-notes taken from a
house in Denmark Hill. Besides the pony and trap, Peace would take with
him on these expeditions a violin case containing his tools; at other
times they would be stuffed into odd pockets made for the purpose in
his trousers. These tools consisted of ten in all--a skeleton key, two
pick-locks, a centre-bit, gimlet, gouge, chisel, vice jemmy and knife; a
portable ladder, a revolver and life preserver completed his equipment.

The range of Peace's activities extended as far as Southampton,
Portsmouth and Southsea; but the bulk of his work was done in
Blackheath, Streatham, Denmark Hill, and other suburbs of South London.
Many dramatic stories are told of his exploits, but they rest for the
most part on slender foundation. On one occasion, in getting on to a
portico, he fell, and was impaled on some railings, fortunately in no
vital part. His career as a burglar in London lasted from the beginning
of the year 1877 until October, 1878. During that time this wanted man,
under the very noses of the police, exercised with complete success his
art as a burglar, working alone, depending wholly on his own mental and
physical gifts, disposing in absolute secrecy of the proceeds of his
work, and living openly the life of a respectable and industrious old
gentleman.

All the while the police were busily seeking Charles Peace, the murderer
of Mr. Dyson. Once or twice they came near to capturing him. On one
occasion a detective who had known Peace in Yorkshire met him in
Farringdon Road, and pursued him up the steps of Holborn Viaduct, but
just as the officer, at the top of the steps, reached out and was on the
point of grabbing his man, Peace with lightning agility slipped through
his fingers and disappeared. The police never had a shadow of suspicion
that Mr. Thompson of Peckham was Charles Peace of Sheffield. They knew
the former only as a polite and chatty old gentleman of a scientific
turn of mind, who drove his own pony and trap, and had a fondness for
music and keeping pet animals.

Peace made the mistake of outstaying his welcome in the neighbourhood
of South-East London. Perhaps he hardly realised the extent to which
his fame was spreading. During the last three months of Peace's career,
Blackheath was agog at the number of successful burglaries committed
in the very midst of its peaceful residents. The vigilance of the local
police was aroused, the officers on night duty were only too anxious to
effect the capture of the mysterious criminal.

About two o'clock in the morning of October 10, 1878, a police
constable, Robinson by name, saw a light appear suddenly in a window at
the back of a house in St. John's Park, Blackheath, the residence of a
Mr. Burness. Had the looked-for opportunity arrived? Was the mysterious
visitor, the disturber of the peace of Blackheath, at his burglarious
employment? Without delay Robinson summoned to his aid two of his
colleagues. One of them went round to the front of the house and rang
the bell, the other waited in the road outside, while Robinson stayed in
the garden at the back. No sooner had the bell rung than Robinson saw a
man come from the dining-room window which opened on to the garden, and
make quickly down the path. Robinson followed him. The man turned; "Keep
back!" he said, "or by God I'll shoot you!" Robinson came on. The man
fired three shots from a revolver, all of which passed close to the
officer's head. Robinson made another rush for him, the man fired
another shot. It missed its mark. The constable closed with his would-be
assassin, and struck him in the face. "I'll settle you this time," cried
the man, and fired a fifth shot, which went through Robinson's arm just
above the elbow. But, in spite of his wound, the valiant officer held
his prisoner, succeeded in flinging him to the ground, and catching hold
of the revolver that hung round the burglar's wrist, hit him on the head
with it. Immediately after the other two constables came to the help of
their colleague, and the struggling desperado was secured.

Little did the police as they searched their battered and moaning
prisoner realise the importance of their capture. When next morning
Peace appeared before the magistrate at Greenwich Police Court he was
not described by name--he had refused to give any--but as a half-caste
about sixty years of age, of repellant aspect. He was remanded for a
week. The first clue to the identity of their prisoner was afforded
by a letter which Peace, unable apparently to endure the loneliness and
suspense of prison any longer, wrote to his co-inventor Mr. Brion. It is
dated November 2, and is signed "John Ward." Peace was disturbed at the
absence of all news from his family. Immediately after his arrest, the
home in Peckham had been broken up. Mrs. Thompson and Mrs. Peace, taking
with them some large boxes, had gone first to the house of a sister of
Mrs. Thompson's in Nottingham, and a day or two later Mrs. Peace had
left Nottingham for Sheffield. There she went to a house in Hazel Road,
occupied by her son-in-law Bolsover, a working collier.(10)


     (10) Later, Mrs. Peace was arrested and charged with being in possession
of stolen property. She was taken to London and tried at the Old Bailey
before Mr. Commissioner Kerr, but acquitted on the ground of her having
acted under the compulsion of her husband.


It was no doubt to get news of his family that Peace wrote to Brion. But
the letters are sufficiently ingenious. Peace represents himself as a
truly penitent sinner who has got himself into a most unfortunate and
unexpected "mess" by giving way to drink. The spelling of the letters is
exaggeratedly illiterate. He asks Mr. Brion to take pity on him and not
despise him as "his own famery has don," to write him a letter to "hease
his trobel hart," if possible to come and see him. Mr. Brion complied
with the request of the mysterious "John Ward," and on arriving at
Newgate where Peace was awaiting trial, found himself in the presence of
his friend and colleague, Mr. Thompson.

In the meantime the police were getting hot on the scent of the identity
of "John Ward" with the great criminal who in spite of all their efforts
had eluded them for two years. The honour and profit of putting the
police on the right scent were claimed by Mrs. Thompson. To her Peace
had contrived to get a letter conveyed about the same time that he wrote
to Mr. Brion. It is addressed to his "dearly beloved wife." He asks
pardon for the "drunken madness" that has involved him in his present
trouble, and gives her the names of certain witnesses whom he would wish
to be called to prove his independent means and his dealings in musical
instruments. It is, he writes, his first offence, and as he has "never
been in prison before," begs her not to feel it a disgrace to come and
see him there. But Peace was leaning on a broken reed. Loyalty does not
appear to have been Susan Thompson's strong point. In her own words she
"was not of the sentimental sort." The "traitress Sue," as she is called
by chroniclers of the time, had fallen a victim to the wiles of the
police. Since, after Peace's arrest, she had been in possession of a
certain amount of stolen property, it was easier no doubt to persuade
her to be frank.

In any case, we find that on February 5, 1879, the day after Peace had
been sentenced to death for the murder of Dyson, Mrs. Thompson appealed
to the Treasury for the reward of L100 offered for Peace's conviction.
She based her application on information which she said she had supplied
to the police officers in charge of the case on November 5 in the
previous year, the very day on which Peace had first written to her from
Newgate. In reply to her letter the Treasury referred "Mrs. S. Bailey,
alias Thompson," to the Home Office, but whether she received from that
office the price of blood history does not relate.

The police scouted the idea that any revelation of hers had assisted
them to identify "John Ward" with Charles Peace. They said that it
was information given them in Peckham, no doubt by Mr. Brion, who, on
learning the deplorable character of his coadjutor, had placed himself
unreservedly in their hands, which first set them on the track. From
Peckham they went to Nottingham, where they no doubt came across Sue
Thompson, and thence to Sheffield, where on November 6 they visited
the house in Hazel Road, occupied by Mrs. Peace and her daughter, Mrs.
Bolsover. There they found two of the boxes which Mrs. Peace had brought
with her from Peckham. Besides stolen property, these boxes contained
evidence of the identity of Ward with Peace. A constable who had known
Peace well in Sheffield was sent to Newgate, and taken into the yard
where the prisoners awaiting trial were exercising. As they passed
round, the constable pointed to the fifth man: "That's Peace," he said,
"I'd know him anywhere." The man left the ranks and, coming up to the
constable, asked earnestly, "What do you want me for?" but the Governor
ordered him to go on with his walk.

It was as John Ward, alias Charles Peace, that Peace, on November 19,
1878, was put on his trial for burglary and the attempted murder of
Police Constable Robinson, at the Old Bailey before Mr. Justice Hawkins.
His age was given in the calendar as sixty, though Peace was actually
forty-six. The evidence against the prisoner was clear enough. All Mr.
Montagu Williams could urge in his defence was that Peace had never
intended to kill the officer, merely to frighten him. The jury found
Peace guilty of attempted murder. Asked if he had anything to say why
judgment should not be passed upon him, he addressed the Judge. He
protested that he had not been fairly dealt with, that he never intended
to kill the prosecutor, that the pistol was one that went off very
easily, and that the last shot had been fired by accident. "I really did
not know," he said, "that the pistol was loaded, and I hope, my lord,
that you will have mercy on me. I feel that I have disgraced myself, I
am not fit either to live or die. I am not prepared to meet my God, but
still I feel that my career has been made to appear much worse than it
really is. Oh, my lord, do have mercy on me; do give me one chance of
repenting and of preparing to meet my God. Do, my lord, have mercy on
me; and I assure you that you shall never repent it. As you hope for
mercy yourself at the hands of the great God, do have mercy on me, and
give me a chance of redeeming my character and preparing myself to meet
my God. I pray, and beseech you to have mercy upon me."

Peace's assumption of pitiable senility, sustained throughout the trial,
though it imposed on Sir Henry Hawkins, failed to melt his heart. He
told Peace that he did not believe his statement that he had fired the
pistol merely to frighten the constable; had not Robinson guarded
his head with his arm he would have been wounded fatally, and Peace
condemned to death. He did not consider it necessary, he said, to make
an inquiry into Peace's antecedents; he was a desperate burglar, and
there was an end of the matter. Notwithstanding his age, Mr. Justice
Hawkins felt it his duty to sentence him to penal servitude for life.
The severity of the sentence was undoubtedly a painful surprise
to Peace; to a man of sixty years of age it would be no doubt less
terrible, but to a man of forty-six it was crushing.

Not that Peace was fated to serve any great part of his sentence.

With as little delay as possible he was to be called on to answer to
the murder of Arthur Dyson. The buxom widow of the murdered man had been
found in America, whither she had returned after her husband's death.
She was quite ready to come to England to give evidence against
her husband's murderer. On January 17, 1879, Peace was taken from
Pentonville prison, where he was serving his sentence, and conveyed by
an early morning train to Sheffield. There at the Town Hall he appeared
before the stipendiary magistrate, and was charged with the murder of
Arthur Dyson. When he saw Mrs. Dyson enter the witness box and tell her
story of the crime, he must have realised that his case was desperate.
Her cross-examination was adjourned to the next hearing, and Peace was
taken back to London. On the 22nd, the day of the second hearing in
Sheffield, an enormous crowd had assembled outside the Town Hall. Inside
the court an anxious and expectant audiience{sic}, among them Mrs.
Dyson, in the words of a contemporary reporter, "stylish and cheerful,"
awaited the appearance of the protagonist. Great was the disappointment
and eager the excitement when the stipendiary came into the court about
a quarter past ten and stated that Peace had attempted to escape that
morning on the journey from London to Sheffield, and that in consequence
of his injuries the case would be adjourned for eight days.

What had happened was this. Peace had left King's Cross by the 5.15
train that morning, due to arrive at Sheffield at 8.45. From the very
commencement of the journey he had been wilful and troublesome. He kept
making excuses for leaving the carriage whenever the train stopped.
To obviate this nuisance the two warders, in whose charge he was, had
provided themselves with little bags which Peace could use when he
wished and then throw out of the window. Just after the train passed
Worksop, Peace asked for one of the bags. When the window was lowered
to allow the bag to be thrown away, Peace with lightning agility took a
flying leap through it. One of the warders caught him by the left foot.
Peace, hanging from the carriage, grasped the footboard with his hands
and kept kicking the warder as hard as he could with his right foot.
The other warder, unable to get to the window to help his colleague, was
making vain efforts to stop the train by pulling the communication cord.
For two miles the train ran on, Peace struggling desperately to escape.
At last he succeeded in kicking off his left shoe, and dropped on to the
line. The train ran on another mile until, with the assistance of some
gentlemen in other carriages, the warders were able to get it pulled up.
They immediately hurried back along the line, and there, near a place
called Kineton Park, they found their prisoner lying in the footway,
apparently unconscious and bleeding from a severe wound in the scalp. A
slow train from Sheffield stopped to pick up the injured man. As he was
lifted into the guard's van, he asked them to cover him up as he was
cold. On arriving at Sheffield, Peace was taken to the Police Station
and there made as comfortable as possible in one of the cells. Even then
he had energy enough to be troublesome over taking the brandy ordered
for him by the surgeon, until one of the officers told "Charley" they
would have none of his hanky-panky, and he had got to take it. "All
right," said Peace, "give me a minute," after which he swallowed
contentedly a couple of gills of the genial spirit.

Peace's daring feat was not, according to his own account, a mere
attempt to escape from the clutches of the law; it was noble and Roman
in its purpose. This is what he told his stepson, Willie Ward: "I saw
from the way I was guarded all the way down from London and all the way
back, when I came for my first trial, that I could not get away from the
warders, and I knew I could not jump from an express train without being
killed. I took a look at Darnall as I went down and as I went back, and
after I was put in my cell, I thought it all over. I felt that I could
not get away, and then I made up my mind to kill myself. I got two bits
of paper and pricked on them the words, 'Bury me at Darnall. God bless
you all!' With a bit of black dirt that I found on the floor of my cell
I wrote the same words on another piece of paper, and then I hid them in
my clothes. My hope was that, when I jumped from the train I should be
cut to pieces under the wheels. Then I should have been taken to the
Duke of York (a public-house at Darnall) and there would have been an
inquest over me. As soon as the inquest was over you would have claimed
my body, found the pieces of paper, and then you would have buried me at
Darnall."

This statement of Peace is no doubt in the main correct. But it is
difficult to believe that there was not present to his mind the sporting
chance that he might not be killed in leaping from the train, in which
event he would no doubt have done his best to get away, trusting to his
considerable powers of ingenious disguise to elude pursuit. But such a
chance was remote. Peace had faced boldly the possibility of a dreadful
death.

With that strain of domestic sentiment, which would appear to have been
a marked characteristic of his family, Peace was the more ready to
cheat the gallows in the hope of being by that means buried decently at
Darnall. It was at Darnall that he had spent some months of comparative
calm in his tempestuous career, and it was at Darnall that he had first
met Mrs. Dyson. Another and more practical motive that may have urged
Peace to attempt to injure seriously, if not kill himself, was the
hope of thereby delaying his trial. If the magisterial investigation
in Sheffield were completed before the end of January, Peace could be
committed for trial to the ensuing Leeds Assizes which commenced in the
first week in February. If he were injured too seriously, this would not
be possible. Here again he was doomed to disappointment.

Peace recovered so well from the results of his adventure on the railway
that the doctor pronounced him fit to appear for his second examination
before the magistrate on January 30. To avoid excitement, both on
the part of the prisoner and the public, the court sat in one of the
corridors of the Town Hall. The scene is described as dismal, dark and
cheerless. The proceedings took place by candlelight, and Peace, who was
seated in an armchair, complained frequently of the cold. At other times
he moaned and groaned and protested against the injustice with which
he was being treated. But the absence of any audience rather dashed the
effect of his laments.

The most interesting part of the proceedings was the cross-examination
of Mrs. Dyson by Mr. Clegg, the prisoner's solicitor.

Its purpose was to show that Mrs. Dyson had been on more intimate terms
with Peace than she was ready to admit, and that Dyson had been shot
by Peace in the course of a struggle, in which the former had been the
aggressor.

In the first part of his task Mr. Clegg met with some success. Mrs.
Dyson, whose memory was certainly eccentric--she could not, she said,
remember the year in which she had been married--was obliged to admit
that she had been in the habit of going to Peace's house, that she had
been alone with him to public-houses and places of entertainment, and
that she and Peace had been photographed together during the summer fair
at Sheffield. She could not "to her knowledge" recollect having told the
landlord of a public-house to charge her drink to Peace.

A great deal of Mrs. Dyson's cross-examination turned on a bundle of
letters that had been found near the scene of Dyson's murder on the
morning following the crime. These letters consisted for the most part
of notes, written in pencil on scraps of paper, purporting to have been
sent from Mrs. Dyson to Peace. In many of them she asks for money to get
drink, others refer to opportunities for their meetings in the absence
of Dyson; there are kind messages to members of Peace's family, his wife
and daughter, and urgent directions to Peace to hold his tongue and not
give ground for suspicion as to their relations. This bundle of letters
contained also the card which Dyson had thrown into Peace's garden
requesting him not to interfere with his family. According to the theory
of the defence, these letters had been written by Mrs. Dyson to Peace,
and went to prove the intimacy of their relations. At the inquest after
her husband's murder, Mrs. Dyson had been questioned by the coroner
about these letters. She denied that she had ever written to Peace; in
fact, she said, she "never did write." It was stated that Dyson himself
had seen the letters, and declared them to be forgeries written by Peace
or members of his family for the purpose of annoyance. Nevertheless,
before the Sheffield magistrate Mr. Clegg thought it his duty to
cross-examine Mrs. Dyson closely as to their authorship. He asked her
to write out a passage from one of them: "You can give me something as a
keepsake if you like, but I don't like to be covetous, and to take them
from your wife and daughter. Love to all!" Mrs. Dyson refused to admit
any likeness between what she had written and the handwriting of the
letter in question. Another passage ran: "Will see you as soon as I
possibly can. I think it would be easier after you move; he won't watch
so. The r--g fits the little finger. Many thanks and love to--Jennie
(Peace's daughter Jane). I will tell you what I thought of when I see
you about arranging matters. Excuse this scribbling." In answer to Mr.
Clegg, Mrs. Dyson admitted that Peace had given her a ring, which she
had worn for a short time on her little finger.

Another letter ran: "If you have a note for me, send now whilst he is
out; but you must not venture, for he is watching, and you cannot be too
careful. Hope your foot is better. I went to Sheffield yesterday, but
I could not see you anywhere. Were you out? Love to Jane." Mrs. Dyson
denied that she had known of an accident which Peace had had to his foot
at this time. In spite of the ruling of the magistrate that Mr.
Clegg had put forward quite enough, if true, to damage Mrs. Dyson's
credibility, he continued to press her as to her authorship of these
notes and letters, but Mrs. Dyson was firm in her repudiation of
them. She was equally firm in denying that anything in the nature of a
struggle had taken place between Peace and her husband previous to his
murder.

At the conclusion of Mrs. Dyson's evidence the prisoner was committed to
take his trial at the Leeds Assizes, which commenced the week following.
Peace, who had groaned and moaned and constantly interrupted the
proceedings, protested his innocence, and complained that his witnesses
had not been called. The apprehension with which this daring malefactor
was regarded by the authorities is shown by this clandestine hearing
of his case in a cold corridor of the Town Hall, and the rapidity with
which his trial followed on his committal. There is an appearance almost
of precipitation in the haste with which Peace was bustled to his doom.
After his committal he was taken to Wakefield Prison, and a few days
later to Armley Jail, there to await his trial.

This began on February 4, and lasted one day. Mr. Justice Lopes, who had
tried vainly to persuade the Manchester Grand Jury to throw out the
bill in the case of the brothers Habron, was the presiding judge. Mr.
Campbell Foster, Q.C., led for the prosecution. Peace was defended by
Mr. Frank Lockwood, then rising into that popular success at the bar
which some fifteen years later made him Solicitor-General, and but for
his premature death would have raised him to even higher honours in his
profession.

In addressing the jury, both Mr. Campbell Foster and Mr. Lockwood took
occasion to protest against the recklessness with which the press of
the day, both high and low, had circulated stories and rumours about
the interesting convict. As early as November in 1878 one leading London
daily newspaper had said that "it was now established beyond doubt that
the burglar captured by Police Constable Robinson was one and the same
as the Banner Cross murderer." Since then, as the public excitement grew
and the facts of Peace's extraordinary career came to light, the press
had responded loyally to the demands of the greedy lovers of sensation,
and piled fiction on fact with generous profusion. "Never," said Mr.
Lockwood, "in the whole course of his experience--and he defied any
of his learned friends to quote an experience--had there been such an
attempt made on the part of those who should be most careful of all
others to preserve the liberties of their fellowmen and to preserve the
dignity of the tribunals of justice to determine the guilt of a man."
Peace exclaimed "Hear, hear!" as Mr. Lockwood went on to say that "for
the sake of snatching paltry pence from the public, these persons had
wickedly sought to prejudice the prisoner's life." Allowing for Mr.
Lockwood's zeal as an advocate, there can be no question that, had
Peace chosen or been in a position to take proceedings, more than one
newspaper had at this time laid itself open to prosecution for contempt
of Court. The Times was not far wrong in saying that, since Muller
murdered Mr. Briggs on the North London Railway and the poisonings of
William Palmer, no criminal case had created such excitement as that of
Charles Peace. The fact that property seemed to be no more sacred to him
than life aggravated in a singular degree the resentment of a commercial
people.

The first witness called by the prosecution was Mrs. Dyson. She
described how on the night of November 29, 1876, she had come out of
the outhouse in the yard at the back of her house, and found herself
confronted by Peace holding a revolver; how he said: "Speak, or I'll
fire!" and the sequence of events already related up to the moment when
Dyson fell, shot in the temple.

Mr. Lockwood commenced his cross-examination of Mrs. Dyson by
endeavouring to get from her an admission; the most important to the
defence, that Dyson had caught hold of Peace after the first shot had
been fired, and that in the struggle which ensued, the revolver had gone
off by accident. But he was not very successful. He put it to Mrs. Dyson
that before the magistrate at Sheffield she had said: "I can't say
my husband did not get hold of the prisoner." "Put in the little
word 'try,' please," answered Mrs. Dyson. In spite of Mr. Lockwood's
questions, she maintained that, though her husband may have attempted to
get hold of Peace, he did not succeed in doing so. As she was the only
witness to the shooting there was no one to contradict her statement.

Mr. Lockwood fared better when he came to deal with the relations of
Mrs. Dyson with Peace previous to the crime. Mrs. Dyson admitted that
in the spring of 1876 her husband had objected to her friendship with
Peace, and that nevertheless, in the following summer, she and Peace
had been photographed together at the Sheffield fair. She made a vain
attempt to escape from such an admission by trying to shift the occasion
of the summer fair to the previous year, 1875, but Mr. Lockwood put
it to her that she had not come to Darnall, where she first met Peace,
until the end of that year. Finally he drove her to say that she could
not remember when she came to Darnall, whether in 1873, 1874, 1875, or
1876. She admitted that she had accepted a ring from Peace, but could
not remember whether she had shown it to her husband. She had been
perhaps twice with Peace to the Marquis of Waterford public-house, and
once to the Star Music Hall. She could not swear one way or the other
whether she had charged to Peace's account drink consumed by her at an
inn in Darnall called the Half-way House. Confronted with a little girl
and a man, whom Mr. Lockwood suggested she had employed to carry notes
to Peace, Mrs. Dyson said that these were merely receipts for pictures
which he had framed for her. On the day before her husband's murder,
Mrs. Dyson was at the Stag Hotel at Sharrow with a little boy belonging
to a neighbour. A man followed her in and sat beside her, and afterwards
followed her out. In answer to Mr. Lockwood, Mrs. Dyson would "almost
swear" the man was not Peace; he had spoken to her, but she could not
remember whether she had spoken to him or not. She denied that this man
had said to her that he would come and see her the next night. As
the result of a parting shot Mr. Lockwood obtained from Mrs. Dyson a
reluctant admission that she had been "slightly inebriated" at the
Half-way House in Darnall, but had not to her knowledge been turned
out of the house on that account. "You may not have known you were
inebriated?" suggested Mr. Lockwood. "I always know what I am doing,"
was Mrs. Dyson's reply, to which an unfriendly critic might have replied
that she did not apparently know with anything like certainty what she
had been doing during the last three or four years. In commenting on
the trial the following day, the Times stigmatised as "feeble" the
prevarications by which Mrs. Dyson tried to explain away her intimacy
with Peace. In this part of his cross-examination Mr. Lockwood had made
it appear at least highly probable that there had been a much closer
relationship between Mrs. Dyson and Peace than the former was willing to
acknowledge.

The evidence of Mrs. Dyson was followed by that of five persons who had
either seen Peace in the neighbourhood of Banner Cross Terrace on the
night of the murder, or heard the screams and shots that accompanied it.
A woman, Mrs. Gregory, whose house was between that of the Dysons and
the passage in which Dyson was shot, said that she had heard the noise
of the clogs Mrs. Dyson was wearing as she went across the yard. A
minute later she heard a scream. She opened her back door and saw Dyson
standing by his own. She told him to go to his wife. She then went back
into her house, and almost directly after heard two shots, followed by
another scream, but no sound as of any scuffling.

Another witness was a labourer named Brassington. He was a stranger to
Peace, but stated that about eight o'clock on the night of the murder
a man came up to him outside the Banner Cross Hotel, a few yards from
Dyson's house. He was standing under a gas lamp, and it was a bright
moonlight night. The man asked him if he knew of any strange people who
had come to live in the neighbourhood. Brassington answered that he
did not. The man then produced a bundle of letters which he asked
Brassington to read. But Brassington declined, as reading was not one of
his accomplishments. The man then said that "he would make it a warm 'un
for those strange folks before morning--he would shoot both of them,"
and went off in the direction of Dyson's house. Brassington swore
positively that Peace was the stranger who had accosted him that night,
and Mr. Lockwood failed to shake him in his evidence. Nor could Mr.
Lockwood persuade the surgeon who was called to Dyson at the time of his
death to admit that the marks on the nose and chin of the dead man
could have been caused by a blow; they were merely abrasions of the skin
caused by the wounded man falling to the ground.

Evidence was then given as to threats uttered by Peace against the
Dysons in the July of 1876, and as to his arrest at Blackheath in the
October of 1878. The revolver taken from Peace that night was produced,
and it was shown that the rifling of the bullet extracted from Dyson's
head was the same as that of the bullet fired from the revolver carried
by Peace at the time of his capture.

Mr. Campbell Foster wanted to put in as evidence the card that Dyson
had flung into Peace's garden at Darnall requesting him not to interfere
with his family. This card had been found among the bundle of letters
dropped by Peace near the scene of the murder. Mr. Lockwood objected to
the admission of the card unless all the letters were admitted at the
same time. The Judge ruled that both the card and the letters were
inadmissible, as irrelevant to the issue; Mr. Lockwood had, he said,
very properly cross-examined Mrs. Dyson on these letters to test her
credibility, but he was bound by her answers and could not contradict
her by introducing them as evidence in the case.

Mr. Lockwood in his address to the jury did his best to persuade them
that the death of Dyson was the accidental result of a struggle between
Peace and himself. He suggested that Mrs. Dyson had left her house that
night for the purpose of meeting Peace, and that Dyson, who was jealous
of his wife's intimacy with him, had gone out to find her; that Dyson,
seeing Peace, had caught hold of him; and that the revolver had gone
off accidentally as Dyson tried to wrest it from his adversary.
He repudiated the suggestion of Mr. Foster that the persons he had
confronted with Mrs. Dyson in the course of his cross-examination had
been hired for a paltry sum to come into court and lie.

Twice, both at the beginning and the end of his speech, Mr. Lockwood
urged as a reason for the jury being tender in taking Peace's life that
he was in such a state of wickedness as to be quite unprepared to meet
death. Both times that his counsel put forward this curious plea, Peace
raised his eyes to heaven and exclaimed "I am not fit to die."

Mr. Justice Lopes in summing up described as an "absolute surmise" the
theory of the accidental discharge of the pistol. He asked the jury to
take Peace's revolver in their hands and try the trigger, so as to see
for themselves whether it was likely to go off accidentally or not. He
pointed out that the pistol produced might not have been the pistol used
at Banner Cross; at the same time the bullet fired in November, 1876,
bore marks such as would have been produced had it been fired from the
pistol taken from Peace at Blackheath in October, 1878. He said that Mr.
Lockwood had been perfectly justified in his attempt to discredit the
evidence of Mrs. Dyson, but the case did not rest on her evidence alone.
In her evidence as to the threats uttered by Peace in July, 1876, Mrs.
Dyson was corroborated by three other witnesses. In the Judge's opinion
it was clearly proved that no struggle or scuffle had taken place
before the murder. If the defence, he concluded, rested on no solid
foundation, then the jury must do their duty to the community at large
and by the oath they had sworn.

It was a quarter past seven when the jury retired. Ten minutes later
they came back into court with a verdict of guilty. Asked if he had
anything to say, Peace in a faint voice replied, "It is no use my
saying anything." The Judge, declining very properly to aggravate the
prisoner's feelings by "a recapitulation of any portion of the details
of what I fear, I can only call your criminal career," passed on him
sentence of death. Peace accepted his fate with composure.

Before we proceed to describe the last days of Peace on earth, let us
finish with the two women who had succeeded Mrs. Peace in his ardent
affections.

A few days after Peace's execution Mrs. Dyson left England for America,
but before going she left behind her a narrative intended to contradict
the imputations which she felt had been made against her moral
character. An Irishwoman by birth, she said that she had gone to America
when she was fifteen years old.

There she met and married Dyson, a civil engineer on the Atlantic and
Great Western Railway. Theirs was a rough and arduous life. But Mrs.
Dyson was thoroughly happy in driving her husband about in a buggy among
bears and creeks. She did not know fear and loved danger: "My husband
loved me and I loved him, and in his company and in driving him about in
this wild kind of fashion I derived much pleasure." However, Mr. Dyson's
health broke down, and he was obliged to return to England. It was at
Darnall that the fatal acquaintance with Peace began. Living next
door but one to the Dysons, Peace took the opportunity of introducing
himself, and Mr. Dyson "being a gentleman," took polite notice of his
advances. He became a constant visitor at the house. But after a time
Peace began to show that he was not the gentleman Mr. Dyson was. He
disgusted the latter by offering to show him improper pictures and "the
sights of the town" of Sheffield.

The Dysons tried to shake off the unwelcome acquaintance, but that was
easier said than done. By this time Peace had set his heart on making
Mrs. Dyson leave her husband. He kept trying to persuade her to go to
Manchester with him, where he would take a cigar or picture shop, to
which Mrs. Dyson, in fine clothes and jewelry, should lend the charm of
her comely presence. He offered her a sealskin jacket, yards of silk,
a gold watch. She should, he said, live in Manchester like a lady, to
which Mrs. Dyson replied coldly that she had always lived like one and
should continue to do so quite independently of him. But Peace would
listen to no refusal, however decided its tone. Dyson threw over
the card into Peace's garden. This only served to aggravate his
determination to possess himself of the wife. He would listen at
keyholes, leer in at the window, and follow Mrs. Dyson wherever she
went. When she was photographed at the fair, she found that Peace had
stood behind her chair and by that means got himself included in the
picture. At times he had threatened her with a revolver. On one occasion
when he was more insulting than usual, Mrs. Dyson forgot her fear of him
and gave him a thrashing. Peace threatened "to make her so that neither
man nor woman should look at her, and then he would have her all to
himself." It was with some purpose of this kind, Mrs. Dyson suggested,
that Peace stole a photograph of herself out of a locket, intending to
make some improper use of it. At last, in desperation, the Dysons moved
to Banner Cross. From the day of their arrival there until the murder,
Mrs. Dyson never saw Peace. She denied altogether having been in his
company the night before the murder. The letters were "bare forgeries,"
written by Peace or members of his family to get her into their power.

Against the advice of all her friends Mrs. Dyson had come back from
America to give evidence against Peace. To the detective who saw her at
Cleveland she said, "I will go back if I have to walk on my head all the
way"; and though she little knew what she would have to go through in
giving her evidence, she would do it again under the circumstances. "My
opinion is," she said, "that Peace is a perfect demon--not a man. I am
told that since he has been sentenced to death he has become a changed
character. That I don't believe. The place to which the wicked go is not
bad enough for him. I think its occupants, bad as they might be, are too
good to be where he is. No matter where he goes, I am satisfied that
there will be hell. Not even a Shakespeare could adequately paint such a
man as he has been. My lifelong regret will be that I ever knew him."

With these few earnest words Mrs. Dyson quitted the shores of England,
hardly clearing up the mystery of her actual relations with Peace.

A woman with whom Mrs. Dyson very much resented finding herself
classed--inebriety would appear to have been their only common
weakness--was Mrs. Thompson, the "traitress Sue." In spite of the fact
that on February 5 Mrs. Thompson had applied to the Treasury for L100,
blood money due her for assisting the police in the identification of
Peace, she was at the same time carrying on a friendly correspondence
with her lover and making attempts to see him. Peace had written to her
before his trial hoping she would not forsake him; "you have been my
bosom friend, and you have ofttimes said you loved me, that you would
die for me." He asked her to sell some goods which he had left with
her in order to raise money for his defence. The traitress replied on
January 27 that she had already sold everything and shared the proceeds
with Mrs. Peace. "You are doing me great injustice," she wrote, "by
saying that I have been out to 'work' with you. Do not die with such a
base falsehood on your conscience, for you know I am young and have my
living and character to redeem. I pity you and myself to think we should
have met." After his condemnation Mrs. Thompson made repeated efforts
to see Peace, coming to Leeds for the purpose. Peace wrote a letter on
February 9 to his "poor Sue," asking her to come to the prison. But,
partly at the wish of Peace's relatives and for reasons of their own, a
permission given Mrs. Thompson by the authorities to visit the convict
was suddenly withdrawn, and she never saw him again.



III

HIS TRIAL AND EXECUTION


In the lives of those famous men who have perished on the scaffold
their behaviour during the interval between their condemnation and their
execution has always been the subject of curiosity and interest.

It may be said at once that nothing could have been more deeply
religious, more sincerely repentant, more Christian to all appearances
than Peace's conduct and demeanour in the last weeks of his life. He
threw himself into the work of atonement with the same uncompromising
zeal and energy that he had displayed as a burglar. By his death a truly
welcome and effective recruit was lost to the ranks of the contrite
and converted sinners. However powerless as a controlling force--and he
admitted it--his belief in God and the devil may have been in the past,
that belief was assured and confident, and in the presence of death
proclaimed itself with vigour, not in words merely, but in deeds.

In obedience to the wishes of his family, Peace had refrained from
seeing Sue Thompson. This was at some sacrifice, for he wished very much
to see her and to the last, though he knew that she had betrayed him,
sent her affectionate and forgiving messages. These were transmitted
to Sue by Mr. Brion. This disingenuous gentleman was a fellow-applicant
with Sue to the Treasury for pecuniary recognition of his efforts in
bringing about the identification of Peace, and furnishing the police
with information as to the convict's disposal of his stolen property. In
his zeal he had even gone so far as to play the role of an accomplice of
Peace, and by this means discovered a place in Petticoat Lane where the
burglar got rid of some of his booty.

After Peace's condemnation Mr. Brion visited him in Armley Jail. His
purpose in doing so was to wring from his co-inventor an admission that
the inventions which they had patented together were his work alone.
Peace denied this, but offered to sell his share for L50. Brion refused
the offer, and persisted in his assertion that Peace had got his name
attached to the patents by undue influence, whatever that might mean.
Peace, after wrestling with the spirit, gave way. "Very well, my
friend," he said, "let it be as you say. I have not cheated you, Heaven
knows. But I also know that this infamy of mine has been the cause of
bringing harm to you, which is the last thing I should have wished to
have caused to my friend." A deed of gift was drawn up, making over to
Brion Peace's share in their inventions; this Peace handed to Brion
as the price of the latter's precious forgiveness and a token of the
sincerity of his colleague's repentance. Thus, as has often happened
in this sad world, was disreputable genius exploited once again by
smug mediocrity. Mr. Brion, having got all he wanted, left the prison,
assuring the Governor that Peace's repentance was "all bunkum," and
advising, with commendable anxiety for the public good, that the warders
in the condemned cell should be doubled.

Peace had one act of atonement to discharge more urgent than displaying
Christian forbearance towards ignoble associates. That was the righting
of William Habron, who was now serving the third year of his life
sentence for the murder of Constable Cock at Whalley Range. Peace
sent for the Governor of the jail a few days before his execution and
obtained from him the materials necessary for drawing up a plan. Peace
was quite an adept at making plans; he had already made an excellent one
of the scene of Dyson's murder. He now drew a plan of the place where
Cock had been shot, gave a detailed account of how he came by his death,
and made a full confession of his own guilt.

In the confession he described how, some days before the burglary, he
had, according to his custom, "spotted" the house at Whalley Range. In
order to do this he always dressed himself respectably, because he had
found that the police never suspected anyone who wore good clothes. On
the night of the crime he passed two policemen on the road to the house.
He had gone into the grounds and was about to begin operations when he
heard a rustle behind him and saw a policeman, whom he recognised as one
of those he had met in the road, enter the garden. With his well-known
agility Peace climbed on to the wall, and dropped on to the other side,
only to find himself almost in the arms of the second policeman. Peace
warned the officer to stand back and fired his revolver wide of him.
But, as Peace said, "these Manchester policemen are a very obstinate
lot." The constable took out his truncheon. Peace fired again and killed
him.

Soon after the murderer saw in the newspapers that two men had been
arrested for the crime. "This greatly interested me," said Peace. "I
always had a liking to be present at trials, as the public no doubt know
by this time." So he went to Manchester Assizes and saw William Habron
sentenced to death. "People will say," he said, "that I was a hardened
wretch for allowing an innocent man to suffer for the crime of which
I was guilty but what man would have given himself up under such
circumstances, knowing as I did that I should certainly be hanged?"
Peace's view of the question was a purely practical one: "Now that I
am going to forfeit my own life and feel that I have nothing to gain
by further secrecy, I think it is right in the sight of God and man to
clear this innocent young man." It would have been more right in the
sight of God and man to have done it before, but then Peace admitted
that during all his career he had allowed neither God nor man to
influence his actions.

How many men in the situation of Peace at the time, with the certainty
of death before him if he confessed, would have sacrificed themselves to
save an innocent man? Cold-blooded heroism of this kind is rare in the
annals of crime. Nor did Peace claim to have anything of the hero about
him.

     "Lion-hearted I've lived,
     And when my time comes
     Lion-hearted I'll die."

Though fond of repeating this piece of doggerel, Peace would have
been the last man to have attributed to himself all those qualities
associated symbolically with the lion.

A few days before his execution Peace was visited in his prison by Mr.
Littlewood, the Vicar of Darnall. Mr. Littlewood had known Peace a few
years before, when he had been chaplain at Wakefield Prison. "Well, my
old friend Peace," he said as he entered the cell, "how are you to-day?"
"'I am very poorly, sir," replied the convict, "but I am exceedingly
pleased to see you." Mr. Littlewood assured Peace that there was at any
rate one person in the world who had deep sympathy with him, and that
was himself. Peace burst into tears. He expressed a wish to unburden
himself to the vicar, but before doing so, asked for his assurance that
he believed in the truth and sincerity of what he was about to say to
him. He said that he preferred to be hanged to lingering out his life
in penal servitude, that he was grieved and repentant for his past
life. "If I could undo, or make amends for anything I have done, I would
suffer my body as I now stand to be cut in pieces inch by inch. I feel,
sir, that I am too bad to live or die, and having this feeling I cannot
think that either you or anyone else would believe me, and that is the
reason why I ask you so much to try to be assured that you do not think
I am telling lies. I call my God to witness that all I am saying and
wish to say shall be the truth--the whole truth--nothing but the truth."
Mr. Littlewood said that, after carefully watching Peace and having
regard to his experience of some of the most hardened of criminals
during his service in Wakefield Prison, he felt convinced that Peace
was in earnest and as sincere as any man could be; he spoke rationally,
coherently, and without excitement.

Peace was determined to test the extent of the reverend gentleman's
faith in his asseverations. "Now, sir," he said, "I understand that you
still have the impression that I stole the clock from your day-schools."
Mr. Littlewood admitted that such was his impression. "I thought so,"
replied Peace, "and this has caused me much grief and pain, for I can
assure you I have so much respect for you personally that I would rather
have given you a clock and much more besides than have taken it. At the
time your clock was stolen I had reason for suspecting that it was taken
by some colliers whom I knew." There was a pause. Mr. Littlewood thought
that Peace was going to give him the name of the colliers. But that was
not Peace's way. He said sharply: "Do you now believe that I have spoken
the truth in denying that I took your clock, and will you leave me
to-day fully believing that I am innocent of doing that?" Mr. Littlewood
looked at him closely and appeared to be deliberating on his reply.
Peace watched him intently. At last Mr. Littlewood said, "Peace, I am
convinced that you did not take the clock. I cannot believe that you
dare deny it now in your position, if you really did." Once more Peace
burst into tears, and was unable for some time to speak.

Having recovered his self-possession, Peace turned to the serious
business of confession. He dealt first with the murder of Dyson.

He maintained that his relations with Mrs. Dyson had been of an intimate
character. He wanted to see her on the night of the crime in order
to get her to induce her husband to withdraw the warrant which he had
procured against him; he was tired, he said, of being hunted about
from place to place. He intercepted Mrs. Dyson as she crossed the
yard. Instead of listening to him quietly Mrs. Dyson became violent and
threatening in her language. Peace took out his revolver, and, holding
it close to her head, warned her that he was not to be trifled with. She
refused to be warned. Dyson, hearing the loud voices, came out of his
house. Peace tried to get away down the passage into Banner Cross Road,
but Dyson followed and caught hold of him. In the struggle Peace fired
one barrel of his revolver wide. Dyson seized the hand in which Peace
was holding the weapon. "Then I knew," said Peace, "I had not a moment
to spare. I made a desperate effort, wrenched the arm from him and fired
again. All that was in my head at the time was to get away. I never did
intend, either there or anywhere else, to take a man's life; but I was
determined that I should not be caught at that time, as the result,
knowing what I had done before, would have been worse even than had I
stayed under the warrant." If he had intended to murder Dyson, Peace
pointed out that he would have set about it in quite a different and
more secret way; it was as unintentional a thing as ever was done; Mrs.
Dyson had committed the grossest perjury in saying that no struggle had
taken place between her husband and himself.

It is to be remembered that Peace and Mrs. Dyson were the sole
witnesses of what took place that night between the two men. In point
of credibility there may be little to choose between them, but Peace can
claim for his account that it was the statement of a dying, and, to all
appearances, sincerely repentant sinner.

Peace then repeated to Mr. Littlewood his confession of the killing of
Constable Cock, and his desire that Habron should be set free.(11) As to
this part of his career Peace indulged in some general reflections.
"My great mistake, sir," he said, "and I can see it now as my end
approaches, has been this--in all my career I have used ball cartridge.
I can see now that in using ball cartridge I did wrong I ought to have
used blank cartridge; then I would not have taken life." Peace said that
he hoped he would meet his death like a hero. "I do not say this in
any kind of bravado. I do not mean such a hero as some persons will
understand when they read this. I mean such a hero as my God might wish
me to be. I am deeply grieved for all I have done, and would atone
for it to the utmost of my power." To Mr. Littlewood the moment seemed
convenient to suggest that as a practical means of atonement Peace
should reveal to him the names of the persons with whom he had disposed
of the greater part of his stolen property. But in spite of much
attempted persuasion by the reverend gentleman Peace explained that he
was a man and meant to be a man to the end.


     (11) William Habron was subsequently given a free pardon and L800 by way
of compensation.


Earlier in their interview Peace had expressed to Mr. Littlewood a hope
that after his execution his name would never be mentioned again, but
before they parted he asked Mr. Littlewood, as a favour, to preach a
sermon on him after his death to the good people of Darnall. He wished
his career held up to them as a beacon, in order that all who saw might
avoid his example, and so his death be of some service to society.

Before Mr. Littlewood left, Peace asked him to hear him pray. Having
requested the warders to kneel down, Peace began a prayer that lasted
twenty minutes. He prayed for himself, his family, his victims, Mr.
Littlewood, society generally, and all classes of the community. Mr.
Littlewood described the prayer as earnest, fervent and fluent. At the
end Peace asked Mr. Littlewood if he ought to see Mrs. Dyson and beg
her forgiveness for having killed her husband. Mr. Littlewood, believing
erroneously that Mrs. Dyson had already left the country, told Peace
that he should direct all his attention to asking forgiveness of his
Maker. At the close of their interview Peace was lifted into bed and,
turning his face to the wall, wept.

Tuesday, February 25, was the day fixed for the execution of Peace.
As the time drew near, the convict's confidence in ultimate salvation
increased. A Dr. Potter of Sheffield had declared in a sermon that "all
hope of Peace's salvation was gone for ever." Peace replied curtly,
"Well, Dr. Potter may think so, but I don't." Though his health had
improved, Peace was still very feeble in body. But his soul was hopeful
and undismayed. On the Saturday before his death his brother and
sister-in-law, a nephew and niece visited him for the last time. He
spoke with some emotion of his approaching end. He said he should die
about eight o'clock, and that at four o'clock an inquest would be held
on his body; he would then be thrown into his grave without service
or sermon of any kind. He asked his relatives to plant a flower on a
certain grave in a cemetery in Sheffield on the day of his execution. He
was very weak, he said, but hoped he should have strength enough to
walk to the scaffold. He sent messages to friends and warnings to avoid
gambling and drinking. He begged his brother to change his manner of
life and "become religious." His good counsel was not apparently
very well received. Peace's visitors took a depressing view of their
relative's condition. They found him "a poor, wretched, haggard man,"
and, meeting Mrs. Thompson who was waiting outside the gaol for news of
"dear Jack," wondered how she could have taken up with such a man.

When, the day before his execution, Peace was visited for the last time
by his wife, his stepson, his daughter, Mrs. Bolsover, and her husband,
he was in much better spirits. He asked his visitors to restrain
themselves from displays of emotion, as he felt very happy and did
not wish to be disturbed. He advised them to sell or exhibit for money
certain works of art of his own devising. Among them was a design
in paper for a monument to be placed over his grave. The design is
elaborate but well and ingeniously executed; in the opinion of Frith,
the painter, it showed "the true feeling of an artist." It is somewhat
in the style of the Albert Memorial, and figures of angels are prominent
in the scheme. The whole conception is typical of the artist's sanguine
and confident assurance of his ultimate destiny. A model boat and a
fiddle made out of a hollow bamboo cane he wished also to be made the
means of raising money. He was describing with some detail the ceremony
of his approaching death and burial when he was interrupted by a sound
of hammering. Peace listened for a moment and then said, "That's a noise
that would make some men fall on the floor. They are working at my own
scaffold." A warder said that he was mistaken. "No, I am not," answered
Peace, "I have not worked so long with wood without knowing the sound of
deals; and they don't have deals inside a prison for anything else than
scaffolds." But the noise, he said, did not disturb him in the least, as
he was quite prepared to meet his fate. He would like to have seen his
grave and coffin; he knew that his body would be treated with scant
ceremony after his death. But what of that? By that time his soul would
be in Heaven. He was pleased that one sinner who had seen him on his way
from Pentonville to Sheffield, had written to tell him that the sight of
the convict had brought home to him the sins of his own past life, and
by this means he had found salvation.

The time had come to say good-bye for the last time. Peace asked his
weeping relatives whether they had anything more that they wished to ask
him. Mrs. Peace reminded him that he had promised to pray with them
at the last. Peace, ever ready, knelt with them and prayed for half an
hour. He then shook hands with them, prayed for and blessed each one
singly, and himself gave way to tears as they left his presence. To his
wife as she departed Peace gave a funeral card of his own designing. It
ran:

     In
     Memory
     of
     Charles Peace
     Who was executed in
     Armley Prison
     Tuesday February 25th,
     1879 Aged 47

     For that I don but never
     Intended.


The same day there arrived in the prison one who in his own trade had
something of the personality and assurance of the culprit he was to
execute. William Marwood--unlike his celebrated victim, he has his place
in the Dictionary of National Biography--is perhaps the most remarkable
of these persons who have held at different times the office of public
executioner. As the inventor of the "long drop," he has done a lasting
service to humanity by enabling the death-sentence passed by the judge
to be carried out with the minimum of possible suffering. Marwood took a
lofty view of the office he held, and refused his assent to the somewhat
hypocritical loathing, with which those who sanction and profit by his
exertions are pleased to regard this servant of the law. "I am doing
God's work," said Marwood, "according to the divine command and the
law of the British Crown. I do it simply as a matter of duty and as
a Christian. I sleep as soundly as a child and am never disturbed by
phantoms. Where there is guilt there is bad sleeping, but I am conscious
that I try to live a blameless life. Detesting idleness, I pass
my vacant time in business (he was a shoemaker at Horncastle, in
Lincolnshire) and work in my shoeshop near the church day after day
until such time as I am required elsewhere. It would have been better
for those I executed if they had preferred industry to idleness."

Marwood had not the almost patriarchal air of benevolent respectability
which his predecessor Calcraft had acquired during a short experience
as a family butler; but as an executioner that kindly old gentleman
had been a sad bungler in his time compared with the scientific and
expeditious Marwood. The Horncastle shoemaker was saving, businesslike,
pious and thoughtful. Like Peace, he had interests outside his ordinary
profession. He had at one time propounded a scheme for the abolition of
the National Debt, a man clearly determined to benefit his fellowmen in
some way or other. A predilection for gin would seem to have been his
only concession to the ordinary weakness of humanity. And now he had
arrived in Armley Jail to exercise his happy dispatch on the greatest
of the many criminals who passed through his hands, one who, in his own
words, "met death with greater firmness" than any man on whom he had
officiated during seven years of Crown employment.

The day of February the 25th broke bitterly cold. Like Charles I.
before him, Peace feared lest the extreme cold should make him appear
to tremble on the scaffold. He had slept calmly till six o'clock in the
morning. A great part of the two hours before the coming of the hangman
Peace spent in letter-writing. He wrote two letters to his wife, in one
of which he copied out some verses he had written in Woking Prison
on the death of their little boy John. In the second he expressed his
satisfaction that he was to die now and not linger twenty years in
prison. To his daughter, step-son and son-in-law he wrote letters of
fervent, religious exhortation and sent them tracts and pictures
which he had secured from well-intentioned persons anxious about
his salvation. To an old friend, George Goodlad, a pianist, who
had apparently lived up to his name, he wrote: "You chose an honest
industrious way through life, but I chose the one of dishonesty,
villainy and sin"; let his fate, he said, be a warning.

Peace ate a hearty breakfast and awaited the coming of the executioner
with calm. He had been troubled with an inconvenient cough the night
before. "I wonder," he said to one of his warders, "if Marwood could
cure this cough of mine." He had got an idea into his head that Marwood
would "punish" him when he came to deal with him on the scaffold, and
asked to see the hangman a few minutes before the appointed hour. "I
hope you will not punish me. I hope you will do your work quickly," he
said to Marwood. "You shall not suffer pain from my hand," replied that
worthy. "God bless you," exclaimed Peace, "I hope to meet you all in
heaven. I am thankful to say my sins are all forgiven." And so these two
pious men--on the morning of an execution Marwood always knelt down and
asked God's blessing on the work he had to do--shook hands together and
set about their business. Firmly and fearlessly Peace submitted himself
to the necessary preparations. For one moment he faltered as the gallows
came in sight, but recovered himself quickly.

As Marwood was about to cover his face, Peace stopped him with some
irritation of manner and said that he wished to speak to the gentlemen
of the press who had been admitted to the ceremony. No one gainsaid him,
and he thus addressed the reporters: "You gentlemen reporters, I wish
you to notice the few words I am going to say. You know what my life
has been. It has been base; but I wish you to notice, for the sake of
others, how a man can die, as I am about to die, in fear of the Lord.
Gentlemen, my heart says that I feel assured that my sins are forgiven
me, that I am going to the Kingdom of Heaven, or else to the place
prepared for those who rest until the great Judgment day. I do not think
I have any enemies, but if there are any who would be so, I wish them
well. Gentlemen, all and all, I wish them to come to the Kingdom of
Heaven when they die, as I am going to die." He asked a blessing on the
officials of the prison and, in conclusion, sent his last wishes and
respects to his dear children and their mother. "I hope," he said, "no
one will disgrace them by taunting them or jeering them on my account,
but to have mercy upon them. God bless you, my dear children. Good-bye,
and Heaven bless you. Amen: Oh, my Lord God, have mercy upon me!"

After the cap had been placed over his head Peace asked twice very
sharply, as a man who expected to be obeyed, for a drink of water. But
this time his request was not compiled with. He died instantaneously and
was buried in Armley Jail.

Had Peace flourished in 1914 instead of 1874, his end might have been
honourable instead of dishonourable. The war of to-day has no doubt
saved many a man from a criminal career by turning to worthy account
qualities which, dangerous in crime, are useful in war. Absolute
fearlessness, agility, resource, cunning and determination; all these
are admirable qualities in the soldier; and all these Charles Peace
possessed in a signal degree. But fate denied him opportunity, he became
a burglar and died on the scaffold. Years of prison life failed, as they
did in those days, to make any impression for good on one resolute in
whatever way he chose to go. Peace was a born fighter. A detective who
knew him and had on one occasion come near capturing him in London, said
that he was a fair fighter, that he always gave fair warning to those on
whom he fired, and that, being a dead shot, the many wide shots which
he fired are to be reckoned proofs of this. Peace maintained to the last
that he had never intended to kill Dyson. This statement ex-detective
Parrock believed, and that the fatal shot was fired over Peace's
shoulder as he was making off. Though habitually sober, Peace was made
intoxicated now and then by the drink, stood him by those whom he used
to amuse with his musical tricks and antics in public-houses. At such
times he would get fuddled and quarrelsome. He was in such a frame
of mind on the evening of Dyson's murder. His visit to the Vicar of
Ecclesall brought him little comfort or consolation. It was in this
unsatisfactory frame of mind that he went to Dyson's house. This much
the ex-detective would urge in his favour. To his neighbours he was an
awe-inspiring but kind and sympathetic man. "If you want my true opinion
of him," says Detective Parrock, "he was a burglar to the backbone but
not a murderer at heart. He deserved the fate that came to him as little
as any who in modern times have met with a like one." Those who are in
the fighting line are always the most generous about their adversaries.
Parrock as a potential target for Peace's revolver, may have erred on
the side of generosity, but there is some truth in what he says.

As Peace himself admitted, his life had been base. He was well aware
that he had misused such gifts as nature had bestowed on him. One
must go back to mediaeval times to find the counterpart of this daring
ruffian who, believing in personal God and devil, refuses until the end
to allow either to interfere with his business in life. In this respect
Charles Peace reminds us irresistibly of our Angevin kings.

There is only one criminal who vies with Charley Peace in that genial
popular regard which makes Charles "Charley" and John "Jack," and that
is Jack Sheppard. What Jack was to the eighteenth century, that Charley
was to the nineteenth. And each one is in a sense typical of his period.
Lecky has said that the eighteenth century is richer than any other
in the romance of crime. I think it may fairly be said that in the
nineteenth century the romance of crime ceased to be. In the eighteenth
century the scenery and dresses, all the stage setting of crime make for
romance; its literature is quaint and picturesque; there is something
gay and debonair about the whole business.

Sheppard is typical of all this. There is a certain charm about the
rascal; his humour is undeniable; he is a philosopher, taking all that
comes with easy grace, even his betrayal by his brother and others
who should have been loyal to him. Jack Sheppard has the good-humoured
carelessness of that most engaging of all eighteenth century
malefactors, Deacon Brodie. It is quite otherwise with Charley Peace.
There is little enough gay or debonair about him. Compared with
Sheppard, Peace is as drab as the surroundings of mid-Victorian crime
are drab compared with the picturesqueness of eighteenth century
England.

Crime in the nineteenth century becomes more scientific in its methods
and in its detection also. The revolver places a more hasty, less
decorous weapon than the old-fashioned pistol in the hands of the
determined burglar. The literature of crime, such as it is, becomes
vulgar and prosaic. Peace has no charm about him, no gaiety, but he has
the virtues of his defects. He, unlike Sheppard, shuns company; he works
alone, never depending on accomplices; a "tight cock," as Sheppard would
have phrased it, and not relying on a like quality of tightness in
his fellows. Sheppard is a slave to his women, Edgeworth Bess and Mrs.
Maggot; Mrs. Peace and Sue Thompson are the slaves of Peace. Sheppard
loves to stroll openly about the London streets in his fine suit
of black, his ruffled shirt and his silver-hilted sword. Peace lies
concealed at Peckham beneath the homely disguise of old Mr. Thompson.
Sheppard is an imp, Peace a goblin. But both have that gift of
personality which, in their own peculiar line, lifts them out from the
ruck, and makes them Jack and Charley to those who like to know famous
people by cheery nicknames.

And so we must accept Charles Peace as a remarkable character, whose
unquestioned gifts as a man of action were squandered on a criminal
career; neither better nor worse than a great number of other persons,
whose good fortune it has been to develop similar qualities under
happier surroundings. There are many more complete villains than the
ordinary criminal, who contrive to go through life without offending
against the law. Close and scientific investigation has shown that the
average convicted criminal differs intellectually from the normal person
only in a slightly lower level of intelligence, a condition that may
well be explained by the fact that the convicted criminal has been
found out. Crime has been happily defined by a recent and most able
investigator into the character of the criminal(12) as "an unusual act
committed by a perfectly normal person." At the same time, according
to the same authority, there is a type of normal person who tends to
be convicted of crime, and he is differentiated from his fellows by
defective physique and mental capacity and an increased possession of
antisocial qualities.(13)


     (12) "The English Convict," a statistical study, by Charles Goring, M.D.
His Majesty's Stationery Office, 1913.

     (13) Murderers--at least those executed for their crimes--have not for
obvious reasons been made the subject of close scientific observation.
Their mental capacity would in all probability be found to be rather
higher than that of less ambitious criminals.


How does Peace answer to the definition? Though short in stature, his
physical development left little to be desired: he was active, agile,
and enjoyed excellent health at all times. For a man of forty-seven he
had aged remarkably in appearance. That is probably to be accounted for
by mental worry. With two murders on his conscience we know from Sue
Thompson that all she learnt of his secrets was what escaped from him in
his troubled dreams--Peace may well have shown traces of mental
anxiety. But in all other respects Charles Peace would seem to have been
physically fit. In intellectual capacity he was undoubtedly above the
average of the ordinary criminal. The facts of his career, his natural
gifts, speak for themselves. Of anti-social proclivities he no doubt
possessed his share at the beginning, and these were aggravated, as in
most cases they were in his day, by prison life and discipline.

Judged as scientifically as is possible where the human being is
concerned, Peace stands out physically and intellectually well above
the average of his class, perhaps the most naturally gifted of all those
who, without advantages of rank or education, have tried their hands at
crime. Ordinary crime for the most part would appear to be little better
than the last resort of the intellectually defective, and a poor game
at that. The only interesting criminals are those worthy of something
better. Peace was one of these. If his life may be said to point a
moral, it is the very simple one that crime is no career for a man of
brains.




The Career of Robert Butler


There is a report of Butler's trial published in Dunedin. It gives in
full the speeches and the cross-examination of the witnesses, but not
in all cases the evidence-in-chief. By the kindness of a friend in
New Zealand I obtained a copy of the depositions taken before the
magistrate; with this I have been able to supplement the report of the
trial. A collection of newspaper cuttings furnished me with the details
of the rest of Butler's career.

I

THE DUNEDIN MURDERS

On the evening of March 23, 1905, Mr. William Munday, a highly respected
citizen of the town of Tooringa, in Queensland, was walking to the
neighbouring town of Toowong to attend a masonic gathering. It was about
eight o'clock, the moon shining brightly. Nearing Toowong, Mr. Munday
saw a middle-aged man, bearded and wearing a white overcoat, step
out into the moonlight from under the shadow of a tree. As Mr. Munday
advanced, the man in the white coat stood directly in his way. "Out with
all you have, and quick about it," he said. Instead of complying with
this peremptory summons, Mr. Munday attempted to close with him. The man
drew back quickly, whipped out a revolver, fired, and made off as fast
as he could. The bullet, after passing through Mr. Munday's left arm,
had lodged in the stomach. The unfortunate gentleman was taken to a
neighbouring hospital where, within a few hours, he was dead.

In the meantime a vigorous search was made for his assailant. Late the
same night Constable Hennessy, riding a bicycle, saw a man in a white
coat who seemed to answer to the description of the assassin. He
dismounted, walked up to him and asked him for a match. The man put his
hand inside his coat. "What have you got there?" asked the constable.
"I'll--soon show you," replied the man in the white coat, producing
suddenly a large revolver. But Hennessy was too quick for him. Landing
him one under the jaw, he sent him to the ground and, after a sharp
struggle, secured him. Constable Hennessy little knew at the time that
his capture in Queensland of the man in the white coat was almost as
notable in the annals of crime as the affray at Blackheath on an autumn
night in 1878, when Constable Robinson grappled successfully, wounded as
he was, with Charles Peace.

The man taken by Hennessy gave the name of James Wharton, and as
James Wharton he was hanged at Brisbane. But before his death it was
ascertained beyond doubt, though he never admitted it himself, that
Wharton was none other than one Robert Butler, whose career as a
criminal and natural wickedness may well rank him with Charles Peace in
the hierarchy of scoundrels. Like Peace, Butler was, in the jargon of
crime, a "hatter," a "lone hand," a solitary who conceived and
executed his nefarious designs alone; like Peace, he supplemented an
insignificant physique by a liberal employment of the revolver; like
Peace, he was something of a musician, the day before his execution he
played hymns for half an hour on the prison organ; like Peace, he knew
when to whine when it suited his purpose; and like Peace, though not
with the same intensity, he could be an uncomfortably persistent lover,
when the fit was on him. Both men were cynics in their way and viewed
their fellow-men with a measure of contempt. But here parallel ends.
Butler was an intellectual, inferior as a craftsman to Peace, the
essentially practical, unread, naturally gifted artist. Butler was a man
of books. He had been schoolmaster, journalist. He had studied the lives
of great men, and as a criminal, had devoted especial attention to those
of Frederick the Great and Napoleon. Butler's defence in the Dunedin
murder trial was a feat of skill quite beyond the power of Peace. Peace
was a religious man after the fashion of the mediaeval tyrant, Butler
an infidel. Peace, dragged into the light of a court of justice, cut a
sorry figure; here Butler shone. Peace escaped a conviction for murder
by letting another suffer in his place; Butler escaped a similar
experience by the sheer ingenuity of his defence. Peace had the modesty
and reticence of the sincere artist; Butler the loquacious vanity of the
literary or forensic coxcomb. Lastly, and it is the supreme difference,
Butler was a murderer by instinct and conviction, as Lacenaire or
Ruloff; "a man's life," he said, "was of no more importance than a
dog's; nature respects the one no more than the other, a volcanic
eruption kills mice and men with the one hand. The divine command,
'kill, kill and spare not,' was intended not only for Joshua, but for
men of all time; it is the example of our rulers, our Fredericks and
Napoleons."

Butler was of the true Prussian mould. "In crime," he would say, "as
in war, no half measures. Let us follow the example of our rulers whose
orders in war run, 'Kill, burn and sink,' and what you cannot carry
away, destroy.'" Here is the gospel of frightfulness applied almost
prophetically to crime. To Butler murder is a principle of warfare; to
Peace it was never more than a desperate resort or an act the outcome of
ungovernable passion.

Ireland can claim the honour of Butler's birth. It took place at
Kilkenny about 1845. At an early age he left his native land for
Australia, and commenced his professional career by being sentenced
under the name of James Wilson--the same initials as those of James
Wharton of Queensland--to twelve months' imprisonment for vagrancy. Of
the sixteen years he passed in Victoria he spent thirteen in prison,
first for stealing, then in steady progression for highway robbery and
burglary. Side by side with the practical and efficient education in
crime furnished by the Victorian prisons of that day, Butler availed
himself of the opportunity to educate his mind. It was during this
period that he found inspiration and encouragement in the study of the
lives of Frederick and Napoleon, besides acquiring a knowledge of music
and shorthand.

When in 1876 Butler quitted Australia for New Zealand, he was
sufficiently accomplished to obtain employment as a schoolmaster.

At Cromwell, Otago, under the name of "C. J. Donelly, Esq.," Butler
opened a "Commercial and Preparatory Academy," and in a prospectus that
recalls Mr. Squeers' famous advertisement of Dotheboys Hall, announced
that the programme of the Academy would include "reading, taught as
an art and upon the most approved principles of elocution, writing,
arithmetic, euclid, algebra, mensuration, trigonometry, book-keeping,
geography, grammar, spelling and dictation, composition, logic and
debate, French, Latin, shorthand, history, music, and general lectures
on astronomy, natural philosophy, geology, and other subjects." The
simpler principles of these branches of learning were to be "rendered
intelligible, and a firm foundation laid for the acquirement of future
knowledge." Unfortunately a suspicion of theft on Butler's part cut
short the fulfilment of this really splendid programme, and Butler left
Cromwell hurriedly for the ampler field of Dunedin. There, less than a
fortnight after his arrivel{sic}, he was sentenced to four years' hard
labour for several burglaries committed in and about that city.

On the 18th of February, 1880, Butler was released from prison. With
that consummate hypocrisy which was part of the man, he had contrived to
enlist the sympathies of the Governor of the Dunedin Jail, who gave
him, on his departure, a suit of clothes and a small sum of money.
A detective of the name of Bain tried to find him employment. Butler
wished to adopt a literary career. He acted as a reporter on the Dunedin
Evening Star, and gave satisfaction to the editor of that newspaper. An
attempt to do some original work, in the shape of "Prison Sketches,"
for another newspaper, was less successful. Bain had arranged for the
publication of the articles in the Sunday Advertiser, but when the time
came to deliver his manuscript, Butler failed to appear. Bain, whose
duty it was to keep an eye on Butler, found him in the street looking
wild and haggard. He said that he had found the work "too much for his
head," that he had torn up what he had written, that he had nowhere to
go, and had been to the end of the jetty with the intention of drowning
himself. Bain replied somewhat caustically that he thought it a pity he
had not done so, as nothing would have given him greater joy than
going to the end of the jetty and identifying his body. "You speak
very plainly," said Butler. "Yes, and what is more, I mean what I say,"
replied Bain. Butler justified Bain's candour by saying that if he broke
out again, he would be worse than the most savage tiger ever let loose
on the community. As a means of obviating such an outbreak, Butler
suggested that, intellectual employment having failed, some form of
manual labour should be found him. Bain complied with Butler's request,
and got him a job at levelling reclaimed ground in the neighbourhood of
Dunedin. On Wednesday, March 10, Butler started work, but after three
hours of it relinquished the effort. Bain saw Butler again in Dunedin on
the evening of Saturday, March 13, and made an appointment to meet him
at half-past eight that night. Butler did not keep the appointment. Bain
searched the town for him, but he was nowhere to be found.

About the same time Butler had some talk with another member of the
Dunedin police force, Inspector Mallard. They discussed the crimes of
Charles Peace and other notable artists of that kind. Butler remarked to
Mallard how easy it would be to destroy all traces of a murder by fire,
and asked the inspector whether if he woke up one morning to find some
brutal murder had been committed, he would not put it down to him. "No,
Butler," replied the inspector, "the first thing I should do would be to
look for suspicious circumstances, and most undoubtedly, if they pointed
to you, you would be looked after."

In the early morning of this Saturday, March 13, the house of a Mr.
Stamper, a solicitor of Dunedin, had been broken into, and some articles
of value, among them a pair of opera glasses, stolen. The house had been
set on fire, and burned to the ground. On the morning of the following
day, Sunday, the 14th, Dunedin was horrified by the discovery of a far
more terrible crime, tigerish certainly in its apparent ferocity. In a
house in Cumberland Street, a young married couple and their little baby
were cruelly murdered and un{sic}{an??} unsuccessful attempt made to
fire the scene of the crime.

About half-past six on Sunday morning a man of the name of Robb, a
carpenter, on getting out of bed, noticed smoke coming from the house
of a neighbor of his, Mr. J. M. Dewar, who occupied a small one-floored
cottage standing by itself in Cumberland Street, a large and broad
thoroughfare on the outskirts of the town. Dewar was a butcher by trade,
a young man, some eighteen months married, and father of a baby girl.
Robb, on seeing smoke coming from Dewar's house, woke his son, who was
a member of the fire brigade. The latter got up, crossed the street,
and going round to the back door, which he found wide open, entered the
house. As he went along the passage that separated the two front rooms,
a bedroom and sitting-room, he called to the inmates to get up. He
received no answer, but as he neared the bedroom he heard a "gurgling"
sound. Crawling on his hands and knees he reached the bedroom door, and
two feet inside it his right hand touched something. It was the body of
a woman; she was still alive, but in a dying condition. Robb dragged
her across the passage into the sitting-room. He got some water, and
extinguished the fire in the bedroom. On the bed lay the body of Dewar.
To all appearances he had been killed in his sleep. By his side was
the body of the baby, suffocated by the smoke. Near the bed was an
axe belonging to Dewar, stained with blood. It was with this weapon,
apparently, that Mr. and Mrs. Dewar had been attacked. Under the bed was
a candlestick belonging also to the Dewars, which had been used by
the murderer in setting fire to the bed. The front window of the
sitting-room was open, there were marks of boot nails on the sill, and
on the grass in front of the window a knife was found. An attempt
had been made to ransack a chest of drawers in the bedroom, but some
articles of jewellery lying in one of the drawers, and a ring on the
dressing-table had been left untouched. As far as was known, Mr. and
Mrs. Dewar were a perfectly happy and united couple. Dewar had been last
seen alive about ten o'clock on the Saturday night getting off a car
near his home. At eleven a neighbour had noticed a light in the Dewars'
house. About five o'clock on the Sunday morning another neighbour
had been aroused from his sleep by the sound as of something falling
heavily. It was a wild and boisterous night. Thinking the noise might be
the slamming of his stable door, he got up and went out to see that
it was secure. He then noticed that a light was burning in the bedroom
window of the Dewars' cottage.

Nothing more was known of what had occurred that morning until at
half-past six Robb saw the smoke coming from Dewars' house. Mrs. Dewar,
who alone could have told something, never recovered consciousness
and died on the day following the crime. Three considerable wounds
sufficient to cause death had been inflicted on the unfortunate woman's
head, and five of a similar character on that of her husband. At the
head of the bed, which stood in the corner of the room, there was a
large smear of blood on the wall just above the door; there were spots
of blood all over the top of the bed, and some smaller ones that had to
all appearances spurted on to the panel of the door nearest to the bed.

The investigation of this shocking crime was placed in the hands of
Detective Bain, whose duty it had been to keep an eye on Robert Butler,
but he did not at first associate his interesting charge with the
commission of the murder. About half-past six on Sunday evening Bain
happened to go to a place called the Scotia Hotel, where the landlord
informed him that one of his servants, a girl named Sarah Gillespie, was
very anxious to see him. Her story was this: On the morning of Thursday,
March 11, Robert Butler had come to the hotel; he was wearing a dark
lavender check suit and carried a top coat and parcel. Butler had stayed
in the hotel all Thursday and slept there that night. He had not slept
in the hotel on the Friday night, and Sarah Gillespie had not seen him
again until he came into the house about five and twenty minutes to
seven on Sunday morning. The girl noticed that he was pale and excited,
seemed afraid and worried, as if someone were coming after him. After
giving her some money for the landlord, he went upstairs, fetched his
top coat, a muffler, and his parcel. Before leaving he said he would
have a pint of beer, as he had not breakfasted. He then left, presumably
to catch an early train.

Butler was next seen a few minutes later at a shop near the hotel, where
he bought five tins of salmon, and about the same time a milk-boy saw
him standing on the kerb in Cumberland Street in a stooping position,
his head turned in the direction of Dewars' house. A little after ten
the same night Butler entered a hotel at a place called Blueskin, some
twelve miles distant from Dunedin. He was wearing an overcoat and a
light muffler. He sat down at a table in the dining-room and seemed
weary and sleepy. Someone standing at the bar said "What a shocking
murder that was in Cumberland Street!" Butler started up, looked
steadily from one to the other of the two men who happened to be in the
room, then sat down again and, taking up a book, appeared to be reading.
More than once he put down the book and kept shifting uneasily in his
chair. After having some supper he got up, paid his reckoning, and left
the hotel.

At half-past three the following morning, about fifteen miles from
Dunedin, on the road to Waikouaiti, two constables met a man whom they
recognised as Butler from a description that had been circulated by the
police. The constables arrested and searched him. They found on him a
pair of opera glasses, the property of Mr. Stamper, whose house had been
burgled and burned down on the morning of the 13th. Of this crime Butler
acknowledged himself to be the perpetrator. Besides the opera glasses
the constables took from Butler two tins of salmon, a purse containing
four shillings and sixpence, a pocket knife, a box of matches, a piece
of candle, and a revolver and cartridges. The prisoner was carrying a
top coat, and was dressed in a dark coat and grey trousers, underneath
which he was wearing a white shirt, an under flannel and a Rob Roy
Crimean shirt. One of the constables noticed that there were marks of
blood on his shirt. Another singular feature in Butler's attire was the
fact that the outer soles of his boots had been recently removed. When
last seen in Dunedin Butler had been wearing a moustache; he was now
clean shaven.

The same evening a remarkable interview took place in the lock-up at
Waikouaiti between Butler and Inspector Mallard. Mallard, who had some
reason for suspecting Butler, bearing in mind their recent conversation,
told the prisoner that he would be charged with the murder in Cumberland
Street. For a few seconds, according to Mallard, the prisoner seemed
terribly agitated and appeared to be choking. Recovering himself
somewhat, he said, "If for that, you can get no evidence against me; and
if I am hanged for it, I shall be an innocent man, whatever other crimes
I may have committed." Mallard replied, "There is evidence to convict
you--the fire was put out." Butler than{sic} said that he would ask
Mallard a question, but, after a pause, decided not to do so. Mallard,
after examining Butler's clothes, told him that those were not the
clothes in which he had left the Scotia Hotel. Butler admitted it, and
said he had thrown those away in the North East Valley. Mallard alluded
to the disappearance of the prisoner's moustache. Butler replied that he
had cut it off on the road. Mallard noticed then the backs of Butler's
hands were scratched, as if by contact with bushes. Butler seemed often
on the point of asking questions, but would then stop and say "No, I
won't ask you anything." To the constables who had arrested him Butler
remarked, "You ought to remember me, because I could have shot you if I
had wished." When Mallard later in the evening visited Butler again, the
prisoner who was then lying down said, "I want to speak to you. I want
to ask the press not to publish my career. Give me fair play. I suppose
I shall be convicted and you will see I can die like a man."

A few days after Butler's arrest a ranger on the Town Belt, a hill
overlooking Dunedin, found a coat, a hat and silk striped cravat, and
a few days later a pair of trousers folded up and placed under a bush.
These articles of clothing were identified as those which Butler
had been seen wearing on the Saturday and Sunday morning. They were
examined. There were a number of bloodstains on them, not one of them
larger in size than a pea, some almost invisible. On the front of the
trousers about the level of the groin there were blood spots on both
sides. There was blood on the fold of the left breast of the coat and on
the lining of the cuff of the right arm. The shirt Butler was wearing
at the time of his arrest was examined also. There were small spots of
blood, about fourteen altogether, on the neck and shoulder bands, the
right armpit, the left sleeve, and on both wristbands. Besides the
clothes, a salmon tin was found on the Town Belt, and behind a seat in
the Botanical Gardens, from which a partial view of the Dewars' house
in Cumberland Street could be obtained, two more salmon tins were found,
all three similar to the five purchased by Butler on the Sunday morning,
two of which had been in his possession at the time of his arrest.

Such were the main facts of the case which Butler had to answer when,
a few weeks later, he was put on his trial before the Supreme Court at
Dunedin. The presiding judge was Mr. Justice Williams, afterwards Sir
Joshua Williams and a member of the Privy Council. The Crown Prosecutor,
Mr. Haggitt, conducted the case for the Crown, and Butler defended
himself.


II

THE TRIAL OF BUTLER


To a man of Butler's egregious vanity his trial was a glorious
opportunity for displaying his intellectual gifts, such as they were.
One who had known him in prison about this time describes him as a
strange compound of vanity and envy, blind to his own faults and envious
of the material advantages enjoyed by others. Self-willed and arrogant,
he could bully or whine with equal effect. Despising men, he believed
that if a man did not possess some requisite quality, he had only to ape
it, as few would distinguish between the real and the sham.

But with all these advantages in the struggle for life, it is certain
that Butler's defence would have been far less effective had be{sic}
been denied all professional aid. As a matter of fact, throughout his
trial Butler was being advised by three distinguished members of the New
Zealand bar, now judges of the Supreme Court, who though not appearing
for him in court, gave him the full benefit of their assistance
outside it. At the same time Butler carried off the thing well. Where
imagination was required, Butler broke down; he could not write sketches
of life in prison; that was too much for his pedestrian intellect. But
given the facts of a case, dealing with a transaction of which he alone
knew the real truth, and aided by the advice and guidance of trained
intellects, Butler was unquestionably clever and shrewd enough to make
the best use of such advantages in meeting the case against him.

Thus equipped for the coming struggle, this high-browed ruffian, with
his semi-intellectual cast of countenance, his jerky restless posturing,
his splay-footed waddle, "like a lame Muscovy duck," in the graphic
words of his gaol companion, stood up to plead for his life before the
Supreme Court at Dunedin.

It may be said at the outset that Butler profited greatly by the
scrupulous fairness shown by the Crown Prosecutor. Mr. Haggitt extended
to the prisoner a degree of consideration and forbearance, justified
undoubtedly towards an undefended prisoner. But, as we have seen, Butler
was not in reality undefended. At every moment of the trial he was in
communication with his legal advisers, and being instructed by them how
to meet the evidence given against him. Under these circumstances the
unfailing consideration shown him by the Crown Prosecutor seems almost
excessive. From the first moment of the trial Butler was fully alive
to the necessities of his situation. He refrained from including in his
challenges of the jury the gentleman who was afterwards foreman; he knew
he was all right, he said, because he parted his hair in the middle, a
"softy," in fact. He did not know in all probability that one gentleman
on the jury had a rooted conviction that the murder of the Dewars was
the work of a criminal lunatic. There was certainly nothing in Butler's
demeanour or behaviour to suggest homicidal mania.

The case against Butler rested on purely circumstantial evidence.

No new facts of importance were adduced at the trial. The stealing
of Dewar's wages, which had been paid to him on the Saturday, was the
motive for the murder suggested by the Crown. The chief facts pointing
to Butler's guilt were: his conversation with Mallard and Bain previous
to the crime; his demeanour after it; his departure from Dunedin; the
removal of his moustache and the soles of his boots; his change of
clothes and the bloodstains found upon them, added to which was
his apparent inability to account for his movements on the night in
question.

Such as the evidence was, Butler did little to shake it in
cross-examination. His questions were many of them skilful and pointed,
but on more than one occasion the judge intervened to save him from the
danger common to all amateur cross-examiners, of not knowing when to
stop. He was most successful in dealing with the medical witnesses.
Butler had explained the bloodstains on his clothes as smears that had
come from scratches on his hands, caused by contact with bushes. This
explanation the medical gentlemen with good reason rejected. But they
went further, and said that these stains might well have been caused by
the spurting and spraying of blood on to the murderer as he struck his
victims. Butler was able to show by the position of the bloodstains on
the clothes that such an explanation was open to considerable doubt.

Butler's speech in his defence lasted six hours, and was a creditable
performance. Its arrangement is somewhat confused and repetitious, some
points are over-elaborated, but on the whole he deals very successfully
with most of the evidence given against him and exposes the
unquestionable weakness of the Crown case. At the outset he declared
that he had taken his innocence for his defence. "I was not willing,"
he said, "to leave my life in the hands of a stranger. I was willing to
incur all the disadvantages which the knowledge of the law might bring
upon me. I was willing, also, to enter on this case without
any experience whatever of that peculiarly acquired art of
cross-examination. I fear I have done wrong. If I had had the assistance
of able counsel, much more light would have been thrown on this case
than has been." As we have seen, Butler enjoyed throughout his trial the
informal assistance of three of the most able counsel in New Zealand, so
that this heroic attitude of conscious innocence braving all dangers
loses most of its force. Without such assistance his danger might have
been very real.

A great deal of the evidence as to his conduct and demeanour at the time
of the murder Butler met by acknowledging that it was he who had broken
into Mr. Stamper's house on the Saturday morning, burgled it and set it
on fire. His consciousness of guilt in this respect was, he said, quite
sufficient to account for anything strange or furtive in his manner
at that time. He was already known to the police; meeting Bain on the
Saturday night, he felt more than ever sure that he was susspected{sic}
of the robbery at Mr. Stamper's; he therefore decided to leave Dunedin
as soon as possible. That night, he said, he spent wandering about the
streets half drunk, taking occasional shelter from the pouring rain,
until six o'clock on the Sunday morning, when he went to the Scotia
Hotel. A more detailed account of his movements on the night of the
Dewars' murder he did not, or would not, give.

When he comes to the facts of the murder and his theories as to the
nature and motive of the crime--theories which he developed at rather
unnecessary length for the purpose of his own defence--his speech is
interesting. It will be recollected that on the discovery of the murder,
a knife was found on the grass outside the house. This knife was not
the property of the Dewars. In Butler's speech he emphasised the opinion
that this knife had been brought there by the murderer: "Horrible though
it may be, my conclusion is that he brought it with the intention of
cutting the throats of his victims, and that, finding they lay in rather
an untoward position, he changed his mind, and, having carried out the
object with which he entered the house, left the knife and, going back,
brought the axe with which he effected his purpose. What was the purpose
of the murderer? Was it the robbery of Dewar's paltry wages? Was it
the act of a tiger broken loose on the community? An act of pure wanton
devilry? or was there some more reasonable explanation of this most
atrocious crime?"

Butler rejected altogether the theory of ordinary theft. No thief
of ambitious views, he said, would pitch upon the house of a poor
journeyman butcher. The killing of the family appeared to him to be
the motive: "an enemy hath done this." The murderer seems to have had a
knowledge of the premises; he enters the house and does his work swiftly
and promptly, and is gone. "We cannot know," Butler continues, "all the
passages in the lives of the murdered man or woman. What can we know of
the hundred spites and jealousies or other causes of malice which might
have caused the crime? If you say some obscure quarrel, some spite or
jealousy is not likely to have been the cause of so dreadful a murder,
you cannot revert to the robbery theory without admitting a motive much
weaker in all its utter needlessness and vagueness. The prominent
feature of the murder, indeed the only feature, is its ruthless,
unrelenting, determined vindictiveness. Every blow seemed to say, 'You
shall die you shall not live.'"

Whether Butler were the murderer of the Dewars or not, the theory that
represented them as having been killed for the purpose of robbery
has its weak side all the weaker if Butler, a practical and ambitious
criminal, were the guilty man.

In 1882, two years after Butler's trial, there appeared in a New Zealand
newspaper, Society, published in Christchurch, a series of Prison
"Portraits," written evidently by one who had himself undergone a term
of imprisonment. One of the "Portraits" was devoted to an account of
Butler. The writer had known Butler in prison. According to the story
told him by Butler, the latter had arrived in Dunedin with a quantity of
jewellery he had stolen in Australia. This jewellery he entrusted to a
young woman for safe keeping. After serving his first term of two years'
imprisonment in Dunedin, Butler found on his release that the young
woman had married a man of the name of Dewar. Butler went to Mrs. Dewar
and asked for the return of his jewellery; she refused to give it up. On
the night of the murder he called at the house in Cumberland Street and
made a last appeal to her, but in vain. He determined on revenge. During
his visit to Mrs. Dewar he had had an opportunity of seeing the axe and
observing the best way to break into the house. He watched the husband's
return, and decided to kill him as well as his wife on the chance of
obtaining his week's wages. With the help of the knife which he had
found in the backyard of a hotel he opened the window. The husband he
killed in his sleep, the woman waked with the first blow he struck her.
He found the jewellery in a drawer rolled up in a pair of stockings.
He afterwards hid it in a well-marked spot some half-hour before his
arrest.

A few years after its appearance in Society, this account of Butler was
reproduced in an Auckland newspaper. Bain, the detective, wrote a letter
questioning the truth of the writer's statements. He pointed out
that when Butler first came to Dunedin he had been at liberty only a
fortnight before serving his first term of imprisonment, very little
time in which to make the acquaintance of a woman and dispose of the
stolen jewellery. He asked why, if Butler had hidden the jewellery just
before his arrest, he had not also hidden the opera-glasses which he
had stolen from Mr. Stamper's house. Neither of these comments is very
convincing. A fortnight seems time enough in which a man of Butler's
character might get to know a woman and dispose of some jewellery;
while, if Butler were the murderer of Mr. Dewar as well as the burglar
who had broken into Stamper's house, it was part of his plan to
acknowledge himself guilty of the latter crime and use it to justify his
movements before and after the murder. Bain is more convincing when he
states at the conclusion of his letter that he had known Mrs. Dewar from
childhood as a "thoroughly good and true woman," who, as far as he knew,
had never in her life had any acquaintance with Butler.

At the same time, the account given by Butler's fellow-prisoner, in
which the conduct of the murdered woman is represented as constituting
the provocation for the subsequent crime, explains one peculiar
circumstance in connection with the tragedy, the selection of this
journeyman butcher and his wife as the victims of the murderer. It
explains the theory, urged so persistently by Butler in his speech to
the jury, that the crime was the work of an enemy of the Dewars, the
outcome of some hidden spite, or obscure quarrel; it explains the
apparent ferocity of the murder, and the improbability of a practical
thief selecting such an unprofitable couple as his prey. The rummaged
chest of drawers and the fact that some trifling articles of jewellery
were left untouched on the top of them, are consistent with an eager
search by the murderer for some particular object. Against this theory
of revenge is the fact that Butler was a malignant ruffian and liar in
any case, that, having realised very little in cash by the burglary at
Stamper's house, he would not be particular as to where he might get a
few shillings more, that he had threatened to do a tigerish deed, and
that it is characteristic of his vanity to try to impute to his crime a
higher motive than mere greed or necessity.

Butler showed himself not averse to speaking of the murder in Cumberland
Street to at least one of those, with whom he came in contact in his
later years. After he had left New Zealand and returned to Australia,
he was walking in a street in Melbourne with a friend when they passed
a lady dressed in black, carrying a baby in her arms. The baby looked
at the two men and laughed. Butler frowned and walked rapidly away. His
companion chaffed him, and asked whether it was the widow or the baby
that he was afraid of. Butler was silent, but after a time asked his
companion to come into some gardens and sit down on one of the seats, as
he had something serious to say to him. For a while Butler sat silent.
Then he asked the other if he had ever been in Dunedin. "Yes," was the
reply. "Look here," said Butler, "you are the only man I ever made any
kind of confidant of. You are a good scholar, though I could teach you
a lot." After this gracious compliment he went on: "I was once tried in
Dunedin on the charge of killing a man, woman and child, and although
innocent, the crime was nearly brought home to me. It was my own ability
that pulled me through. Had I employed a professional advocate, I should
not have been here to-day talking to you." After describing the murder,
Butler said: "Trying to fire the house was unnecessary, and killing
the baby was unnecessary and cruel. I respect no man's life, for no man
respects mine. A lot of men I have never injured have tried to put a
rope round my neck more than once. I hate society in general, and one
or two individuals in particular. The man who did that murder in Dunedin
has, if anything, my sympathy, but it seems to me he need not have
killed that child." His companion was about to speak. Butler stopped
him. "Now, don't ever ask me such a silly question as that," he said.
"What?" asked his friend. "You were about to ask me if I did that deed,"
replied Butler, "and you know perfectly well that, guilty or innocent,
that question would only be answered in one way." "I was about to ask
nothing of the kind," said the other, "for you have already told me that
you were innocent." "Good!" said Butler, "then let that be the end of
the subject, and never refer to it again, except, perhaps, in your own
mind, when you can, if you like, remember that I said the killing of the
child was unnecessary and cruel."

Having developed to the jury his theory of why the crime was committed,
Butler told them that, as far as he was concerned, there were four
points against him on which the Crown relied to prove his guilt.
Firstly, there was the fact of his being in the neighbourhood of the
crime on the Sunday morning; that, he said, applied to scores of other
people besides himself. Then there was his alleged disturbed appearance
and guilty demeanour. The evidence of that was, he contended, doubtful
in any case, and referable to another cause; as also his leaving Dunedin
in the way and at the time he did. He scouted the idea that murderers
are compelled by some invisible force to betray their guilt. "The doings
of men," he urged, "and their success are regulated by the amount
of judgment that they possess, and, without impugning or denying the
existence of Providence, I say this is a law that holds good in all
cases, whether for evil or good. Murderers, if they have the sense and
ability and discretion to cover up their crime, will escape, do escape,
and have escaped. Many people, when they have gravely shaken their heads
and said 'Murder will out,' consider they have done a great deal and
gone a long way towards settling the question. Well, this, like many
other stock formulas of Old World wisdom, is not true. How many murders
are there that the world has never heard of, and never will? How many a
murdered man, for instance, lies among the gum-trees of Victoria, or
in the old abandoned mining-shafts on the diggings, who is missed by
nobody, perhaps, but a pining wife at home, or helpless children, or
an old mother? But who were their murderers? Where are they? God knows,
perhaps, but nobody else, and nobody ever will." The fact, he said, that
he was alleged to have walked up Cumberland Street on the Sunday morning
and looked in the direction of the Dewars' house was, unless the causes
of superstition and a vague and incomplete reasoning were to be accepted
as proof, evidence rather of his innocence than his guilt. He had
removed the soles of his boots, he said, in order to ease his feet in
walking; the outer soles had become worn and ragged, and in lumps under
his feet. He denied that he had told Bain, the detective, that he would
break out as a desperate tiger let loose on the community; what he had
said was that he was tired of living the life of a prairie dog or a
tiger in the jungle.

Butler was more successful when he came to deal with the bloodstains on
his clothes. These, he said, were caused by the blood from the scratches
on his hands, which had been observed at the time of his arrest. The
doctors had rejected this theory, and said that the spots of blood
had been impelled from the axe or from the heads of the victims as the
murderer struck the fatal blow. Butler put on the clothes in court, and
was successful in showing that the position and appearance of certain
of the blood spots was not compatible with such a theory. "I think,"
he said, "I am fairly warranted in saying that the evidence of these
gentlemen is, not to put too fine a point on it, worth just nothing at
all."

Butler's concluding words to the jury were brief but emphatic: "I stand
in a terrible position. So do you. See that in your way of disposing of
me you deliver yourselves of your responsibilities."

In the exercise of his forbearance towards an undefended prisoner, Mr.
Haggitt did not address the jury for the Crown. At four o'clock the
judge commenced his summing-up. Mr. Justice Williams impressed on
the jury that they must be satisfied, before they could convict the
prisoner, that the circumstances of the crime and the prisoner's conduct
were inconsistent with any other reasonable hypothesis than his guilt.
There was little or no evidence that robbery was the motive of the
crime. The circumstance of the prisoner being out all Saturday night and
in the neighbourhood of the crime on Sunday morning only amounted to
the fact that he had an opportunity shared by a great number of other
persons of committing the murder. The evidence of his agitation and
demeanour at the time of his arrest must be accepted with caution. The
evidence of the blood spots was of crucial importance; there was nothing
save this to connect him directly with the crime. The jury must be
satisfied that the blood on the clothes corresponded with the blood
marks which, in all probability, would be found on the person who
committed the murder. In regard to the medical testimony some caution
must be exercised. Where medical gentlemen had made observations, seen
with their own eyes, the direct inference might be highly trustworthy,
but, when they proceeded to draw further inferences, they might be in
danger of looking at facts through the spectacles of theory; "we know
that people do that in other things besides science--politics, religion,
and so forth." Taking the Crown evidence, at its strongest, there was
a missing link; did the evidence of the bloodstains supply it? These
bloodstains were almost invisible. Could a person be reasonably asked to
explain how they came where they did? Could they be accounted for in no
other reasonable way than that the clothes had been worn by the murderer
of the Dewars?

In spite of a summing-up distinctly favourable to the prisoner, the jury
were out three hours. According to one account of their proceedings,
told to the writer, there was at first a majority of the jurymen in
favour of conviction. But it was Saturday night; if they could not come
to a decision they were in danger of being locked up over Sunday. For
this reason the gentleman who held an obstinate and unshaken belief that
the crime was the work of a homicidal maniac found an unexpected ally in
a prominent member of a church choir who was down to sing a solo in his
church on Sunday, and was anxious not to lose such an opportunity for
distinction. Whatever the cause, after three hours' deliberation the
jury returned a verdict of "Not Guilty." Later in the Session Butler
pleaded guilty to the burglary at Mr. Stamper's house, and was sentenced
to eighteen years' imprisonment. The severity of this sentence was not,
the judge said, intended to mark the strong suspicion under which Butler
laboured of being a murderer as well as a burglar.

The ends of justice had been served by Butler's acquittal. But in the
light of after events, it is perhaps unfortunate that the jury did not
stretch a point and so save the life of Mr. Munday of Toowong. Butler
underwent his term of imprisonment in Littleton Jail. There his
reputation was most unenviable. He is described by a fellow prisoner as
ill-tempered, malicious, destructive, but cowardly and treacherous. He
seems to have done little or no work; he looked after the choir and the
library, but was not above breaking up the one and smashing the other,
if the fit seized him.



III

HIS DECLINE AND FALL


In 1896 Butler was released from prison. The news of his release was
described as falling like a bombshell among the peaceful inhabitants
of Dunedin. In the colony of Victoria, where Butler had commenced his
career, it was received with an apprehension that was justified by
subsequent events. It was believed that on his release the New Zealand
authorities had shipped Butler off to Rio. But it was not long before he
made his way once more to Australia. From the moment of his arrival
in Melbourne he was shadowed by the police. One or two mysterious
occurrences soon led to his arrest. On June 5 he was sentenced to twelve
months' imprisonment under the Criminal Influx Act, which makes it a
penal offence for any convict to enter Victoria for three years
after his release from prison. Not content with this, the authorities
determined to put Butler on trial on two charges of burglary and one of
highway robbery, committed since his return to the colony. To one charge
of burglary, that of breaking into a hairdresser's shop and stealing a
wig, some razors and a little money, Butler pleaded guilty.

But the charge of highway robbery, which bore a singular resemblance
to the final catastrophe in Queensland, he resisted to the utmost, and
showed that his experience in the Supreme Court at Dunedin had not been
lost on him. At half-past six one evening in a suburb of Melbourne an
elderly gentleman found himself confronted by a bearded man, wearing a
long overcoat and a boxer hat and flourishing a revolver, who told him
abruptly to "turn out his pockets." The old man did ashe was told. The
robber then asked for his watch and chain, saying "Business must
be done." The old gentleman mildly urged that this was a dangerous
business. On being assured that the watch was a gold one, the robber
appeared willing to risk the danger, and departed thoroughly satisfied.
The old gentleman afterwards identified Butler as the man who had taken
his watch. Another elderly man swore that he had seen Butler at the time
of the robbery in the possession of a fine gold watch, which he said had
been sent him from home. But the watch had not been found in Butler's
possession.

On June 18 Butler was put on his trial in the Melbourne Criminal
Court before Mr. Justice Holroyd, charged with robbery under arms. His
appearance in the dock aroused very considerable interest. "It was the
general verdict," wrote one newspaper, "that his intellectual head and
forehead compared not unfavourably with those of the judge." He
was decently dressed and wore pince-nez, which he used in the best
professional manner as he referred to the various documents that lay in
front of him. He went into the witness-box and stated that the evening
of the crime he had spent according to his custom in the Public Library.

For an hour and a half he addressed the jury. He disputed the
possibility of his identification by his alleged victim. He was "an old
gentleman of sedentary pursuits and not cast in the heroic mould." Such
a man would be naturally alarmed and confused at meeting suddenly an
armed robber. Now, under these circumstances, could his recognition of
a man whose face was hidden by a beard, his head by a boxer hat, and his
body by a long overcoat, be considered trustworthy? And such recognition
occurring in the course of a chance encounter in the darkness, that
fruitful mother of error? The elderly gentleman had described his
moustache as a slight one, but the jury could see that it was full and
overhanging. He complained that he had been put up for identification
singly, not with other men, according to the usual custom; the police
had said to the prosecutor: "We have here a man that we think robbed
you, and, if he is not the man, we shall be disappointed," to which
the prosecutor had replied: "Yes, and if he is not the man, I shall be
disappointed too." For the elderly person who had stated that he had
seen a gold watch in Butler's possession the latter had nothing but
scorn. He was a "lean and slippered pantaloon in Shakespeare's last
stage"; and he, Butler, would have been a lunatic to have confided in
such a man.

The jury acquitted Butler, adding as a rider to their verdict that there
was not sufficient evidence of identification. The third charge against
Butler was not proceeded with. He was put up to receive sentence for the
burglary at the hairdresser's shop. Butler handed to the judge a written
statement which Mr. Justice Holroyd described as a narrative that
might have been taken from those sensational newspapers written for
nursery-maids, and from which, he said, he could not find that Butler
had ever done one good thing in the whole course of his life. Of that
life of fifty years Butler had spent thirty-five in prison. The judge
expressed his regret that a man of Butler's knowledge, information,
vanity, and utter recklessness of what evil will do, could not be put
away somewhere for the rest of his life, and sentenced him to fifteen
years' imprisonment with hard labour. "An iniquitous and brutal
sentence!" exclaimed the prisoner. After a brief altercation with the
judge, who said that he could hardly express the scorn he felt for such
a man, Butler was removed. The judge subsequently reduced the sentence
to one of ten years. Chance or destiny would seem implacable in their
pursuit of Mr. William Munday of Toowong.

Butler after his trial admitted that it was he who had robbed the old
gentleman of his watch, and described to the police the house in which
it was hidden. When the police went there to search they found that the
house had been pulled down, but among the debris they discovered a brown
paper parcel containing the old gentleman's gold watch and chain, a
five-chambered revolver, a keen-edged butcher's knife, and a mask.

Butler served his term of imprisonment in Victoria, "an unmitigated
nuisance" to his custodians. On his release in 1904, he made, as in
Dunedin, an attempt to earn a living by his pen. He contributed some
articles to a Melbourne evening paper on the inconveniences of prison
discipline, but he was quite unfitted for any sustained effort as a
journalist. According to his own account, with the little money he had
left he made his way to Sydney, thence to Brisbane. He was half-starved,
bewildered, despairing; in his own words, "if a psychological camera
could have been turned on me it would have shown me like a bird
fascinated by a serpent, fascinated and bewildered by the fate in front,
behind, and around me." Months of suffering and privation passed, months
of tramping hundreds of miles with occasional breakdowns, months of
hunger and sickness; "my actions had become those of a fool; my mind and
will had become a remnant guided or misguided by unreasoning impulse."

It was under the influence of such an impulse that on March 23 Butler
had met and shot Mr. Munday at Toowong. On May 24 he was arraigned at
Brisbane before the Supreme Court of Queensland. But the Butler who
stood in the dock of the Brisbane Criminal Court was very different
from the Butler who had successfully defended himself at Dunedin and
Melbourne. The spirit had gone out of him; it was rather as a suppliant,
represented by counsel, that he faced the charge of murder. His attitude
was one of humble and appropriate penitence. In a weak and nervous voice
he told the story of his hardships since his release from his Victorian
prison; he would only urge that the shooting of Mr. Munday was
accidental, caused by Munday picking up a stone and attacking him. When
about to be sentenced to death he expressed great sorrow and contrition
for his crime, for the poor wife and children of his unfortunate victim.
His life, he said, was a poor thing, but he would gladly give it fifty
times over.

The sentence of death was confirmed by the Executive on June 30. To
a Freethought advocate who visited him shortly before his execution,
Butler wrote a final confession of faith: "I shall have to find my way
across the harbour bar without the aid of any pilot. In these matters
I have for many years carried an exempt flag, and, as it has not been
carried through caprice or ignorance, I am compelled to carry it to the
last. There is an impassable bar of what I honestly believe to be the
inexorable logic of philosophy and facts, history and experience of the
nature of the world, the human race and myself, between me and the
views of the communion of any religious organisation. So instead of the
'depart Christian soul' of the priest, I only hope for the comfort and
satisfaction of the last friendly good-bye of any who cares to give it."

From this positive affirmation of unbelief Butler wilted somewhat at the
approach of death. The day before his execution he spent half an hour
playing hymns on the church organ in the prison; and on the scaffold,
where his agitation rendered him almost speechless, he expressed his
sorrow for what he had done, and the hope that, if there were a heaven,
mercy would be shown him.




M. Derues


The last word on Derues has been said by M. Georges Claretie in his
excellent monograph, "Derues L'Empoisonneur," Paris. 1907. There is a
full account of the case in Vol. V. of Fouquier, "Causes Celebres."

I

THE CLIMBING LITTLE GROCER

M. Etienne Saint-Faust de Lamotte, a provincial nobleman of ancient
lineage and moderate health, ex-equerry to the King, desired in
the year 1774 to dispose of a property in the country, the estate of
Buisson-Souef near Villeneuve-le-Roi, which he had purchased some ten
years before out of money acquired by a prudent marriage.

With an eye to the main chance M. de Lamotte had in 1760 ran away with
the daughter of a wealthy citizen of Rheims, who was then staying with
her sister in Paris. They lived together in the country for some time,
and a son was born to them, whom the father legitimised by subsequently
marrying the mother. For a few years M. and Mme. de Lamotte dwelt
happily together at Buisson-Souef. But as their boy grew up they became
anxious to leave the country and return to Paris, where M. de Lamotte
hoped to be able to obtain for his son some position about the Court of
Louis XVI. And so it was that in May, 1775, M. de Lamotte gave a
power of attorney to his wife in order that she might go to Paris
and negotiate for the sale of Buisson-Souef. The legal side of the
transaction was placed in the hands of one Jolly, a proctor at the
Chatelet in Paris.

Now the proctor Jolly had a client with a great desire to acquire a
place in the country, M. Derues de Cyrano de Bury, lord of Candeville,
Herchies, and other places. Here was the very man to comply with
the requirements of the de Lamottes, and such a pleasing, ready,
accommodating gentleman into the bargain! Very delicate to all
appearances, strangely pale, slight, fragile in build, with his
beardless chin and feminine cast of feature, there was something
cat-like in the soft insinuating smile of this seemingly most amiable,
candid and pious of men. Always cheerful and optimistic, it was quite
a pleasure to do business with M. Derues de Cyrano de Bury. The
de Lamottes after one or two interviews were delighted with their
prospective purchaser. Everything was speedily settled. M. Derues and
his wife, a lady belonging to the distinguished family of Nicolai,
visited Buisson-Souef. They were enchanted with what they saw, and their
hosts were hardly less enchanted with their visitors. By the end of
December, 1775, the purchase was concluded. M. Derues was to give
130,000 livres (about L20,000) for the estate, the payments to be made
by instalments, the first of 12,000 livres to be paid on the actual
signing of the contract of sale, which, it was agreed, was to be
concluded not later than the first of June, 1776. In the meantime, as an
earnest of good faith, M. Derues gave Mme. de Lamotte a bill for 4,200
livres to fall due on April 1, 1776.

What could be more satisfactory? That M. Derues was a substantial person
there could be no doubt. Through his wife he was entitled to a sum of
250,000 livres as her share of the property of a wealthy kinsman, one
Despeignes-Duplessis, a country gentleman, who some four years before
had been found murdered in his house under mysterious circumstances.
The liquidation of the Duplessis inheritance, as soon as the law's delay
could be overcome, would place the Derues in a position of affluence
fitting a Cyrano de Bury and a Nicolai.

At this time M. Derues was in reality far from affluent. In point of
fact he was insolvent. Nor was his lineage, nor that of his wife, in any
way distinguished. He had no right to call himself de Cyrano de Bury or
Lord of Candeville. His wife's name was Nicolais, not Nicolai--a very
important difference from the genealogical point of view. The Duplessis
inheritance, though certainly existent, would seem to have had little
more chance of realisation than the mythical Crawford millions of Madame
Humbert. And yet, crippled with debt, without a penny in the world,
this daring grocer of the Rue Beaubourg, for such was M. Derues'
present condition in life, could cheerfully and confidently engage in
a transaction as considerable as the purchase of a large estate for
130,000 livres! The origin of so enterprising a gentleman is worthy of
attention.

Antoine Francois Derues was born at Chartres in 1744; his father was a
corn merchant. His parents died when he was three years old. For some
time after his birth he was assumed to be a girl; it was not until
he was twelve years old that an operation determined his sex to be
masculine. Apprenticed by his relatives to a grocer, Derues succeeded
so well in the business that he was able in 1770 to set up on his
own account in Paris, and in 1772 he married. Among the grocer's
many friends and acquaintances this marriage created something of a
sensation, for Derues let it be known that the lady of his choice was of
noble birth and an heiress. The first statement was untrue. The lady
was one Marie Louise Nicolais, daughter of a non-commissioned artillery
officer, turned coachbuilder. But by suppressing the S at the end of her
name, which Derues was careful also to erase in his marriage contract,
the ambitious grocer was able to describe his wife as connected with
the noble house of Nicolai, one of the most distinguished of the great
French families.

There was more truth in the statement that Mme. Derues was an heiress. A
kinsman of her mother, Beraud by name, had become the heir to a certain
Marquis Desprez. Beraud was the son of a small merchant. His mother
had married a second time, the husband being the Marquis Desprez, and
through her Beraud had inherited the Marquis' property. According to the
custom of the time, Beraud, on coming into his inheritance, took a
title from one of his estates and called himself thenceforth the lord of
Despeignes-Duplessis. A rude, solitary, brutal man, devoted to sport,
he lived alone in his castle of Candeville, hated by his neighbours, a
terror to poachers. One day he was found lying dead in his bedroom; he
had been shot in the chest; the assassin had escaped through an open
window.

The mystery of Beraud's murder was never solved. His estate of 200,000
livres was divided among three cousins, of whom the mother of Mme.
Derues was one. Mme. Derues herself was entitled to a third of his
mother's share of the estate, that is, one-ninth of the whole. But in
1775 Derues acquired the rest of the mother's share on condition that
he paid her an annual income of 1,200 livres. Thus on the liquidation
of the Duplessis inheritance Mme. Derues would be entitled nominally to
some 66,500 livres, about L11,000 in English money. But five years had
passed since the death of Despeignes-Duplessis, and the estate was still
in the slow process of legal settlement. If Derues were to receive the
full third of the Duplessis inheritance--a very unlikely supposition
after four years of liquidation--66,000 livres would not suffice to pay
his ordinary debts quite apart from the purchase money of Buisson-Souef.
His financial condition was in the last degree critical. Not content
with the modest calling of a grocer, Derues had turned money-lender,
a money-lender to spendthrift and embarrassed noblemen. Derues dearly
loved a lord; he wanted to become one himself; it delighted him to
receive dukes and marquises at the Rue Beaubourg, even if they came
there with the avowed object of raising the wind. The smiling grocer, in
his everlasting bonnet and flowered dressing-gown a la J. J. Rousseau,
was ever ready to oblige the needy scion of a noble house. What he
borrowed at moderate interest from his creditors he lent at enhanced
interest to the quality. Duns and bailiffs jostled the dukes and
marquises whose presence at the Rue Beaubourg so impressed the wondering
neighbours of the facile grocer.

This aristocratic money-lending proved a hopeless trade; it only plunged
Derues deeper and deeper into the mire of financial disaster. The
noblemen either forgot to pay while they were alive, or on their death
were found to be insolvent. Derues was driven to ordering goods and
merchandise on credit, and selling them at a lower price for ready
money. Victims of this treatment began to press him seriously for their
money or their goods. Desperately he continued to fence them off with
the long expected windfall of the Duplessis inheritance.

Paris was getting too hot for him. Gay and irrepressible as he was, the
strain was severe. If he could only find some retreat in the country
where he might enjoy at once refuge from his creditors and the rank and
consequence of a country gentleman! Nothing--no fear, no disappointment,
no disaster--could check the little grocer's ardent and overmastering
desire to be a gentleman indeed, a landed proprietor, a lord or
something or other. At the beginning of 1775 he had purchased a place
near Rueil from a retired coffeehouse-keeper, paying 1,000 livres on
account, but the non-payment of the rest of the purchase-money had
resulted in the annulment of the contract. Undefeated, Derues only
determined to fly the higher. Having failed to pay 9,000 livres for a
modest estate near Rueil, he had no hesitation in pledging himself to
pay 130,000 livres for the lordly domain of Buisson-Souef. So great were
his pride and joy on the conclusion of the latter bargain that he amused
himself by rehearsing on paper his future style and title: "Antoine
Francois de Cyrano Derues de Bury, Seigneur de Buisson-Souef et Valle
Profonde." He is worthy of Thackeray's pen, this little grocer-snob,
with his grand and ruinous acquaintance with the noble and the great,
his spurious titles, his unwearied climbing of the social ladder.

The confiding, if willing, dupe of aristocratic impecuniosity, Derues
was a past master of the art of duping others. From the moment of the
purchase of Buisson-Souef all his art was employed in cajoling the
trusting and simple de Lamottes. Legally Buisson-Souef was his from the
signing of the agreement in December, 1775. His first payment was due
in April, 1776. Instead of making it, Derues went down to Buisson-Souef
with his little girl, and stayed there as the guests of the de Lamottes
for six months. His good humour and piety won all hearts. The village
priest especially derived great satisfaction from the society of so
devout a companion. He entertained his good friends, the merry little
man, by dressing up as a woman, a role his smooth face and effeminate
features well fitted him to play. If business were alluded to, the merry
gentleman railed at the delay and chicanery of lawyers; it was that
alone that postponed the liquidation of the Duplessis inheritance; as
soon as the lawyers could be got rid of, the purchase-money of his new
estate would be promptly paid up. But as time went on and no payment was
forthcoming the de Lamottes began to feel a little uneasy. As soon as
Derues had departed in November M. de Lamotte decided to send his
wife to Paris to make further inquiries and, if possible, bring their
purchaser up to the scratch. Mme. de Lamotte had developed into a stout,
indolent woman, of the Mrs. Bloss type, fond of staying in bed and
taking heavy meals. Her son, a fat, lethargic youth of fourteen,
accompanied his mother.

On hearing of Mme. de Lamotte's contemplated visit to Paris, Derues was
filled with alarm. If she were living free and independent in Paris she
might find out the truth about the real state of his affairs, and then
good-bye to Buisson-Souef and landed gentility! No, if Mme. de Lamotte
were to come to Paris, she must come as the guest of the Derues,
a pleasant return for the hospitality accorded to the grocer at
Buisson-Souef. The invitation was given and readily accepted; M. de
Lamotte still had enough confidence in and liking for the Derues to be
glad of the opportunity of placing his wife under their roof. And so it
was that on December 16, 1776, Mme. de Lamotte arrived at Paris and took
up her abode at the house of the Derues in the Rue Beaubourg Her son she
placed at a private school in a neighbouring street.

To Derues there was now one pressing and immediate problem to be
solved--how to keep Buisson-Souef as his own without paying for it? To
one less sanguine, less daring, less impudent and desperate in his need,
the problem would have appeared insoluble.

But that was by no means the view of the cheery and resourceful grocer.
He had a solution ready, well thought out and bearing to his mind
the stamp of probability. He would make a fictitious payment of the
purchase-money to Mme. de Lamotte. She would then disappear, taking her
son with her. Her indiscretion in having been the mistress of de Lamotte
before she became his wife, would lend colour to his story that she had
gone off with a former lover, taking with her the money which Derues
had paid her for Buisson-Souef. He would then produce the necessary
documents proving the payment of the purchase-money, and Buisson-Souef
would be his for good and all.

The prime necessity to the success of this plan was the disappearance,
willing or unwilling, of Mme. de Lamotte and her son. The former had
settled down quite comfortably beneath the hospitable roof of the
Derues, and under the soothing influence of her host showed little
vigour in pressing him for the money due to herself and her husband. She
had already spent a month in quietly enjoying Paris and the society of
her friends when, towards the end of January, 1770, her health and that
of her son began to fail. Mme. de Lamotte was seized with sickness and
internal trouble. Though Derues wrote to her husband that his wife was
well and their business was on the point of conclusion, by the 30th of
January Mme. de Lamotte had taken to her bed, nursed and physicked by
the ready Derues. On the 31st the servant at the Rue Beaubourg was
told that she could go to her home at Montrouge, whither Derues had
previously sent his two children. Mme. Derues, who was in an interesting
condition, was sent out for an hour by her husband to do some shopping.
Derues was alone with his patient.

In the evening a friend, one Bertin, came to dine with Derues. Bertin
was a short, hustling, credulous, breathless gentleman, always in a
hurry, with a great belief in the abilities of M. Derues. He found the
little man in excellent spirits. Bertin asked if he could see Mme. de
Lamotte. Mme. Derues said that that was impossible, but that her husband
had given her some medicine which was working splendidly. The young de
Lamotte called to see his mother. Derues took him into her room; in the
dim light the boy saw her sleeping, and crept out quietly for fear of
disturbing her. The Derues and their friends sat down to dinner. Derues
kept jumping up and running into the sick room, from which a horrible
smell began to pervade the house. But Derues was radiant at the success
of his medicine. "Was there ever such a nurse as I am?" he exclaimed.
Bertin remarked that he thought it was a woman's and not a man's place
to nurse a lady under such distressing circumstances. Derues protested
that it was an occupation he had always liked. Next day, February 1, the
servant was still at Montrouge; Mme. Derues was again sent out shopping;
again Derues was alone with his patient. But she was a patient no
longer; she had become a corpse. The highly successful medicine
administered to the poor lady by her jolly and assiduous nurse had
indeed worked wonders.

Derues had bought a large leather trunk. It is possible that to Derues
belongs the distinction of being the first murderer to put that harmless
and necessary article of travel to a criminal use. He was engaged in
his preparations for coffining Mme. de Lamotte, when a female creditor
knocked insistently at the door. She would take no denial. Clad in his
bonnet and gown, Derues was compelled to admit her. She saw the
large trunk, and suspected a bolt on the part of her creditor. Derues
reassured her; a lady, he said, who had been stopping with them was
returning to the country. The creditor departed. Later in the day Derues
came out of the house and summoned some porters. With their help the
heavy trunk was taken to the house of a sculptor, a friend of Derues,
who agreed to keep it in his studio until Derues could take it down to
his place in the country. Bertin came in to dinner again that evening,
and also the young de Lamotte. Derues was gayer than ever, laughing
and joking with his guests. He told the boy that his mother had quite
recovered and gone to Versailles to see about finding him some post at
the Court. "We'll go and see her there in a day or two," he said, "I'll
let you know when."

On the following day a smartly dressed, dapper, but very pale little
gentleman, giving the name of Ducoudray, hired a vacant cellar in a
house in the Rue de la Mortellerie. He had, he said, some Spanish wine
he wanted to store there, and three or four days later M. Ducoudray
deposited in this cellar a large grey trunk. A few days after he
employed a man to dig a large hole in the floor of the cellar, giving as
his reason for such a proceeding that "there was no way of keeping wine
like burying it." While the man worked at the job, his genial employer
beguiled his labours with merry quips and tales, which he illustrated
with delightful mimicry. The hole dug, the man was sent about his
business. "I will bury the wine myself," said his employer, and on one
or two occasions M. Ducoudray was seen by persons living in the house
going in and out of his cellar, a lighted candle in his hand. One day
the pale little gentleman was observed leaving the cellar, accompanied
by a porter carrying a large trunk, and after that the dwellers in the
Rue de la Mortellerie saw the pale little gentleman no more.

A few days later M. Derues sent down to his place at Buisson-Souef a
large trunk filled with china. It was received there by M. de Lamotte.
Little did the trusting gentleman guess that it was in this very trunk
that the body of his dear wife had been conveyed to its last resting
place in the cellar of M. Ducoudray in the Rue de la Mortellerie. Nor
had M. Mesvrel-Desvergers, importunate creditor of M. Derues, guessed
the contents of the large trunk that he had met his debtor one day
early in February conveying through the streets of Paris. Creditors
were always interrupting Derues at inconvenient moments. M.
Mesvrel-Desvergers had tapped Derues on the shoulder, reminded him
forcibly of his liability towards him, and spoken darkly of possible
imprisonment. Derues pointed to the trunk. It contained, he said, a
sample of wine; he was going to order some more of it, and he would then
be in a position to pay his debt. But the creditor, still doubting, had
M. Derues followed, and ascertained that he had deposited his sample of
wine at a house in the Rue de la Mortellerie.

On Wednesday, February 12, a M. Beaupre of Commercy arrived at
Versailles with his nephew, a fat boy, in reality some fourteen years of
age, but given out as older. They hired a room at the house of a cooper
named Pecquet. M. Beaupre was a very pale little gentleman, who seemed
in excellent spirits, in spite of the fact that his nephew was clearly
anything but well. Indeed, so sick and ailing did he appear to be that
Mme. Pecquet suggested that his uncle should call in a doctor. But
M. Beaupre said that that was quite unnecessary; he had no faith in
doctors; he would give the boy a good purge. His illness was due, he
said, to a venereal disorder and the drugs which he had been taking in
order to cure it; it was a priest the boy needed rather than a
doctor. On the Thursday and Friday the boy's condition showed little
improvement; the vomiting continued. But on Saturday M. Beaupre declared
himself as highly delighted with the success of his medicine. The same
night the boy was dead. The priest, urgently sent for by his devout
uncle, arrived to find a corpse. On the following day "Louis Anotine
Beaupre, aged twenty-two and a half," was buried at Versailles, his
pious uncle leaving with the priest six livres to pay for masses for the
repose of his erring nephew's soul.

The same evening M. Derues who, according to his own account, had left
Paris with the young de Lamotte in order to take the boy to his mother
in Versailles, returned home to the Rue Beaubourg. As usual, Bertin
dropped in to dinner. He found his host full of merriment, singing in
the lightness of his heart. Indeed, he had reason to be pleased, for
at last, he told his wife and his friend, Buisson-Souef was his. He had
seen Mme. de Lamotte at Versailles and paid her the full purchase-money
in good, sounding gold. And, best joke of all, Mme. de Lamotte had no
sooner settled the business than she had gone off with a former lover,
her son and her money, and would in all probability never be heard of
again. The gay gentleman laughingly reminded his hearers that such an
escapade on the part of Mme. de Lamotte was hardly to be wondered at,
when they recollected that her son had been born out of wedlock.

To all appearances Mme. de Lamotte had undoubtedly concluded the sale of
Buisson-Souef to Derues and received the price of it before disappearing
with her lover. Derues had in his possession a deed of sale signed
by Mme. de Lamotte and acknowledging the payment to her by Derues of
100,000 livres, which he had borrowed for that purpose from an advocate
of the name of Duclos. As a fact the loan from Duclos to Derues was
fictitious. A legal document proving the loan had been drawn up, but the
cash which the notary had demanded to see before executing the document
had been borrowed for a few hours. Duclos, a provincial advocate,
had acted in good faith, in having been represented to him that such
fictitious transactions were frequently used in Paris for the purpose
of getting over some temporary financial difficulty. On the 15th of
February the deed of the sale of Buisson-Souef had been brought by a
woman to the office of a scrivener employed by Derues; it was already
signed, but the woman asked that certain blanks should be filled in and
that the document should be dated. She was told that the date should
be that of the day on which the parties had signed it. She gave it as
February 12. A few days later Derues called at the office and was told
of the lady's visit. "Ah!" he said, "it was Mme. de Lamotte herself, the
lady who sold me the estate."

In the meantime Derues, through his bustling and ubiquitous friend
Bertin, took good care that the story of Mme. de Lamotte's sale of
Buisson-Souef and subsequent elopement should be spread sedulously
abroad. By Bertin it was told to M. Jolly, the proctor in whose hands
the de Lamottes had placed the sale of Buisson-Souef. It was M. Jolly
who had in the first instance recommended to them his client Derues as a
possible purchaser. The proctor, who knew Mme. de Lamotte to be a woman
devoted to her husband and her home, was astonished to hear of her
infidelity, more especially as the story told by Derues represented her
as saying in very coarse terms how little she cared for her husband's
honour. He was surprised, too, that she should not have consulted
him about the conclusion of the business with Derues, and that Derues
himself should have been able to find so considerable a sum of money as
100,000 livres. But, said M. Jolly, if he were satisfied that Mme. de
Lamotte had taken away the money with her, then he would deliver up to
Derues the power of attorney which M. de Lamotte had left with him in
1775, giving his wife authority to carry out the sale of Buisson-Souef.
Mme. de Lamotte, being a married woman, the sale of the property to
Derues would be legally invalid if the husband's power of attorney were
not in the hands of the purchaser.



II

THE GAME OF BLUFF


To Derues, on the eve of victory, the statement of Jolly in regard to
the power of attorney was a serious reverse. He had never thought of
such an instrument, or he would have persuaded Mme. de Lamotte to have
gotten permission of it before her disappearance. Now he must try to get
it from Jolly himself. On the 26th of February he once again raised from
a friendly notary a few thousand livres on the Duplessis inheritance,
and deposited the deed of sale of Buisson-Souef as further security.
His pocket full of gold, he went straight to the office of Jolly. To the
surprise of the proctor Derues announced that he had come to pay him 200
livres which he owed him, and apologised for the delay. Taking the
gold coins from his pockets he filled his three-cornered hat with
considerably more than the sum due, and held it out invitingly to
M. Jolly. Then he proceeded to tell him of his dealings with Mme. de
Lamotte. She had offered, he said, to get the power of attorney for him,
but he, trusting in her good faith, had said that there was no occasion
for hurry; and then, faithless, ungrateful woman that she was, she had
gone off with his money and left him in the lurch. "But," he added, "I
trust you absolutely, M. Jolly, you have all my business in your hands,
and I shall be a good client in the future. You have the power of
attorney--you will give it to me?" and he rattled the coins in his
hat. "I must have it," he went on, "I must have it at any price at any
price," and again the coins danced in his hat, while his eyes looked
knowingly at the proctor. M. Jolly saw his meaning, and his surprise
turned to indignation. He told Derues bluntly that he did not believe
his story, that until he was convinced of its truth he would not part
with the power of attorney, and showed the confounded grocer the door.

Derues hastened home filled with wrath, and took counsel with his friend
Bertin. Bertin knew something of legal process; they would try whether
the law could not be invoked to compel Jolly to surrender the power of
attorney. Bertin went off to the Civil Lieutenant and applied for an
order to oblige M. Jolly to give up the document in question. An order
was made that Jolly must either surrender it into the hands of Derues or
appear before a referee and show cause why he should not comply with
the order. Jolly refused still to give it up or allow a copy of it to be
made, and agreed to appear before the referee to justify his action. In
the meantime Derues, greatly daring, had started for Buisson-Souef to
try what "bluff" could do in this serious crisis in his adventure.

At Buisson-Souef poor M. de Lamotte waited, puzzled and distressed,
for news from his wife. On Saturday, 17th, the day after the return of
Derues from Versailles, he heard from Mme. Derues that his wife had left
Paris and gone with her son to Versailles. A second letter told him that
she had completed the sale of Buisson-Souef to Derues, and was still at
Versailles trying to obtain some post for the boy. On February 19 Mme.
Derues wrote again expressing surprise that M. de Lamotte had not had
any letter from his wife and asking if he had received some oysters
which the Derues had sent him. The distracted husband was in no mood for
oysters. "Do not send me oysters," he writes, "I am too ill with worry.
I thank you for all your kindness to my son. I love him better than
myself, and God grant he will be good and grateful." The only reply he
received from the Derues was an assurance that he would see his wife
again in a few days.

The days passed, but Mme. de Lamotte made no sign. About four o'clock on
the afternoon of February 28, Derues, accompanied by the parish
priest of Villeneuvele-Roi, presented himself before M. de Lamotte at
Buisson-Souef. For the moment M. de Lamotte was rejoiced to see
the little man; at last he would get news of his wife. But he was
disappointed. Derues could tell him only what he had been told already,
that his wife had sold their estate and gone away with the money.

M. de Lamotte was hardly convinced. How, he asked Derues, had he found
the 100,000 livres to buy Buisson-Souef, he who had not a halfpenny a
short time ago? Derues replied that he had borrowed it from a friend;
that there was no use in talking about it; the place was his now, his
alone, and M. de Lamotte had no longer a right to be there; he was very
sorry, poor dear gentleman, that his wife had gone off and left him
without a shilling, but personally he would always be a friend to him
and would allow him 3,000 livres a year for the rest of his life. In the
meantime, he said, he had already sold forty casks of the last year's
vintage, and would be obliged if M. de Lamotte would see to their being
sent off at once.

By this time the anger and indignation of M. de Lamotte blazed forth. He
told Derues that his story was a pack of lies, that he was still master
at Buisson-Souef, and not a bottle of wine should leave it. "You are
torturing me," he exclaimed, "I know something has happened to my wife
and child. I am coming to Paris myself, and if it is as I fear,
you shall answer for it with your head!" Derues, undismayed by this
outburst, re-asserted his ownership and departed in defiant mood,
leaving on the premises a butcher of the neighbourhood to look after his
property.

But things were going ill with Derues. M. de Lamotte meant to show
fight; he would have powerful friends to back him; class against class,
the little grocer would be no match for him. It was immediate possession
of Buisson-Souef that Derues wanted, not lawsuits; they were expensive
and the results uncertain. He spoke freely to his friends of the
difficulties of the situation.

What could he do? The general opinion seemed to be that some fresh
news of Mme. de Lamotte--her reappearance, perhaps--would be the
only effective settlement of the dispute. He had made Mme. de Lamotte
disappear, why should he not make her reappear? He was not the man to
stick at trifles. His powers of female impersonation, with which he
had amused his good friends at Buisson-Souef, could now be turned to
practical account. On March 5 he left Paris again.

On the evening of March 7 a gentleman, M. Desportes of Paris, hired a
room at the Hotel Blanc in Lyons. On the following day he went out early
in the morning, leaving word that, should a lady whom he was expecting,
call to see him, she was to be shown up to his room. The same morning a
gentleman, resembling M. Desportes of Paris, bought two lady's dresses
at a shop in Lyons.

The same afternoon a lady dressed in black silk, with a hood well drawn
over her eyes, called at the office of M. Pourra, a notary.

The latter was not greatly attracted by his visitor, whose nose struck
him as large for a woman. She said that she had spent her youth in
Lyons, but her accent was distinctly Parisian. The lady gave her name as
Madame de Lamotte, and asked for a power of attorney by which she could
give her husband the interest due to her on a sum of 30,000 livres,
part of the purchase-money of the estate of Buisson-Souef, which she
had recently sold. As Mme. de Lamotte represented herself as having been
sent to M. Pourra by a respectable merchant for whom he was in the
habit of doing business, he agreed to draw up the necessary document,
accepting her statement that she and her husband had separate estates.
Mme. de Lamotte said that she would not have time to wait until the
power of attorney was ready, and therefore asked M. Pourra to send it
to the parish priest at Villeneuvele-Roi; this he promised to do. Mme.
de-Lamotte had called twice during the day at the Hotel Blanc and asked
for M. Desportes of Paris, but he was not at home. While Derues, alias
Desportes, alias Mme. de Lamotte, was masquerading in Lyons, events had
been moving swiftly and unfavourably in Paris. Sick with misgiving and
anxiety, M. de Lamotte had come there to find, if possible, his wife and
child. By a strange coincidence he alighted at an inn in the Rue de la
Mortellerie, only a few yards from the wine-cellar in which the corpse
of his ill-fated wife lay buried. He lost no time in putting his case
before the Lieutenant of Police, who placed the affair in the hands
of one of the magistrates of the Chatelet, then the criminal court of
Paris. At first the magistrate believed that the case was one of fraud
and that Mme. de Lamotte and her son were being kept somewhere in
concealment by Derues. But as he investigated the circumstances further,
the evidence of the illness of the mother and son, the date of the
disappearance of Mme. de Lamotte, and her reputed signature to the deed
of sale on February 12, led him to suspect that he was dealing with a
case of murder.

When Derues returned to Paris from Lyons, on March 11, he found that the
police had already visited the house and questioned his wife, and
that he himself was under close surveillance. A day or two later the
advocate, Duclos, revealed to the magistrate the fictitious character
of the loan of 100,000 livres, which Derues alleged that he had paid
to Mme. de Lamotte as the price of Buisson-Souef. When the new power of
attorney purporting to be signed by Mme. de Lamotte arrived from
Lyons, and the signature was compared with that on the deed of sale of
Buisson-Souef to Derues, both were pronounced to be forgeries. Derues
was arrested and lodged in the Prison of For l'Eveque.

The approach of danger had not dashed the spirits of the little man, nor
was he without partisans in Paris. Opinion in the city was divided as
to the truth of his account of Mme. de Lamotte's elopement. The nobility
were on the side of the injured de Lamotte, but the bourgeoisie
accepted the grocer's story and made merry over the deceived husband.
Interrogated, however, by the magistrate of the Chatelet, Derues'
position became more difficult. Under the stress of close questioning
the flimsy fabric of his financial statements fell to pieces like a
house of cards. He had to admit that he had never paid Mme. de Lamotte
100,000 livres; he had paid her only 25,000 livres in gold; further
pressed he said that the 25,000 livres had been made up partly in gold,
partly in bills; but where the gold had come from, or on whom he had
drawn the bills, he could not explain. Still his position was not
desperate; and he knew it. In the absence of Mme. de Lamotte he could
not be charged with fraud or forgery; and until her body was discovered,
it would be impossible to charge him with murder.

A month passed; Mme. Derues, who had made a belated attempt to follow
her husband's example by impersonating Mme. de Lamotte in Paris, had
been arrested and imprisoned in the Grand Chatelet; when, on April 18,
information was received by the authorities which determined them to
explore the wine-cellar in the Rue de la Mortellerie. Whether the woman
who had let the cellar to Derues, or the creditor who had met him taking
his cask of wine there, had informed the investigating magistrate, seems
uncertain. In any case, the corpse of the unhappy lady was soon brought
to light and Derues confronted with it. At first he said that he failed
to recognise it as the remains of Mme. de Lamotte, but he soon abandoned
that rather impossible attitude. He admitted that he had given some
harmless medicine to Mme. de Lamotte during her illness, and then, to
his horror, one morning had awakened to find her dead. A fear lest
her husband would accuse him of having caused her death had led him to
conceal the body, and also that of her son who, he now confessed, had
died and been buried by him at Versailles. On April 23 the body of the
young de Lamotte was exhumed. Both bodies were examined by doctors, and
they declared themselves satisfied that mother and son had died "from
a bitter and corrosive poison administered in some kind of drink." What
the poison was they did not venture to state, but one of their number,
in the light of subsequent investigation, arrived at the conclusion that
Derues had used in both cases corrosive sublimate. How or where he had
obtained the poison was never discovered.

Justice moved swiftly in Paris in those days. The preliminary
investigation in Derues' case was ended on April 28. Two days later his
trial commenced before the tribunal of the Chatelet.

It lasted one day. The judges had before them the depositions taken by
the examining magistrate. Both Derues and his wife were interrogated. He
maintained that he had not poisoned either Mme. de Lamotte or her son;
his only crime, he said, lay in having concealed their deaths. Mme;
Derues said: "It is Buisson-Souef that has ruined us! I always told my
husband that he was mad to buy these properties--I am sure my husband is
not a poisoner--I trusted my husband and believed every word he said."
The court condemned Derues to death, but deferred judgment in his wife's
case on the ground of her pregnancy.

And now the frail, cat-like little man had to brace himself to meet
a cruel and protracted execution. But sanguine to the last, he still
hoped. An appeal lay from the Chatelet to the Parliament of Paris. It
was heard on March 5. Derues was brought to the Palais de Justice.
The room in which he waited was filled with curious spectators, who
marvelled at his coolness and impudence. He recognised among them a
Benedictine monk of his acquaintance. "My case," he called out to him,
"will soon be over; we'll meet again yet and have a good time together."
One visitor, wishing not to appear too curious, pretended to be looking
at a picture. "Come, sir," said Derues, "you haven't come here to see
the pictures, but to see me. Have a good look at me. Why study copies of
nature when you can look at such a remarkable original as I?" But there
were to be no more days of mirth and gaiety for the jesting grocer. His
appeal was rejected, and he was ordered for execution on the morrow.

At six o'clock on the morning of May 6 Derues returned to the Palais
de Justice, there to submit to the superfluous torments of the question
ordinary and extraordinary. Though condemned to death, torture was to
be applied in the hope of wringing from the prisoner some sort of
confession. The doctors declared him too delicate to undergo the torture
of pouring cold water into him, which his illustrious predecessor, Mme.
de Brinvilliers, had suffered; he was to endure the less severe torture
of the "boot."

His legs were tightly encased in wood, and wedges were then hammered in
until the flesh was crushed and the bones broken. But never a word
of confession was wrung from the suffering creature. Four wedges
constituting the ordinary torture he endured; at the third of the
extraordinary he fainted away. Put in the front of a fire the warmth
restored him. Again he was questioned, again he asserted his wife's
innocence and his own.

At two o'clock in the afternoon Derues was recovered sufficiently to be
taken to Notre Dame. There, in front of the Cathedral, candle in hand
and rope round his neck, he made the amende honorable. But as the
sentence was read aloud to the people Derues reiterated the assertion
of his innocence. From Notre Dame he was taken to the Hotel de Ville.
A condemned man had the right to stop there on his way to execution,
to make his will and last dying declarations. Derues availed himself
of this opportunity to protest solemnly and emphatically his wife's
absolute innocence of any complicity in whatever he had done. "I want
above all," he said, "to state that my wife is entirely innocent. She
knew nothing. I used fifty cunning devices to hide everything from her.
I am speaking nothing but the truth, she is wholly innocent--as for me,
I am about to die." His wife was allowed to see him; he enjoined her to
bring up their children in the fear of God and love of duty, and to let
them know how he had died. Once again, as he took up the pen to sign the
record of his last words, he re-asserted her innocence.

Of the last dreadful punishment the offending grocer was to be spared
nothing. For an aristocrat like Mme. de Brinvilliers beheading was
considered indignity enough. But Derues must go through with it all; he
must be broken on the wheel and burnt alive and his ashes scattered to
the four winds of heaven; there was to be no retentum for him, a
clause sometimes inserted in the sentence permitting the executioner to
strangle the broken victim before casting him on to the fire. He must
endure all to the utmost agony the law could inflict. It was six o'clock
when Derues arrived at the Place de Greve, crowded to its capacity, the
square itself, the windows of the houses; places had been bought at high
prices, stools, ladders, anything that would give a good view of the end
of the now famous poisoner.

Pale but calm, Derues faced his audience. He was stripped of all but his
shirt; lying flat on the scaffold, his face looking up to the sky, his
head resting on a stone, his limbs were fastened to the wheel. Then with
a heavy bar of iron the executioner broke them one after another, and
each time he struck a fearful cry came from the culprit. The customary
three final blows on the stomach were inflicted, but still the little
man lived. Alive and broken, he was thrown on to the fire. His burnt
ashes, scattered to the winds, were picked up eagerly by the mob,
reputed, as in England the pieces of the hangman's rope, talismans.

Some two months after the execution of her husband Mme. Derues was
delivered in the Conciergerie of a male child; it is hardly surprising,
in face of her experiences during her pregnancy, that it was born an
idiot. In January, 1778, the judges of the Parliament, by a majority of
one, decided that she should remain a prisoner in the Conciergerie for
another year, while judgment in her case was reserved. In the following
August she was charged with having forged the signature of Mme. de
Lamotte on the deeds of sale. In February, 1779, the two experts in
handwriting to whom the question had been submitted decided in her
favour, and the charge was abandoned.

But Mme. Derues had a far sterner, more implacable and, be it added,
more unscrupulous adversary than the law in M. de Lamotte.

Not content with her husband's death, M. de Lamotte believed the wife to
have been his partner in guilt, and thirsted for revenge.

To accomplish it he even stooped to suborn witnesses, but the conspiracy
was exposed, and so strong became the sympathy with the accused woman
that a young proctor of the Parliament published a pamphlet in her
defence, asking for an immediate inquiry into the charges made against
her, charges that had in no instance been proved.

At last, in March, 1779, the Parliament decided to finish with the
affair. In secret session the judges met, examined once more all the
documents in the case, listened to a report on it from one of their
number, interrogated the now weary, hopeless prisoner, and, by a large
majority, condemned her to a punishment that fell only just short of
the supreme penalty. On the grounds that she had wilfully and knowingly
participated with her husband in the fraudulent attempt to become
possessed of the estate of Buisson-Souef, and was strongly suspected of
having participated with him in his greater crime, she was sentenced
to be publicly flogged, branded on both shoulders with the letter V
(Voleuse) and imprisoned for life in the Salpetriere Prison. On March
13, in front of the Conciergerie Mme. Derues underwent the first part of
her punishment. The same day her hair was cut short, and she was dressed
in the uniform of the prison in which she was to pass the remainder of
her days.

Paris had just begun to forget Mme. Derues when a temporary interest
was-excited in her fortunes by the astonishing intelligence that, two
months after her condemnation, she had been delivered of a child in her
new prison. Its fatherhood was never determined, and, taken from her
mother, the child died in fifteen days. Was its birth the result of some
passing love affair, or some act of drunken violence on the part of her
jailors, or had the wretched woman, fearing a sentence of death, made an
effort to avert once again the supreme penalty? History does not relate.

Ten years passed. A fellow prisoner in the Salpetriere described Mme.
Derues as "scheming, malicious, capable of anything." She was accused
of being violent, and of wishing to revenge herself by setting fire to
Paris. At length the Revolution broke on France, the Bastille fell, and
in that same year an old uncle of Mme. Derues, an ex-soldier of
Louis XV., living in Brittany, petitioned for his niece's release. He
protested her innocence, and begged that he might take her to his home
and restore her to her children. For three years he persisted vainly in
his efforts. At last, in the year 1792, it seemed as if they might be
crowned with success. He was told that the case would be re-examined;
that it was possible that the Parliament had judged unjustly. This good
news came to him in March. But in September of that year there took
place those shocking massacres in the Paris prisons, which rank high
among the atrocities of the Revolution. At four o'clock on the afternoon
of September 4, the slaughterers visited the Salpetriere Prison, and
fifth among their victims fell the widow of Derues.




Dr. Castaing


There are two reports of the trial of Castaing: "Proces Complet d'Edme
Samuel Castaing," Paris, 1823; "Affaire Castaing," Paris, 1823.

I

AN UNHAPPY COINCIDENCE

Edme Castaing, born at Alencon in 1796, was the youngest of the three
sons of an Inspector-General in the department of Woods and Forests.
His elder brother had entered the same service as his father, the other
brother was a staff-captain of engineers. Without being wealthy, the
family, consisting of M. and Mme. Castaing and four children, was in
comfortable circumstances. The young Edme was educated at the College of
Angers--the Alma Mater of Barre and Lebiez--where, intelligent and hard
working, he carried off many prizes. He decided to enter the medical
profession, and at the age of nineteen commenced his studies at the
School of Medicine in Paris. For two years he worked hard and well,
living within the modest allowance made him by his father. At the end of
that time this young man of two or three-and-twenty formed a passionate
attachment for a lady, the widow of a judge, and the mother of three
children. Of the genuine depth and sincerity of this passion for a woman
who must have been considerably older than himself, there can be no
doubt. Henceforth the one object in life to Castaing was to make money
enough to relieve the comparative poverty of his adored mistress, and
place her and her children beyond the reach of want. In 1821 Castaing
became a duly qualified doctor, and by that time had added to the
responsibilities of his mistress and himself by becoming the father of
two children, whom she had brought into the world. The lady was exigent,
and Castaing found it difficult to combine his work with a due regard to
her claims on his society. Nor was work plentiful or lucrative. To add
to his embarrassments Castaing, in 1818, had backed a bill for a
friend for 600 francs. To meet it when it fell due two years later was
impossible, and desperate were the efforts made by Castaing and his
mother to put off the day of reckoning. His father, displeased with his
son's conduct, would do nothing to help him. But his mother spared
no effort to extricate him from his difficulties. She begged a highly
placed official to plead with the insistent creditor, but all in vain.
There seemed no hope of a further delay when suddenly, in the October
of 1822, Castaing became the possessor of 100,000 francs. How he became
possessed of this considerable sum of money forms part of a strange and
mysterious story.

Among the friends of Castaing were two young men of about his own age,
Auguste and Hippolyte Ballet. Auguste, the elder, had the misfortune
a few days after his birth to incur his mother's lasting dislike. The
nurse had let the child fall from her arms in the mother's presence, and
the shock had endangered Mme. Ballet's life. From that moment the
mother took a strong aversion to her son; he was left to the charge of
servants; his meals were taken in the kitchen. As soon as he was five
years old he was put out to board elsewhere, while his brother Hippolyte
and his sister were well cared for at home. The effect of this unjust
neglect on the character of Auguste Ballet was, as may be imagined, had;
he became indolent and dissipated. His brother Hippolyte, on the other
hand, had justified the affectionate care bestowed on his upbringing; he
had grown into a studious, intelligent youth of a refined and attractive
temperament. Unhappily, early in his life he had developed consumption,
a disease he inherited from his mother. As he grew older his health grew
steadily worse until, in 1822, his friends were seriously alarmed at his
condition. It became so much graver that, in the August of that year,
the doctors recommended him to take the waters at Enghien. In September
he returned to Paris apparently much better, but on October 2 he was
seized with sudden illness, and three days later he was dead.

A few years before the death of Hippolyte his father and mother had
died almost at the same time. M. Ballet had left to each of his sons a
fortune of some 260,000 francs. Though called to the bar, both Auguste
and Hippolyte Ballet were now men of independent means. After the death
of their parents, whatever jealousy Auguste may have felt at the unfair
preference which his mother had shown for her younger son, had died
down. At the time of Hippolyte's death the brothers were on good terms,
though the more prudent Hippolyte disapproved of his elder brother's
extravagance.

Of Hippolyte Ballet Dr. Castaing had become the fast friend. Apart
from his personal liking for Castaing, it was a source of comfort to
Hippolyte, in his critical state of health, to have as his friend one
whose medical knowledge was always at his service.

About the middle of August, 1822, Hippolyte, on the advice of his
doctors, went to Enghien to take the waters. There Castaing paid him
frequent visits. He returned to Paris on September 22, and seemed to
have benefited greatly by the cure. On Tuesday, October 1, he saw his
sister, Mme. Martignon, and her husband; he seemed well, but said that
he was having leeches applied to him by his friend Castaing. On the
Wednesday evening his sister saw him again, and found him well and with
a good appetite. On the Thursday, after a night disturbed by severe
attacks of vomiting, his condition seemed serious. His brother-in-law,
who visited him, found that he had taken to his bed, his face was
swollen, his eyes were red. His sister called in the evening, but could
not see him. The servants told her that her brother was a little better
but resting, and that he did not wish to be disturbed; they said that
Dr. Castaing had been with him all day.

On Friday Castaing himself called on the Martignons, and told them that
Hippolyte had passed a shockingly bad night. Madame Martignon insisted
on going to nurse her brother herself, but Castaing refused positively
to let her see him; the sight of her, he said, would be too agitating
to the patient. Later in the day Mme. Martignon went to her brother's
house. In order to obey Dr. Castaing's injunctions, she dressed herself
in some of the clothes of the servant Victoire, in the hope that if she
went into his bedroom thus disguised, Hippolyte would not recognise her.
But even this subterfuge was forbidden by Castaing, and Mme. Martignon
had to content herself with listening in an adjoining room for the sound
of her brother's voice. At eight o'clock that evening the Martignons
learnt that Hippolyte was better, but at ten o'clock they received a
message that he was dying, and that his brother Auguste had been sent
for. Mme. Martignon was prostrated with grief, but her husband hastened
to his brother-in-law's house. There he found Castaing, who said that
the death agony of his friend was so dreadful that he had not the
strength to remain in the room with the dying man. Another doctor was
sent for, but at ten o'clock the following morning, after protracted
suffering, Hippolyte Ballet passed away.

A post-mortem was held on his body. It was made by Drs. Segalas and
Castaing. They stated that death was due to pleurisy aggravated by the
consumptive condition of the deceased, which, however serious, was not
of itself likely to have been so rapidly fatal in its consequences.

Hippolyte had died, leaving a fortune of some 240,000 francs. In the
previous September he had spoken to the notary Lebret, a former clerk
of his father's, of his intention of making a will. He had seen that his
brother Auguste was squandering his share of their inheritance; he told
Lebret that whatever he might leave to Auguste should not be placed at
his absolute disposal. To his servant Victoire, during his last illness,
Hippolyte had spoken of a will he had made which he wished to destroy.
If Hippolyte had made such a will, did he destroy it before his death?
In any case, no trace of it was ever found after his death. He
was presumed to have died intestate, and his fortune was divided,
three-quarters of it going to his brother Auguste, the remaining quarter
to his sister, Mme. Martignon.

On the day of Hippolyte's death Auguste Ballet wrote from his brother's
house to one Prignon: "With great grief I have to tell you that I have
just lost my brother; I write at the same time to say that I must have
100,000 francs to-day if possible. I have the greatest need of it.
Destroy my letter, and reply at once. M. Sandrie will, I am sure,
accommodate me. I am at my poor brother's house, from which I am
writing." Prignon did as he was asked, but it was two days before the
stockbroker, Sandrie, could raise the necessary sum. On October 7 he
sold out sufficient of Auguste's stock to realise 100,000 francs, and
the following day gave Prignon an order on the Bank of France for that
amount. The same day Prignon took the order to Auguste. Accompanied by
Castaing and Jean, Auguste's black servant, Auguste and Prignon drove to
the bank. There the order was cashed. Prignon's part of the business was
at an end. He said good-bye to Auguste outside the bank. As the latter
got into his cabriolet, carrying the bundle of notes, Prignon heard him
say to Castaing: "There are the 100,000 francs."

Why had Auguste Ballet, after his brother's death, such urgent need of
100,000 francs? If the statements of Auguste made to other persons
are to be believed, he had paid the 100,000 francs which he had raised
through Prignon to Lebret, his father's former clerk, who would seem to
have acted as legal and financial adviser to his old master's children.
According to Auguste's story, his sister, Mme. Martignon, had offered
Lebret 80,000 francs to preserve a copy of a will made by Hippolyte,
leaving her the bulk of his fortune. Castaing, however, had ascertained
that Lebret would be willing, if Auguste would outbid his sister and pay
100,000 francs, to destroy the will so that, Hippolyte dying intestate,
Auguste would take the greater part of his brother's fortune. Auguste
agreed to accept Lebret's terms, raised the necessary sum, and handed
over the money to Castaing, who, in turn, gave it to Lebret, who had
thereupon destroyed the copy of the will. Castaing, according to the
evidence of Auguste's mistress, an actress of the name of Percillie,
had spoken in her presence of having himself destroyed one copy of
Hippolyte's will before his death, and admitted having arranged with
Lebret after Hippolyte's death for the destruction of the other copy.

How far was the story told by Auguste, and repeated in somewhat
different shape by Castaing to other persons, true? There is no doubt
that after the visit to the Bank of France with Prignon on October
8, Auguste and Castaing drove together to Lebret's office. The negro
servant said that on arriving there one of them got out of the cab and
went up to Lebret's house, but which of the two he would not at first
say positively. Later he swore that it was Auguste Ballet. Whatever
happened on that visit to Lebret's--and it was the theory of the
prosecution that Castaing and not Auguste had gone up to the office--the
same afternoon Auguste Ballet showed his mistress the seals of the copy
of his brother's will which Lebret had destroyed, and told her that
Lebret, all through the business, had refused to deal directly with him,
and would only act through the intermediary of Castaing.

Did Lebret, as a fact, receive the 100,000 francs? A close examination
of his finances showed no trace of such a sum. Castaing, on the other
hand, on October 10, 1822, had given a stockbroker a sum of 66,000
francs to invest in securities; on the 11th of the same month he had
lent his mother 30,000 francs; and on the 14th had given his mistress
4,000 francs. Of how this large sum of money had come to Castaing at
a time when he was practically insolvent he gave various accounts.
His final version was that in the will destroyed by Auguste, Hippolyte
Ballet had left him an income for life equivalent to a capital of
100,000 francs, and that Auguste had given him that sum out of respect
for his brother's wishes. If that explanation were true, it was
certainly strange that shortly after his brother's death Auguste Ballet
should have expressed surprise and suspicion to a friend on hearing that
Castaing had been buying stock to the value of 8,000 francs. If he had
given Castaing 100,000 francs for himself, there was no occasion for
surprise or suspicion at his investing 8,000. That Auguste had paid out
100,000 francs to some one in October the state of his finances at
his death clearly proved. According to the theory of the prosecution,
Auguste believed that he had paid that money to Lebret through the
intermediary of Castaing, and not to Castaing himself. Hence his
surprise at hearing that Castaing, whom he knew to be impecunious, was
investing such a sum as 8,000 francs.

No money had ever reached Lebret. His honesty and good faith were
demonstrated beyond any shadow of a doubt; no copy of any will of
Hippolyte Ballet had ever been in his possession. But Castaing had shown
Auguste Ballet a copy of his brother's will, the seals of which Auguste
had shown to his mistress. In all probability, and possibly at the
instigation of Castaing, Hippolyte Ballet had made a will, leaving the
greater part of his property to his sister. Somehow or other Castaing
had got possession of this will. On his death Castaing had invented the
story of Mme. Martignon's bribe to Lebret, and so persuaded Auguste
to outbid her. He had ingeniously kept Auguste and Lebret apart by
representing Lebret as refusing to deal direct with Auguste, and by
these means had secured to his own use the sum of 100,000 francs, which
Auguste believed was being paid to Lebret as the price of his
alleged destruction of his brother's will. The plot was ingenious and
successful. To Lebret and the Martignons Castaing said that Hippolyte
had made a will in Mme. Martignon's favour, but had destroyed it himself
some days before his death. The Martignons expressed themselves as glad
that Hippolyte had done so, for they feared lest such a will should
have provoked resentment against them on the part of Auguste. By keeping
Auguste and Lebret apart, Castaing prevented awkward explanations. The
only possible danger of discovery lay in Auguste's incautious admissions
to his mistress and friends; but even had the fact of the destruction
of the will come to the ears of the Martignons, it is unlikely that they
would have taken any steps involving the disgrace of Auguste.

Castaing had enriched himself considerably by the opportune death of his
friend Hippolyte. It might be made a matter of unfriendly comment that,
on the first day of May preceding that sad event, Castaing had purchased
ten grains of acetate of morphia from a chemist in Paris, and on
September 18, less than a month before Hippolyte's death, he had
purchased another ten grains of acetate of morphia from the same
chemist. The subject of poisons had always been a favourite branch of
Castaing's medical studies, especially vegetable poisons; morphia is a
vegetable poison.

Castaing's position relative to Auguste Ballet was now a strong one.
They were accomplices in the unlawful destruction of Hippolyte's will.
Auguste believed it to be in his friend's power to ruin him at any time
by revealing his dealings with Lebret. But, more than that, to Auguste,
who believed that his 100,000 francs had gone into Lebret's pocket,
Castaing could represent himself as so far unrewarded for his share in
the business; Lebret had taken all the money, while he had received no
recompense of any kind for the trouble he had taken and the risk he was
encountering on his friend's behalf. Whatever the motive, from fear or
gratitude, Auguste Ballet was persuaded to make a will leaving Dr. Edme
Samuel Castaing the whole of his fortune, subject to a few trifling
legacies. But Auguste's feelings towards his sole legatee were no longer
cordial. To one or two of his friends he expressed his growing distaste
for Castaing's society.

Dr. Castaing can hardly have failed to observe this change. He knew
Auguste to be reckless and extravagant with his money; he learnt that he
had realised another 100,000 francs out of his securities, and that he
kept the money locked up in a drawer in his desk. If Auguste's fortune
were dissipated by extravagance, or he revoked his will, Castaing stood
to lose heavily. As time went on Castaing felt less and less sure that
he could place much reliance on the favourable disposition or thrift of
Auguste. The latter had fallen in love with a new mistress; he began to
entertain expensively; even if he should not change his mind and leave
his money away from Castaing, there might very soon be no money to
leave. At the end of May, 1823, Castaing consulted a cousin of his,
Malassis, a notary's clerk, as to the validity of a will made by a sick
man in favour of his medical attendant. He said that he had a patient
gravely ill who, not wishing to leave his money to his sister, whom he
disliked, intended to leave it to him. Malassis reassured him as to the
validity of such a will, and gave him the necessary instructions for
preparing it. On May 29 Castaing sent Malassis the will of Auguste
Ballet with the following note, "I send you the will of M. Ballets
examine it and keep it as his representative." The will was dated
December 1, 1822, and made Castaing sole legatee. On the same day
that the will was deposited with Malassis, Castaing and Auguste Ballet
started to-gether on a little two days' trip into the country. To his
friends Auguste seemed in the best of health and spirits; so much so
that his housekeeper remarked as he left how well he was looking, and
Castaing echoed her remark, saying that he looked like a prince!

During the afternoon the two friends visited Saint Germain, then
returned to Paris, and at seven o'clock in the evening arrived at the
Tete Noire Hotel at Saint Cloud, where they took a double-bedded room,
Castaing paying five francs in advance. They spent the following day,
Friday, May 30, in walking about the neighbourhood, dined at the hotel
at seven, went out again and returned about nine o'clock. Soon after
their return Castaing ordered some warmed wine to be sent up to the
bedroom. It was taken up by one of the maid-servants. Two glasses were
mixed with lemon and sugar which Castaing had brought with him. Both the
young men drank of the beverage. Auguste complained that it was sour,
and thought that he had put too much lemon in it. He gave his glass to
the servant to taste, who also found the drink sour. Shortly after
she left the room and went upstairs to the bedside of one of her
fellow-servants who was ill. Castaing, for no apparent reason, followed
her up and stayed in the room for about five minutes. Auguste spent a
bad night, suffering from internal pains, and in the morning his legs
were so swollen that he could not put on his boots.

Castaing got up at four o'clock that morning and asked one of the
servants to let him out. Two hours later he drove up in a cabriolet to
the door of a chemist in Paris, and asked for twelve grains of tartar
emetic, which he wanted to mix in a wash according to a prescription of
Dr. Castaing. But he did not tell the chemist that he was Dr. Castaing
himself. An hour later Castaing arrived at the shop of another chemist,
Chevalier, with whom he had already some acquaintance; he had bought
acetate of morphia from him some months before, and had discussed with
him then the effects of vegetable poisons. On this particular morning he
bought of his assistant thirty-six grains of acetate of morphia, paying,
as a medical man, three francs fifty centimes for it instead of the
usual price of four francs. Later in the morning Castaing returned to
Saint Cloud, a distance of ten miles from Paris, and said that he had
been out for a long walk. He found Auguste ill in bed. Castaing asked
for some cold milk, which was taken up to the bedroom by one of the
servants. Shortly after this Castaing went out again. During his absence
Auguste was seized with violent pains and sickness. When Castaing
returned he found his friend in the care of the people of the hotel. He
told them to throw away the matter that had been vomited, as the smell
was offensive, and Auguste told them to do as his friend directed.
Castaing proposed to send for a doctor from Paris, but Auguste insisted
that a local doctor should be called in at once.

Accordingly Dr. Pigache of Saint Cloud was summoned. He arrived at the
hotel about eleven o'clock. Before seeing the patient Castaing told the
doctor that he believed him to be suffering from cholera. Pigache asked
to see the matter vomited but was told that it had been thrown away. He
prescribed a careful diet, lemonade and a soothing draught.

Dr. Pigache returned at three o'clock, when he found that the patient
had taken some lemonade, but, according to Castaing, had refused to take
the draught. He called again that afternoon. Ballet was much better;
he said that he would be quite well if he could get some sleep, and
expressed a wish to return to Paris. Dr. Pigache dissuaded him from this
and left, saying that he would come again in the evening. Castaing said
that that would be unnecessary, and it was agreed that Pigache should
see the patient again at eight o'clock the next morning. During the
afternoon Castaing sent a letter to Paris to Jean, Auguste's negro
servant, telling him to take the two keys of his master's desk to his
cousin Malassis. But the negro distrusted Castaing. He knew of the will
which his master had made in the doctor's favour. Rather than compromise
himself by any injudicious act, he brought the keys to Saint Cloud and
there handed them over to Castaing.

When Jean arrived his master complained to him of feeling very ill.
Jean said that he hoped he would be well enough to go back to Paris the
following day, to which Auguste replied, "I don't think so. But if I am
lucky enough to get away to-morrow, I shall leave fifty francs for
the poor here." About eleven o'clock that night Castaing, in Jean's
presence, gave the sick man a spoonful of the draught prescribed by Dr.
Pigache. Four or five minutes later Auguste was seized with terrible
convulsions, followed by unconsciousness. Dr. Pigache was sent for. He
found Ballet lying on his back unconscious, his throat strained, his
mouth shut and his eyes fixed; the pulse was weak, his body covered
with cold sweat; and every now and then he was seized with strong
convulsions. The doctor asked Castaing the cause of the sudden change in
Ballet's condition. Castaing replied that it had commenced shortly after
he had taken a spoonful of the draught which the doctor had prescribed
for him. Dr. Pigache bled the patient and applied twenty leeches. He
returned about six; Ballet was sinking, and Castaing appeared to be
greatly upset. He told the doctor what an unhappy coincidence it was
that he should have been present at the deathbeds of both Hippolyte and
his brother Auguste; and that the position was the more distressing
for him as he was the sole heir to Auguste's fortune. To M. Pelletan, a
professor of medicine, who had been sent for to St. Cloud in the early
hours of Sunday morning, Castaing appeared to be in a state of great
grief and agitation; he was shedding tears. Pelletan was from the first
impressed by the suspicious nature of the case, and pointed out to
Castaing the awkwardness of his situation as heir to the dying man.
"You're right," replied Castaing, "my position is dreadful, horrible. In
my great grief I had never thought of it till now, but now you make me
see it clearly. Do you think there will be an investigation?" Pelletan
answered that he should be compelled to ask for a post-mortem. "Ah! You
will be doing me the greatest service," said Castaing, "I beg you to
insist on a post-mortem. You will be acting as a second father to me in
doing so." The parish priest was sent for to administer extreme unction
to the dying man. To the parish clerk who accompanied the priest
Castaing said, "I am losing a friend of my childhood," and both priest
and clerk went away greatly edified by the sincere sorrow and pious
demeanour of the young doctor. About mid-day on Sunday, June 1, Auguste
Ballet died.

During the afternoon Castaing left the hotel for some hours, and that
same afternoon a young man about twenty-five years of age, short and
fair, left a letter at the house of Malassis. The letter was from
Castaing and said, "My dear friend, Ballet has just died, but do nothing
before to-morrow, Monday. I will see you and tell you, yes or no,
whether it is time to act. I expect that his brother-in-law, M.
Martignon, whose face is pock-marked and who carries a decoration, will
call and see you. I have said that I did not know what dispositions
Ballet may have made, but that before his death he had told me to give
you two little keys which I am going to deliver to you myself to-morrow,
Monday. I have not said that we are cousins, but only that I had seen
you once or twice at Ballet's, with whom you were friendly. So say
nothing till I have seen you, but whatever you do, don't say you are
a relative of mine." When he returned to the hotel Castaing found
Martignon, Lebret, and one or two friends of Auguste already assembled.
It was only that morning that Martignon had received from Castaing any
intimation of his brother-in-law's critical condition. From the first
Castaing was regarded with suspicion; the nature of the illness, the
secrecy maintained about it by Castaing, the coincidence of some of
the circumstances with those of the death of Hippolyte, all combined to
excite suspicion. Asked if Auguste had left a will Castaing said no;
but the next day he admitted its existence, and said that it was in the
hands of Malassis.

Monday, June 2, was the day fixed for the post-mortem; it was performed
in the hotel at Saint Cloud. Castaing was still in the hotel under
provisional arrest. While the post-mortem was going on his agitation was
extreme; he kept opening the door of the room in which he was confined,
to hear if possible some news of the result. At last M. Pelletan
obtained permission to inform him of the verdict of the doctors. It was
favourable to Castaing; no trace of death by violence or poison had been
discovered.

The medical men declared death to be due to an inflammation of
the stomach, which could be attributed to natural causes; that the
inflammation had subsided; that it had been succeeded by cerebral
inflammation, which frequently follows inflammation of the stomach,
and may have been aggravated in this case by exposure to the sun or by
over-indulgence of any kind.


II

THE TRIAL OF DR. CASTAING


Castaing expected, as a result of the doctors' report, immediate
release. In this he was disappointed; he was placed under stricter
arrest and taken to Paris, where a preliminary investigation commenced,
lasting five months. During the early part of his imprisonment Castaing
feigned insanity, going to disgusting lengths in the hope of convincing
those about him of the reality of his madness. But after three days of
futile effort he gave up the attempt, and turned his attention to more
practical means of defence. In the prison at Versailles, whither he had
been removed from Paris, he got on friendly terms with a prisoner, one
Goupil, who was awaiting trial for some unimportant offence. To Goupil
Castaing described the cruelty of his position and the causes that had
led to his wrongful arrest. He admitted his unfortunate possession of
the poison, and said that the 100,000 francs which he had invested
he had inherited from an uncle. Through Goupil he succeeded in
communicating with his mother in the hope that she would use her
influence to stifle some of the more serious evidence against him.
Through other prisoners he tried to get at the chemists from whom he had
bought acetate of morphia, and persuade them to say that the preparation
of morphia which he had purchased was harmless.

The trial of Castaing commenced before the Paris Assize Court on
November 10, 1823. He was charged with the murder of Hippolyte Ballet,
the destruction of a document containing the final dispositions of
Hippolyte's property, and with the murder of Auguste Ballet. The three
charges were to be tried simultaneously. The Act of Accusation
in Castaing's case is a remarkable document, covering a hundred
closely-printed pages. It is a well-reasoned, graphic and unfair
statement of the case for the prosecution. It tells the whole story
of the crime, and inserts everything that can possibly prejudice the
prisoner in the eyes of the jury. As an example, it quotes against
Castaing a letter of his mistress in which, in the course of some
quarrel, she had written to him saying that his mother had said some
"horrible things" (des horreurs) of him; but what those "horrible
things" were was not revealed, nor were they ever alluded to again
in the course of the trial, nor was his mistress called as a witness,
though payments of money by Castaing to her formed an important part
of the evidence against him. Again, the evidence of Goupil, his fellow
prisoner, as to the incriminating statements made to him by Castaing is
given in the Act of Accusation, but Goupil himself was not called at the
trial.

During the reading of the Act of Accusation by the Clerk of the Court
Castaing listened calmly. Only when some allusion was made to his
mistress and their children did he betray any sign of emotion. As soon
as the actual facts of the case were set out he was all attention,
making notes busily. He is described as rather attractive in appearance,
his face long, his features regular, his forehead high, his hair,
fair in colour, brushed back from the brows; he wore rather large
side-whiskers. One of the witnesses at Saint Cloud said that Castaing
looked more like a priest than a doctor; his downcast eyes, gentle
voice, quiet and unassuming demeanour, lent him an air of patience and
humility.

The interrogatory of Castaing by the presiding judge lasted all the
afternoon of the first day of the trial and the morning of the second.
The opening part of it dealt with the murder of Hippolyte Ballet,
and elicited little or nothing that was fresh. Beyond the purchase
of acetate of morphia previous to Hippolyte's death, which Castaing
reluctantly admitted, there was no serious evidence against him, and
before the end of the trial the prosecution abandoned that part of the
charge.

Questioned by the President as to the destruction of Hippolyte Ballet's
will, Castaing admitted that he had seen a draft of a will executed by
Hippolyte in favour of his sister, but he denied having told Auguste
that Lebret had in his possession a copy which he was prepared to
destroy for 100,000 francs. Asked to explain the assertion of Mlle.
Percillie, Auguste's mistress, that statements to this effect had been
made in her presence by both Auguste Ballet and himself, he said that it
was not true; that he had never been to her house. "What motive," he was
asked, "could Mlle. Percillie have for accusing you?" "She hated me,"
was the reply, "because I had tried to separate Auguste from her."
Castaing denied that he had driven with Auguste to Lebret's office on
October 8. Asked to explain his sudden possession of 100,000 francs at a
moment when he was apparently without a penny, he repeated his statement
that Auguste had given him the capital sum as an equivalent for an
income of 4,000 francs which his brother had intended to leave him.
"Why, when first asked if you had received anything from Auguste, did
you say you had received nothing?" was the question.

"It was a thoughtless statement," was the answer. "Why," pursued the
President, "should you not have admitted at once a fact that went to
prove your own good faith? If, however, this fact be true, it does not
explain the mysterious way in which Auguste asked Prignon to raise for
him 100,000 francs; and unless those 100,000 francs were given to you,
it is impossible to account for them. It is important to your case that
you should give the jury a satisfactory explanation on this point."
Castaing could only repeat his previous explanations.

The interrogatory was then directed to the death of Auguste Ballet.
Castaing said that Auguste Ballet had left him all his fortune on
account of a disagreement with his sister. Asked why, after Auguste's
death, he had at first denied all knowledge of the will made in his
favour and deposited by him with Malassis, he could give no satisfactory
reason. Coming to the facts of the alleged poisoning of Auguste Ballet,
the President asked Castaing why, shortly after the warm wine was
brought up on the night of May 30, he went up to the room where one of
the servants of the hotel was lying sick. Castaing replied that he was
sent for by the wife of the hotel-keeper. This the woman denied; she
said that she did not even know that he was a doctor. "According to
the prosecution," said the judge, "you left the room in order to avoid
drinking your share of the wine." Castaing said that he had drunk half
a cupful of it. The judge reminded him that to one of the witnesses
Castaing had said that he had drunk only a little.

A ridiculous statement made by Castaing to explain the purchase of
morphia and antimony in Paris on May 31 was brought up against him.
Shortly after his arrest Castaing had said that the cats and dogs about
the hotel had made such a noise on the night of May 30 that they had
disturbed the rest of Auguste, who, in the early morning, had asked
Castaing to get some poison to kill them. He had accordingly gone all
the way, about ten miles, to Paris at four in the morning to purchase
antimony and morphia to kill cats and dogs. All the people of the
hotel denied that there had been any such disturbance on the night in
question. Castaing now said that he had bought the poisons at Auguste's
request, partly to kill the noisy cats and dogs, and partly for the
purpose of their making experiments on animals. Asked why he had not
given this second reason before, he said that as Auguste was not a
medical man it would have been damaging to his reputation to divulge the
fact of his wishing to make unauthorised experiments on animals. "Why
go to Paris for the poison?" asked the judge, "there was a chemist a few
yards from the hotel. And when in Paris, why go to two chemists?" To all
these questions Castaing's answers were such as to lead the President
to express a doubt as to whether they were likely to convince the jury.
Castaing was obliged to admit that he had allowed, if not ordered, the
evacuations of the sick man to be thrown away. He stated that he had
thrown away the morphia and antimony, which he had bought in Paris,
in the closets of the hotel, because, owing to the concatenation of
circumstances, he thought that he would be suspected of murder. In reply
to a question from one of the jury, Castaing said that he had mixed
the acetate of morphia and tartar emetic together before reaching Saint
Cloud, but why he had done so he could not explain.

The medical evidence at the trial was favourable to the accused. Orfila,
the famous chemist of that day, said that, though the symptoms in
Auguste Ballet's case might be attributed to poisoning by acetate of
morphia or some other vegetable poison, at the same time they could
be equally well attributed to sudden illness of a natural kind. The
liquids, taken from the stomach of Ballet, had yielded on analysis no
trace of poison of any sort. The convulsive symptoms present in Ballet's
case were undoubtedly a characteristic result of a severe dose of
acetate of morphia.(14) Castaing said that he had mixed the acetate of
morphia and tartar emetic together, but in any case no trace of either
poison was found in Auguste's body, and his illness might, from all
appearances, have been occasioned by natural causes. Some attempt was
made by the prosecution to prove that the apoplexy to which Hippolyte
Ballet had finally succumbed, might be attributed to a vegetable poison;
one of the doctors expressed an opinion favourable to that conclusion
"as a man but not as a physician." But the evidence did not go further.


     (14) It was asserted some years later by one medical authority in
Palmer's case that it might have been morphia and not strychnine that
had caused the tetanic symptoms which preceded Cook's death.


To the young priest-like doctor the ordeal of his trial was a severe
one. It lasted eight days. It was only at midday on the sixth day that
the evidence was concluded. Not only was Castaing compelled to submit to
a long interrogatory by the President, but, after each witness had given
his or her evidence, the prisoner was called on to refute or explain any
points unfavourable to him. This he did briefly, with varying success;
as the trial went on, with increasing embarrassment. A great deal of
the evidence given against Castaing was hearsay, and would have been
inadmissible in an English court of justice. Statements made by Auguste
to other persons about Castaing were freely admitted. But more serious
was the evidence of Mlle. Percillie, Auguste's mistress. She swore that
on one occasion in her presence Castaing had reproached Auguste with
ingratitude; he had complained that he had destroyed one copy of
Hippolyte Ballet's will, and for Auguste's sake had procured the
destruction of the other, and that yet, in spite of all this, Auguste
hesitated to entrust him with 100,000 francs. Asked what he had to say
to this statement Castaing denied its truth. He had, he said, only been
in Mlle. Percillie's house once, and then not with Auguste Ballet. Mlle.
Percillie adhered to the truth of her evidence, and the President left
it to the jury to decide between them.

A Mme. Durand, a patient of Castaing, gave some curious evidence as to
a story told her by the young doctor. He said that a friend of his,
suffering from lung disease, had been persuaded into making a will in
his sister's favour. The sister had offered a bribe of 80,000 francs to
her brother's lawyer to persuade him to make such a will, and paid one
of his clerks 3,000 francs for drawing it up. Castaing, in his friend's
interest, and in order to expose the fraud, invited the clerk to come
and see him. His friend, hidden in an alcove in the room, overheard the
conversation between Castaing and the clerk, and so learnt the details
of his sister's intrigue. He at once destroyed the will and became
reconciled with his brother, whom he had been about to disinherit. After
his death the brother, out of gratitude, had given Castaing 100,000
francs.

President: Castaing, did you tell this story to Mme. Durand?

Castaing: I don't recollect.

Avocat-General: But Mme. Durand says that you did.

Castaing: I don't recollect.

President: You always say that you don't recollect; that is no answer.
Have you, yes or no, made such a statement to Mme. Durand?

Castaing: I don't recollect; if I had said it, I should recollect it.

Another lady whom Castaing had attended free of charge swore, with a
good deal of reluctance, that Castaing had told her a somewhat similar
story as accounting for his possession of 100,000 francs.

Witnesses were called for the defence who spoke to the diligence and
good conduct of Castaing as a medical student; and eighteen, whom he had
treated free of expense, testified to his kindness and generosity. "All
these witnesses," said the President, "speak to your generosity; but,
for that very reason, you must have made little profit out of your
profession, and had little opportunity for saving anything," to which
Castaing replied: "These are not the only patients I attended; I have
not called those who paid me for my services." At the same time Castaing
found it impossible to prove that he had ever made a substantial living
by the exercise of his profession.

One of the medical witnesses called for the defence, M. Chaussier, had
volunteered the remark that the absence of any trace of poison in the
portions of Auguste Ballet's body submitted to analysis, constituted an
absence of the corpus delicti. To this the President replied that that
was a question of criminal law, and no concern of his. But in his speech
for the prosecution the Avocat-General dealt with the point raised
at some length--a point which, if it had held good as a principle of
English law, would have secured the acquittal of so wicked a poisoner as
Palmer. He quoted from the famous French lawyer d'Aguesseau: "The corpus
delicti is no other thing than the delictum itself; but the proofs of
the delictum are infinitely variable according to the nature of things;
they may be general or special, principal or accessory, direct or
indirect; in a word, they form that general effect (ensemble) which goes
to determine the conviction of an honest man." If such a contention as
M. Chaussier's were correct, said the Avocat-General, then it would
be impossible in a case of poisoning to convict a prisoner after his
victim's death, or, if his victim survived, to convict him of the
attempt to poison. He reminded the jury of that paragraph in the Code
of Criminal Procedure which instructed them as to their duties: "The Law
does not ask you to give the reasons that have convinced you; it
lays down no rules by which you are to decide as to the fullness or
sufficiency of proof... it only asks you one question: 'Have you an
inward conviction?'" "If," he said, "the actual traces of poison are a
material proof of murder by poison, then a new paragraph must be added
to the Criminal Code--'Since, however, vegetable poisons leave no trace,
poisoning by such means may be committed with impunity.'" To poisoners
he would say in future: "Bunglers that you are, don't use arsenic or any
mineral poison; they leave traces; you will be found out. Use vegetable
poisons; poison your fathers, poison your mothers, poison all your
families, and their inheritance will be yours--fear nothing; you will go
unpunished! You have committed murder by poisoning, it is true; but the
corpus delicti will not be there because it can't be there!" This was
a case, he urged, of circumstantial evidence. "We have," he said, "gone
through a large number of facts. Of these there is not one that does not
go directly to the proof of poisoning, and that can only be explained on
the supposition of poisoning; whereas, if the theory of the defence
be admitted, all these facts, from the first to the last, become
meaningless and absurd. They can only be refuted by arguments or
explanations that are childish and ridiculous."

Castaing was defended by two advocates--Roussel, a schoolfellow of his,
and the famous Berryer, reckoned by some the greatest French orator
since Mirabeau. Both advocates were allowed to address the jury. Roussel
insisted on the importance of the corpus delicti. "The delictum," he
said, "is the effect, the guilty man merely the cause; it is useless to
deal with the cause if the effect is uncertain," and he cited a case
in which a woman had been sent for trial, charged with murdering her
husband; the moral proof of her guilt seemed conclusive, when suddenly
her husband appeared in court alive and well. The advocate made a good
deal of the fact that the remains of the draught prescribed by Dr.
Pigache, a spoonful of which Castaing had given to Auguste Ballet,
had been analysed and showed no trace of poison. Against this the
prosecution set the evidence of the chemist at Saint Cloud, who had made
up the prescription. He said that the same day he had made up a second
prescription similar to that of Dr. Pigache, but not made out for
Auguste Ballet, which contained, in addition to the other ingredients,
acetate of morphia. The original of this prescription he had given to a
friend of Castaing, who had come to his shop and asked him for it a few
days after Ballet's death. It would seem therefore that there had
been two bottles of medicine, one of which containing morphia had
disappeared.

M. Roussel combatted the suggestion that the family of Castaing were in
a state of indigence. He showed that his father had an income of 10,000
francs, while his two brothers were holding good positions, one as an
officer in the army, the other as a government official. The mistress
of Castaing he represented as enjoying an income of 5,000 francs.
He protested against the quantity of hearsay evidence that had been
admitted into the case. "In England," he said, "when a witness is
called, he is asked 'What have you seen?' If he can only testify to mere
talk, and hearsay, he is not heard." He quoted the concluding paragraph
of the will of Auguste Ballet as showing his friendly feeling towards
Castaing: "It is only after careful reflection that I have made
this final disposition of my property, in order to mark the sincere
friendship which I have never for one moment ceased to feel for MM.
Castaing, Briant and Leuchere, in order to recognise the faithful
loyalty of my servants, and deprive M. and Mme. Martignon, my
brother-in-law and sister, of all rights to which they might be legally
entitled on my death, fully persuaded in soul and conscience that, in
doing so, I am giving to each their just and proper due." "Is this,"
asked M. Roussel, "a document wrested by surprise from a weak man,
extorted by trickery? Is he not acting in the full exercise of his
faculties? He forgets no one, and justifies his conduct."

When M. Roussel came to the incident of the noisy cats and dogs at Saint
Cloud, he was as ingenious as the circumstances permitted: "A serious
charge engrosses public attention; men's minds are concentrated on
the large, broad aspects of the case; they are in a state of unnatural
excitement. They see only the greatness, the solemnity of the
accusation, and then, suddenly, in the midst of all that is of such
tragic and surpassing interest, comes this trivial fact about cats and
dogs. It makes an unfavourable impression, because it is dramatically
out of keeping with the tragedy of the story. But we are not here to
construct a drama. No, gentlemen, look at it merely as a trivial
incident of ordinary, everyday life, and you will see it in its proper
light." M. Roussel concluded by saying that Castaing's most eloquent
advocate, if he could have been present, would have been Auguste Ballet.
"If Providence had permitted him to enter this court, he would cry out
to you, 'Save my friend's life! His heart is undefiled! He is
innocent!'"

M. Roussel concluded his speech at ten o'clock on Sunday night, November
16. The next morning Berryer addressed the jury. His speech in defence
of Castaing is not considered one of his most successful efforts. He
gave personal testimony as to the taste of acetate of morphia. He said
that with the help of his own chemist he had put a quarter of a grain
of the acetate into a large spoonful of milk, and had found it so
insupportably bitter to the taste that he could not keep it in his
mouth. If, he contended, Ballet had been poisoned by tartar emetic, then
twelve grains given in milk would have given it an insipid taste, and
vomiting immediately after would have got rid of the poison. Later
investigations have shown that, in cases of antimonial poisoning,
vomiting does not necessarily get rid of all the poison, and the
convulsions in which Auguste Ballet died are symptomatic of poisoning
either by morphia or antimony. In conclusion, Berryer quoted the words
addressed by one of the Kings of France to his judges: "When God has not
vouchsafed clear proof of a crime, it is a sign that He does not wish
that man should determine it, but leaves its judgment to a higher
tribunal."

The Avocat-General, in reply, made a telling answer to M. Roussel's
attempt to minimise the importance of the cats and dogs: "He has spoken
of the drama of life, and of its ordinary everyday incidents. If there
is drama in this case, it is of Castaing's making. As to the ordinary
incidents of everyday life, a man buys poison, brings it to the bedside
of his sick friend, saying it is for experiments on cats and dogs, the
friend dies, the other, his sole heir, after foretelling his death,
takes possession of his keys, and proceeds to gather up the spoils--are
these ordinary incidents of every-day life?"

It was nine o'clock at night when the jury retired to consider their
verdict. They returned into court after two hours' deliberation. They
found the prisoner "Not Guilty" of the murder of Hippolyte Ballet,
"Guilty" of destroying his will, and "Guilty" by seven votes to five
of the murder of Auguste Ballet. Asked if he had anything to say before
judgment was given, Castaing, in a very loud voice, said "No; but I
shall know how to die, though I am the victim of ill-fortune, of fatal
circumstance. I shall go to meet my two friends. I am accused of having
treacherously murdered them. There is a Providence above us! If there
is such a thing as an immortal soul, I shall see Hippolyte and Auguste
Ballet again. This is no empty declamation; I don't ask for human pity"
(raising his hands to heaven), "I look to God's mercy, and shall go
joyfully to the scaffold. My conscience is clear. It will not reproach
me even when I feel" (putting his hands to his neck). "Alas! It is
easier to feel what I am feeling than to express what I dare not
express." (In a feeble voice): "You have desired my death; you have it!"
The judges retired to consider the sentence. The candles were guttering,
the light of the lamps was beginning to fade; the aspect of the court
grim and terrible. M. Roussel broke down and burst into tears. Castaing
leant over to his old schoolfellow: "Courage, Roussel," he said; "you
have always believed me innocent, and I am innocent. Embrace for me my
father, my mother, my brothers, my child." He turned to a group of young
advocates standing near: "And you, young people, who have listened to
my trial, attend also my execution; I shall be as firm then as I am now.
All I ask is to die soon. I should be ashamed to plead for mercy." The
judges returned. Castaing was condemned to death, and ordered to pay
100,000 francs damages to the family of Auguste Ballet.

Castaing was not ashamed to appeal to the Court of Cassation for a
revision of his trial, but on December 4 his appeal was rejected. Two
days later he was executed. He had attempted suicide by means of poison,
which one of his friends had brought to him in prison, concealed inside
a watch. His courage failed him at the last, and he met his death in a
state of collapse.

It is not often, happily, that a young man of gentle birth and good
education is a double murderer at twenty-six. And such a soft, humble,
insinuating young man too!--good to his mother, good to his mistress,
fond of his children, kind to his patients.

Yet this gentle creature can deliberately poison his two friends.

Was ever such a contradictory fellow?




Professor Webster


The best report of Webster's trial is that edited by Bemis. The
following tracts in the British Museum have been consulted by the
writer: "Appendix to the Webster Trial," Boston, 1850: "Thoughts on the
Conviction of Webster"; "The Boston Tragedy," by W. E. Bigelow.


It is not often that the gaunt spectre of murder invades the cloistered
calm of academic life. Yet such a strange and unwonted tragedy befell
Harvard University in the year 1849, when John W. Webster, Professor of
Chemistry, took the life of Dr. George Parkman, a distinguished citizen
of Boston. The scene of the crime, the old Medical School, now a Dental
Hospital, is still standing, or was when the present writer visited
Boston in 1907. It is a large and rather dreary red-brick, three-storied
building, situated in the lower part of the city, flanked on its west
side by the mud flats leading down to the Charles River. The first
floor consists of two large rooms, separated from each other by the main
entrance hall, which is approached by a flight of steps leading up
from the street level. Of these two rooms, the left, as you face the
building, is fitted up as a lecture-room. In the year 1849 it was
the lecture-room of Professor Webster. Behind the lecture-room is a
laboratory, known as the upper laboratory, communicating by a private
staircase with the lower laboratory, which occupies the left wing of the
ground floor. A small passage, entered by a door on the left-hand side
of the front of the building, separated this lower laboratory from the
dissecting-room, an out-house built on to the west wall of the college,
but now demolished. From this description it will be seen that any
person, provided with the necessary keys, could enter the college by
the side-door near the dissecting room on the ground floor, and pass
up through the lower and upper laboratory into Professor Webster's
lecture-room without entering any other part of the building. The
Professor of Chemistry, by locking the doors of his lecture-rooms and
the lower laboratory, could, if he wished, make himself perfectly secure
against intrusion, and come and go by the side-door without attracting
much attention. These rooms are little altered at the present time from
their arrangement in 1849. The lecture-room and laboratory are used for
the same purposes to-day; the lower laboratory, a dismal chamber, now
disused and somewhat rearranged, is still recognisable as the scene of
the Professor's chemical experiments.

On the second floor of the hospital is a museum, once anatomical, now
dental. One of the principal objects of interest in this museum is a
plaster cast of the jaws of Dr. George Parkman, made by a well-known
dentist of Boston, Dr. Keep, in the year 1846. In that year the
new medical college was formally opened. Dr. Parkman, a wealthy and
public-spirited citizen of Boston, had given the piece of land, on which
the college had been erected. He had been invited to be present at the
opening ceremony. In anticipation of being asked to make a speech on
this occasion Dr. Parkman, whose teeth were few and far between, had
himself fitted by Dr. Keep with a complete set of false teeth. Oliver
Wendell Holmes, then Professor of Anatomy at Harvard, who was present at
the opening of the college, noticed how very nice and white the doctor's
teeth appeared to be. It was the discovery of the remains of these same
admirable teeth three years later in the furnace in Professor Webster's
lower laboratory that led to the conviction of Dr. Parkman's murderer.
By a strange coincidence the doctor met his death in the very college
which his generosity had helped to build. Though to-day the state of the
college has declined from the medical to the dental, his memory still
lives within its walls by the cast of his jaws preserved in the dental
museum as a relic of a case, in which the art of dentistry did signal
service to the cause of justice.

In his lifetime Dr. Parkman was a well-known figure in the streets of
Boston. His peculiar personal appearance and eccentric habits combined
to make him something of a character. As he walked through the streets
he presented a remarkable appearance. He was exceptionally tall, longer
in the body than the legs; his lower jaw protruded some half an inch
beyond the upper; he carried his body bent forward from the small of his
back. He seemed to be always in a hurry; so impetuous was he that, if
his horse did not travel fast enough to please him, he would get off its
back, and, leaving the steed in the middle of the street, hasten on his
way on foot. A just and generous man, he was extremely punctilious in
matters of business, and uncompromising in his resentment of any form
of falsehood or deceit. It was the force of his resentment in such a
case that cost him his life.

The doctor was unfailingly punctual in taking his meals. Dr. Kingsley,
during the fourteen years he had acted as his agent, had always been
able to make sure of finding him at home at his dinner hour, half-past
two o'clock. But on Friday, November 23, 1849, to his surprise and
that of his family, Dr. Parkman did not come home to dinner; and their
anxiety was increased when the day passed, and there was still no sign
of the doctor's return. Inquiries were made. From these it appeared that
Dr. Parkman had been last seen alive between one and two o'clock on the
Friday afternoon. About half-past one he had visited a grocer's shop
in Bridge Street, made some purchases, and left behind him a paper bag
containing a lettuce, which, he said, he would call for on his way home.
Shortly before two o'clock he was seen by a workman, at a distance of
forty or fifty feet from the Medical College, going in that direction.
From that moment all certain trace of him was lost. His family knew that
he had made an appointment for half-past one that day, but where and
with whom they did not know. As a matter of fact, Professor John
W. Webster had appointed that hour to receive Dr. Parkman in his
lecture-room in the Medical College.

John W. Webster was at this time Professor of Chemistry and Mineralogy
in Harvard University, a Doctor of Medicine and a Member of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences, the London Geological Society and the St.
Petersburg Mineralogical Society. He was the author of several works
on geology and chemistry, a man now close on sixty years of age. His
countenance was genial, his manner mild and unassuming; he was clean
shaven, wore spectacles, and looked younger than his years.

Professor Webster was popular with a large circle of friends. To those
who liked him he was a man of pleasing and attractive manners, artistic
in his tastes--he was especially fond of music--not a very profound
or remarkable chemist, but a pleasant social companion. His temper was
hasty and irritable. Spoilt in his boyhood as an only child, he was
self-willed and self-indulgent. His wife and daughters were better liked
than he. By unfriendly criticics{sic} the Professor was thought to be
selfish, fonder of the good things of the table and a good cigar than
was consistent with his duty to his family or the smallness of his
income. His father, a successful apothecary at Boston, had died in 1833,
leaving John, his only son, a fortune of some L10,000. In rather less
than ten years Webster had run through the whole of his inheritance. He
had built himself a costly mansion in Cambridge, spent a large sum
of money in collecting minerals, and delighted to exercise lavish
hospitality. By living consistently beyond his means he found himself
at length entirely dependent on his professional earnings. These were
small. His salary as Professor was fixed at L240 a year;(15) the rest of
his income he derived from the sale of tickets for his lectures at the
Medical College. That income was insufficient to meet his wants.


     (15) I have given these sums of money in their English equivalents
in order to give the reader an idea of the smallness of the sum which
brought about the tragedy.


As early as 1842 he had borrowed L80 from his friend Dr. Parkman. It was
to Parkman's good offices that he owed his appointment as a Professor at
Harvard; they had entered the University as under-graduates in the same
year. Up to 1847 Webster had repaid Parkman twenty pounds of his debt;
but, in that year he found it necessary to raise a further loan of L490,
which was subscribed by a few friends, among them Parkman himself. As
a security for the repayment of this loan, the professor executed a
mortgage on his valuable collection of minerals in favour of Parkman.
In the April of 1848 the Professor's financial difficulties became so
serious that he was threatened with an execution in his house. In this
predicament he went to a Mr. Shaw, Dr. Parkman's brother-in-law, and
begged a loan of L240, offering him as security a bill of sale on the
collection of minerals, which he had already mortgaged to Parkman. Shaw
accepted the security, and lent the money. Shaw would seem to have had
a good deal of sympathy with Webster's embarrassments; he considered the
Professor's income very inadequate to his position, and showed himself
quite ready at a later period to waive his debt altogether.

Dr. Parkman was a less easy-going creditor. Forbearing and patient as
long as he was dealt with fairly, he was merciless where he thought
he detected trickery or evasion. His forbearance and his patience were
utterly exhausted, his anger and indignation strongly aroused, when he
learnt from Shaw that Webster had given him as security for his debt
a bill of sale on the collection of minerals, already mortgaged to
himself. From the moment of the discovery of this act of dishonesty
on the part of Webster, Parkman pursued his debtor with unrelenting
severity.

He threatened him with an action at law; he said openly that he was
neither an honourable, honest, nor upright man; he tried to appropriate
to the payment of his debt the fees for lectures which Mr. Pettee,
Webster's agent, collected on the Professor's behalf. He even visited
Webster in his lecture-room and sat glaring at him in the front row
of seats, while the Professor was striving under these somewhat
unfavourable conditions to impart instruction to his pupils--a
proceeding which the Doctor's odd cast of features must have aggravated
in no small degree.

It was early in November that Parkman adopted these aggressive tactics.
On the 19th of that month Webster and the janitor of the College,
Ephraim Littlefield, were working in the upper laboratory. It was dark;
they had lit candles. Webster was reading a chemical book. As he looked
up from the book he saw Parkman standing in the doorway leading from
the lecture-room. "Dr. Webster, are you ready for me to-night?" asked
Parkman. "No," replied the other, "I am not ready to-night." After a
little further conversation in regard to the mortgage, Parkman departed
with the ominous remark, "Doctor, something must be done to-morrow."

Unfortunately the Professor was not in a position to do anything. He had
no means sufficient to meet his creditor's demands; and that creditor
was unrelenting. On the 22nd Parkman rode into Cambridge, where Webster
lived, to press him further, but failed to find him. Webster's patience,
none too great at any time, was being sorely tried. To whom could
he turn? What further resource was open to him? There was none. He
determined to see his creditor once more. At 8 o'clock on the morning
of Friday the 23rd, Webster called at Dr. Parkman's house and made the
appointment for their meeting at the Medical College at half-past
one, to which the Doctor had been seen hastening just before his
disappearance. At nine o'clock the same morning Pettee, the agent, had
called on the Professor at the College and paid him by cheque a balance
of L28 due on his lecture tickets, informing him at the same time that,
owing to the trouble with Dr. Parkman, he must decline to receive any
further sums of money on his behalf. Webster replied that Parkman was
a nervous, excitable man, subject to mental aberrations, but he added,
"You will have no further trouble with Dr. Parkman, for I have settled
with him." It is difficult to see how the Professor could have settled,
or proposed to settle, with his creditor on that day. A balance of L28
at his bank, and the L18 which Mr. Pettee had paid to him that morning,
represented the sum of Professor Webster's fortune on Friday, November
23, 1849.

Since the afternoon of that day the search for the missing Parkman had
been unremitting. On the Saturday his friends communicated with the
police. On Sunday hand-bills were issued stating the fact of the
Doctor's disappearance, and on Monday, the 26th, a description and
the offer of a considerable reward for the discovery of his body were
circulated both in and out of the city. Two days later a further reward
was offered. But these efforts were fruitless. The only person who gave
any information beyond that afforded by those who had seen the Doctor in
the streets on the morning of his disappearance, was Professor Webster.
About four o'clock on the Sunday afternoon the Professor called at the
house of the Revd. Francis Parkman, the Doctor's brother. They were
intimate friends. Webster had for a time attended Parkman's chapel; and
Mr. Parkman had baptised the Professor's grand-daughter. On this Sunday
afternoon Mr. Parkman could not help remarking Webster's peculiar
manner. With a bare greeting and no expression of condolence with the
family's distress, his visitor entered abruptly and nervously on the
object of his errand. He had called, he said, to tell Mr. Parkman that
he had seen his brother at the Medical College on Friday afternoon, that
he had paid him L90 which he owed him, and that the Doctor had in the
course of their interview taken out a paper and dashed his pen
through it, presumably as an acknowledgment of the liquidation of the
Professor's debt. Having communicated this intelligence to the somewhat
astonished gentleman, Webster left him as abruptly as he had come.

Another relative of Dr. Parkman, his nephew, Mr. Parkman Blake, in the
course of inquiries as to his uncle's fate, thought it right to see
Webster. Accordingly he went to the college on Monday, the 26th, about
eleven o'clock in the morning. Though not one of his lecture days, the
janitor Littlefield informed him that the Professor was in his room. The
door of the lecture-room, however, was found to be locked, and it was
only after considerable delay that Mr. Blake gained admittance. As he
descended the steps to the floor of the lecture-room Webster, dressed in
a working suit of blue overalls and wearing on his head a smoking cap,
came in from the back door. Instead of advancing to greet his visitor,
he stood fixed to the spot, and waited, as if defensively, for Mr.
Blake to speak. In answer to Mr. Blake's questions Webster described
his interview with Dr. Parkman on the Friday afternoon. He gave a
very similar account of it to that he had already given to Mr. Francis
Parkman. He added that at the end of their interview he had asked the
Doctor for the return of the mortgage, to which the latter had replied,
"I haven't it with me, but I will see it is properly cancelled." Mr.
Blake asked Webster if he could recollect in what form of money it
was that he had paid Dr. Parkman. Webster answered that he could only
recollect a bill of L20 on the New Zealand Bank: pressed on this point,
he seemed to rather avoid any further inquiries. Mr. Blake left him,
dissatisfied with the result of his visit.

One particular in Webster's statement was unquestionably strange, if
not incredible. He had, he said, paid Parkman a sum of L90, which he
had given him personally, and represented the Doctor as having at their
interview promised to cancel the mortgage on the collection of minerals
which Webster had given as security for the loan of L490 that had been
subscribed by Parkman and four of his friends. Now L120 of this loan
was still owing. If Webster's statement were true, Parkman had a perfect
right to cancel Webster's personal debt to himself; but he had no right
to cancel entirely the mortgage on the minerals, so long as money due to
others on that mortgage was yet unpaid. Was it conceivable that one so
strict and scrupulous in all monetary transactions as Parkman would have
settled his own personal claim, and then sacrificed in so discreditable
a manner the claims of others, for the satisfaction of which he had made
himself responsible?

There was yet another singular circumstance. On Saturday, the 24th, the
day after his settlement with Parkman, Webster paid into his own account
at the Charles River Bank the cheque for L18, lecture fees, handed
over to him by the agent Pettee just before Dr. Parkman's visit on the
Friday. This sum had not apparently gone towards the making up of the
L90, which Webster said that he had paid to Parkman that day. The
means by which Webster had been enabled to settle this debt became more
mysterious than ever.

On Tuesday, November 27, the Professor received three other visitors in
his lecture-room. These were police officers who, in the course of
their search for the missing man, felt it their duty to examine, however
perfunctorily, the Medical College. With apologies to the Professor,
they passed through his lecture room to the laboratory at the back,
and from thence, down the private stairs, past a privy, into the lower
laboratory. As they passed the privy one of the officers asked what
place it was. "Dr. Webster's private lavatory," replied the janitor, who
was conducting them. At that moment Webster's voice called them away
to examine the store-room in the lower laboratory, and after a cursory
examination the officers departed.

The janitor, Ephraim Littlefield, did not take the opportunity afforded
him by the visit of the police officers to impart to them the feelings
of uneasiness; which the conduct of Professor Webster during the last
three days had excited in his breast. There were circumstances in the
Professor's behaviour which could not fail to attract the attention of
a man, whose business throughout the day was to dust and sweep
the College, light the fires and overlook generally the order and
cleanliness of the building.

Littlefield, it will be remembered, had seen Dr. Parkman on the Monday
before his disappearance, when he visited Webster at the College, and
been present at the interview, in the course of which the Doctor told
Webster that "something must be done." That Monday morning Webster asked
Littlefield a number of questions about the dissecting-room vault, which
was situated just outside the door of the lower laboratory. He asked
how it was built, whether a light could be put into it, and how it was
reached for the purpose of repair. On the following Thursday, the day
before Parkman's disappearance, the Professor told Littlefield to get
him a pint of blood from the Massachusetts Hospital; he said that
he wanted it for an experiment. On the morning of Friday, the day of
Parkman's disappearance, Littlefield informed the Professor that he had
been unsuccessful in his efforts to get the blood, as they had not been
bleeding anyone lately at the hospital. The same morning Littlefield
found to his surprise a sledge-hammer behind the door of the Professor's
back room; he presumed that it had been left there by masons, and took
it down to the lower laboratory. This sledge-hammer Littlefield never
saw again. About a quarter to two that afternoon Littlefield, standing
at the front door, after his dinner, saw Dr. Parkman coming towards
the College. At two o'clock Littlefield went up to Dr. Oliver Wendell
Holmes' room, immediately above Professor Webster's, to help the Doctor
to clear his table after his lecture, which was the last delivered that
day. About a quarter of an hour later he let Dr. Holmes out, locked the
front door and began to clear out the stoves in the other lecture-rooms.
When he reached Webster's he was surprised to find that both doors, that
of the lecture room and that of the lower laboratory, were either locked
or bolted. He could hear nothing but the running of water in one of the
sinks. About half-past five Littlefield saw the Professor coming down
the back stairs with a lighted candle in his hand. Webster blew out the
candle and left the building. Late that night Littlefield again tried
the Professor's doors; they were still fastened. The janitor was
surprised at this, as he had never known such a thing to happen before.

On Saturday, the 24th, though not lecturing that day, the Professor came
to the College in the morning. He told Littlefield to light the stove
in the lower laboratory. When Littlefield made to pass from the
lecture-room into the Professor's private room at the back, and so down
by the private stairs to the lower laboratory, the Professor stopped him
and told him to go round by the door in front of the building. The whole
of that day and Sunday, the Professor's doors remained fast. On Sunday
evening at sunset Littlefield, who was talking with a friend in North
Grove Street, the street that faces the College, was accosted by
Webster. The Professor asked him if he recollected Parkman's visit
to the College on Friday, the 23rd, and, on his replying in the
affirmative, the Professor described to him their interview and the
repayment of his debt. Littlefield was struck during their conversation
by the uneasiness of the Professor's bearing; contrary to his habit he
seemed unable to look him in the face, his manner was confused, his face
pale.

During the whole of Monday, except for a visit from Mr. Parkman Blake,
Professor Webster was again locked alone in his laboratory. Neither
that night, nor early Tuesday morning, could Littlefield get into
the Professor's rooms to perform his customary duties. On Tuesday the
Professor lectured at twelve o'clock, and later received the visit of
the police officers that has been described already. At four o'clock
that afternoon, the Professor's bell rang. Littlefield answered it.
The Professor asked the janitor whether he had bought his turkey for
Thanksgiving Day, which was on the following Thursday. Littlefield said
that he had not done so yet. Webster then handed him an order on his
provision dealer. "Take that," he said, "and get a nice turkey; perhaps
I shall want you to do some odd jobs for me." Littlefield thanked him,
and said that he would be glad to do anything for him that he could. The
janitor was the more surprised at Webster's generosity on this occasion,
as this turkey was the first present he had received at the Professor's
hands during the seven years he had worked in the College. Littlefield
saw the Professor again about half-past six that evening as the latter
was leaving the College. The janitor asked him if he wanted any more
fires lighted in his rooms, because owing to the holidays there were
to be no further lectures that week. Webster said that he did not, and
asked Littlefield whether he were a freemason. The janitor said "Yes,"
and with that they parted.

Littlefield was curious. The mysterious activity of the Professor of
Chemistry seemed to him more than unusual. His perplexity was increased
on the following day. Though on account of the holidays all work had
been suspended at the College for the remainder of the week, Webster was
again busy in his room early Wednesday morning. Littlefield could hear
him moving about. In vain did the janitor look through the keyhole, bore
a hole in the door, peep under it; all he could get was a sight of the
Professor's feet moving about the laboratory. Perplexity gave way to
apprehension when in the course of the afternoon Littlefield discovered
that the outer wall of the lower laboratory was so hot that he could
hardly bear to place his hand on it. On the outer side of this wall was
a furnace sometimes used by the Professor in his chemical experiments.
How came it to be so heated? The Professor had told Littlefield on
Tuesday that he should not be requiring any fires during the remainder
of the week.

The janitor determined to resolve his suspicions. He climbed up to the
back windows of the lower laboratory, found one of them unfastened, and
let himself in. But, beyond evidences of the considerable fires that had
been kept burning during the last few days, Littlefield saw nothing
to excite peculiar attention. Still he was uneasy. Those he met in
the street kept on telling him that Dr. Parkman would be found in the
Medical College. He felt that he himself was beginning to be suspected
of having some share in the mystery, whilst in his own mind he became
more certain every day that the real solution lay within the walls
of Professor Webster's laboratory. His attention had fixed itself
particularly on the lavatory at the foot of the stairs connecting the
upper and lower laboratories. This room he found to be locked and the
key, a large one, had disappeared. He recollected that when the police
officers had paid their visit to the college, the Professor had
diverted their attention as they were about to inspect this room. The
only method by which, unknown to the Professor and without breaking open
the door, Littlefield could examine the vault of this retiring room was
by going down to the basement floor of the college and digging a hole
through the wall into the vault itself. This he determined to do.

On Thursday, Thanksgiving Day, Littlefield commenced operations with
a hatchet and a chisel. Progress was slow, as that evening he had been
invited to attend a festal gathering. On Friday the janitor, before
resuming work, acquainted two of the Professors of the college with
his proposed investigation, and received their sanction. As Webster,
however, was going constantly in and out of his rooms, he could make
little further progress that day. The Professor had come into town early
in the morning.

Before going to the college he purchased some fish-hooks and gave orders
for the making of a strong tin box with firm handles, a foot and a half
square and a little more than a foot in depth; during the rest of the
day he had been busy in his rooms until he left the college about four
o'clock. Not till then was the watchful janitor able to resume his
labours. Armed with a crowbar, he worked vigorously until he succeeded
in penetrating the wall sufficiently to admit a light into the vault of
the lavatory. The first objects which the light revealed to his eyes,
were the pelvis of a man and two parts of a human leg.

Leaving his wife in charge of the remains, Littlefield went immediately
to the house of Professor Bigelow, and informed him of the result of
his search. They returned to the college some twenty minutes later,
accompanied by the City Marshal. The human remains--a pelvis, a thigh
and a leg--were taken out of the vault, and on a further search some
pieces of bone were removed from one of the furnaces in the lower
laboratory. The City Marshal at once dispatched three of his officers to
Cambridge, to the house of Professor Webster.

To his immediate circle of friends and relations the conduct of
the Professor during this eventful week had betrayed no unwonted
discomposure or disturbance of mind. His evenings had been spent either
at the house of friends, or at his own, playing whist, or reading
Milton's "Allegro" and "Penseroso" to his wife and daughters. On Friday
evening, about eight o'clock, as the Professor was saying good-bye to a
friend on the steps of his house at Cambridge, the three police officers
drove up to the door and asked him to accompany them to the Medical
College. It was proposed, they said, to make a further search there that
evening, and his presence was considered advisable. Webster assented
immediately, put on his boots, his hat and coat, and got into the hired
coach. As they drove towards the city, Webster spoke to the officers
of Parkman's disappearance, and suggested that they should stop at the
house of a lady who, he said, could give them some peculiar information
on that subject. As they entered Boston, he remarked that they were
taking the wrong direction for reaching the college. One of the officers
replied that the driver might be "green," but that he would find his
way to the college in time. At length the coach stopped. One of the
officers alighted, and invited his companions to follow him into the
office of the Leverett Street Jail. They obeyed. The Professor asked
what it all meant; he was informed that he must consider himself
in custody, charged with the murder of Dr. George Parkman. Webster,
somewhat taken aback, desired that word should be sent to his family,
but was dissuaded from his purpose for the time being. He was searched,
and among other articles taken from him was a key some four or five
inches long; it was the missing lavatory key. Whilst one of the officers
withdrew to make out a mittimus, the Professor asked one of the others
if they had found Dr. Parkman. The officer begged him not to question
him. "You might tell me something about it," pleaded Webster. "Where did
they find him? Did they find the whole body? Oh, my children! What will
they do? What will they think of me? Where did you get the information?"
The officers asked him if anybody had access to his apartments but
himself. "Nobody," he replied, "but the porter who makes the fire."
Then, after a pause, he exclaimed: "That villain! I am a ruined man."
He was walking up and down wringing his hands, when one of the officers
saw him put one hand into his waistcoat pocket, and raise it to his
lips. A few moments later the unhappy man was seized with violent
spasms. He was unable to stand, and was laid down in one of the cells.
From this distressing state he was roused shortly before eleven, to be
taken to the college. He was quite incapable of walking, and had to be
supported by two of the officers. He was present there while his rooms
were searched; but his state was painful in the extreme. He asked for
water, but trembled so convulsively that he could only snap at the
tumbler like a dog; his limbs were rigid; tears and sweat poured down
his cheeks. On the way back to the jail, one of the officers, moved
by his condition, expressed his pity for him. "Do you pity me? Are you
sorry for me? What for?" asked Webster. "To see you so excited," replied
the officer. "Oh! that's it," said the Professor.

The whole night through the prisoner lay without moving, and not until
the following afternoon were his limbs relaxed sufficiently to allow of
his sitting up. As his condition improved, he grew more confident. "That
is no more Dr. Parkman's body," he said, "than mine. How in the world
it came there I don't know," and he added: "I never liked the looks of
Littlefield the janitor; I opposed his coming there all I could."

In the meantime a further examination of the Professor's rooms on
Saturday had resulted in the discovery, in a tea-chest in the lower
laboratory, of a thorax, the left thigh of a leg, and a hunting knife
embedded in tan and covered over with minerals; some portions of bone
and teeth were found mixed with the slag and cinders of one of the
furnaces; also some fish-hooks and a quantity of twine, the latter
identical with a piece of twine that had been tied round the thigh found
in the chest.

Two days later the Professor furnished unwittingly some additional
evidence against himself. On the Monday evening after his arrest he
wrote from prison to one of his daughters the following letter:


"MY DEAREST MARIANNE,--I wrote Mama yesterday; I had a good sleep last
night, and dreamt of you all. I got my clothes off, for the first time,
and awoke in the morning quite hungry. It was a long time before my
first breakfast from Parker's came; and it was relished, I can assure
you. At one o'clock I was notified that I must appear at the court room.
All was arranged with great regard to my comfort, and went off better
than I had anticipated.

"On my return I had a bit of turkey and rice from Parker's. They send
much more than I can eat, and I have directed the steward to distribute
the surplus to any poor ones here.

"If you will send me a small canister of tea, I can make my own. A
little pepper I may want some day. I would send the dirty clothes, but
they were taken to dry. Tell Mama NOT TO OPEN the little bundle I gave
her the other day, but to keep it just as she received it. With many
kisses to you all. Good night!--From your affectionate

"FATHER."

"P.S.--My tongue troubles me yet very much, and I must have bitten it
in my distress the other night; it is painful and swollen, affecting my
speech. Had Mama better send for Nancy? I think so; or Aunt Amelia."

"Couple of coloured neck handkerchiefs, one Madras."


This letter, which shows an anxiety about his personal comfort singular
in one so tragically situated, passed through the hands of the keeper
of the jail. He was struck by the words underlined, "NOT TO OPEN,"
in regard to the small bundle confided to Mrs. Webster. He called the
attention of the police to this phrase. They sent immediately an officer
armed with a search warrant to the Professor's house. He received from
Mrs. Webster among other papers a package which, on being opened,
was found to contain the two notes given by Webster to Parkman as
acknowledgments of his indebtedness to him in 1842 and 1847, and a paper
showing the amount of his debts to Parkman in 1847. There were daubs and
erasures made across these documents, and across one was written twice
over the word "paid." All these evidences of payments and cancellations
appeared on examination to be in the handwriting of the Professor.

After an inquest lasting nine days the coroner's jury declared the
remains found in the college to be those of Dr. George Parkman, and that
the deceased had met his death at the hands of Professor J. W. Webster.
The prisoner waived his right to a magisterial investigation, and on
January 26, 1850, the Grand Jury returned a true bill. But it was not
until March 17 that the Professor's trial opened before the Supreme
Court of Massachusetts. The proceedings were conducted with that
dignity and propriety which we look for in the courts of that State.
The principal features in the defence were an attempt to impugn the
testimony of the janitor Littlefield, and to question the possibility
of the identification of the remains of Parkman's teeth. There was a
further attempt to prove that the deceased had been seen by a number
of persons in the streets of Boston on the Friday afternoon, after his
visit to the Medical College. The witness Littlefield was unshaken by a
severe cross-examination. The very reluctance with which Dr. Keep
gave his fatal evidence, and the support given to his conclusions
by distinguished testimony told strongly in favour of the absolute
trustworthiness of his statements. The evidence called to prove that
the murdered man had been seen alive late on Friday afternoon was highly
inconclusive.

Contrary to the advice of his counsel, Webster addressed the jury
himself. He complained of the conduct of his case, and enumerated
various points that his counsel had omitted to make, which he conceived
to be in his favour. The value of his statements may be judged by the
fact that he called God to witness that he had not written any one of
the anonymous letters, purporting to give a true account of the doctor's
fate, which had been received by the police at the time of Parkman's
disappearance. After his condemnation Webster confessed to the
authorship of at least one of them.

The jury retired at eight o'clock on the eleventh day of the trial. They
would seem to have approached their duty in a most solemn and devout
spirit, and it was with the greatest reluctance and after some searching
of heart that they brought themselves to find the prisoner guilty of
wilful murder. On hearing their verdict, the Professor sank into a seat,
and, dropping his head, rubbed his eyes behind his spectacles as if
wiping away tears. On the following morning the Chief Justice sentenced
him to death after a well-meaning speech of quite unnecessary length and
elaboration, at the conclusion of which the condemned man wept freely.

A petition for a writ of error having been dismissed, the Professor in
July addressed a petition for clemency to the Council of the State. Dr.
Putnam, who had been attending Webster in the jail, read to the Council
a confession which he had persuaded the prisoner to make. According to
this statement Webster had, on the Friday afternoon, struck Parkman on
the head with a heavy wooden stick in a wild moment of rage, induced by
the violent taunts and threats of his creditor. Appalled by his deed,
he had in panic locked himself in his room, and proceeded with desperate
haste to dismember the body; he had placed it for that purpose in the
sink in his back room, through which was running a constant stream of
water that carried away the blood. Some portions of the body he had
burnt in the furnace; those in the lavatory and the tea-chest he had
concealed there, until he should have had an opportunity of getting rid
of them.

In this statement Professor Webster denied all premeditation. Dr. Putnam
asked him solemnly whether he had not, immediately before the crime,
meditated at any time on the advantages that would accrue to him
from Parkman's death. Webster replied "Never, before God!" He had, he
protested, no idea of doing Parkman an injury until the bitter tongue
of the latter provoked him. "I am irritable and violent," he said, "a
quickness and brief violence of temper has been the besetting sin of my
life. I was an only child, much indulged, and I have never secured the
control over my passions that I ought to have acquired early; and the
consequence is--all this!" He denied having told Parkman that he was
going to settle with him that afternoon, and said that he had asked him
to come to the college with the sole object of pleading with him for
further indulgence. He explained his convulsive seizure at the time
of his arrest by his having taken a dose of strychnine, which he had
carried in his pocket since the crime. In spite of these statements and
the prayers of the unfortunate man's wife and daughters, who, until his
confession to Dr. Putnam, had believed implicity in his innocence, the
Council decided that the law must take its course, and fixed August 30
as the day of execution.

The Professor resigned himself to his fate. He sent for Littlefield and
his wife, and expressed his regret for any injustice he had done them:
"All you said was true. You have misrepresented nothing." Asked by the
sheriff whether he was to understand from some of his expressions that
he contemplated an attempt at suicide, "Why should I?" he replied,
"all the proceedings in my case have been just... and it is just that
I should die upon the scaffold in accordance with that sentence."
"Everybody is right," he said to the keeper of the jail, "and I am
wrong. And I feel that, if the yielding up of my life to the injured
law will atone, even in part, for the crime I have committed, that is a
consolation."

In a letter to the Reverend Francis Parkman he expressed deep contrition
for his guilt. He added one sentence which may perhaps fairly express
the measure of premeditation that accompanied his crime. "I had never,"
he wrote, "until the two or three last interviews with your brother,
felt towards him anything but gratitude for his many acts of kindness
and friendship."

Professor Webster met his death with fortitude and resignation. That he
deserved his fate few will be inclined to deny. The attempt to procure
blood, the questions about the dissecting-room vault, the appointment
made with Parkman at the college, the statement to Pettee, all point to
some degree of premeditation, or at least would make it appear that the
murder of Parkman had been considered by him as a possible eventuality.
His accusation of Littlefield deprives him of a good deal of sympathy.
On the other hand, the age and position of Webster, the aggravating
persistency of Parkman, his threats and denunciations, coupled with his
own shortness of temper, make it conceivable that he may have killed his
victim on a sudden and overmastering provocation, in which case he had
better at once have acknowledged his crime instead of making a repulsive
attempt to conceal it. But for the evidence of Dr. Keep he would
possibly have escaped punishment altogether. Save for the portions
of his false teeth, there was not sufficient evidence to identify the
remains found in the college as those of Parkman. Without these teeth
the proof of the corpus delicti would have been incomplete, and so
afforded Webster a fair chance of acquittal.




The Mysterious Mr. Holmes


"The Holmes-Pitezel Case," by F. B. Geyer, 1896; "Holmes' Own Story,"
Philadelphia, 1895; and "Celebrated Criminal Cases of America," by T. S.
Duke, San Francisco, are the authorities for this account of the case.



I

HONOUR AMONGST THIEVES

In the year 1894 Mr. Smith, a carpenter, of Philadelphia, had patented a
new saw-set. Wishing to make some money out of his invention, Mr. Smith
was attracted by the sign:

B. F. PERRY

PATENTS BOUGHT AND SOLD

which he saw stretched across the window of a two-storied house, 1,316
Callowhill Street. He entered the house and made the acquaintance of Mr.
Perry, a tall, dark, bony man, to whom he explained the merits of his
invention. Perry listened with interest, and asked for a model. In the
meantime he suggested that Smith should do some carpenter's work for him
in the house. Smith agreed, and on August 22, while at work there saw a
man enter the house and go up with Perry to a room on the second story.

A few days later Smith called at Callowhill Street to ask Perry about
the sale of the patent. He waited half an hour in the shop below, called
out to Perry who, he thought, might be in the rooms above, received no
answer and went away. Next day, September 4, Smith returned, found the
place just as he had left it the day before; called Perry again, but
again got no answer. Surprised, he went upstairs, and in the back room
of the second story the morning sunshine, streaming through the window,
showed him the dead body of a man, his face charred beyond recognition,
lying with his feet to the window and his head to the door. There was
evidence of some sort of explosion: a broken bottle that had contained
an inflammable substance, a broken pipe filled with tobacco, and a burnt
match lay by the side of the body.

The general appearance of the dead man answered to that of B. F. Perry.
A medical examination of the body showed that death had been sudden,
that there had been paralysis of the involuntary muscles, and that the
stomach, besides showing symptoms of alcoholic irritation, emitted a
strong odour of chloroform. An inquest was held, and a verdict returned
that B. F. Perry had died of congestion of the lungs caused by the
inhalation of flame or chloroform. After lying in the mortuary for
eleven days the body was buried.

In the meantime the Philadelphia branch of the Fidelity Mutual Life
Association had received a letter from one Jephtha D. Howe, an attorney
at St. Louis, stating that the deceased B. F. Perry was Benjamin F.
Pitezel of that city, who had been insured in their office for a sum of
ten thousand dollars. The insurance had been effected in Chicago in the
November of 1893. Mr. Howe proposed to come to Philadelphia with some
members of the Pitezel family to identify the remains. Referring to
their Chicago branch, the insurance company found that the only person
who would seem to have known Pitezel when in that city, was a certain
H. H. Holmes, living at Wilmette, Illinois. They got into communication
with Mr. Holmes, and forwarded to him a cutting from a newspaper, which
stated erroneously that the death of B. F. Perry had taken place in
Chicago.

On September 18 they received a letter from Mr. Holmes, in which he
offered what assistance he could toward the identification of B. F.
Perry as B. F. Pitezel. He gave the name of a dentist in Chicago who
would be able to recognise teeth which he had made for Pitezel, and
himself furnished a description of the man, especially of a malformation
of the knee and a warty growth on the back of the neck by which he could
be further identified. Mr. Holmes offered, if his expenses were paid, to
come to Chicago to view the body. Two days later he wrote again saying
that he had seen by other papers that Perry's death had taken place in
Philadelphia and not in Chicago, and that as he had to be in Baltimore
in a day or two, he would run over to Philadelphia and visit the office
of the Fidelity Life Association.

On September 20 the assiduous Mr. Holmes called at the office of the
Association in Philadelphia, inquired anxiously about the nature and
cause of Perry's death, gave again a description of him and, on learning
that Mr. Howe, the attorney from St. Louis, was about to come to
Philadelphia to represent the widow, Mrs. Pitezel, and complete the
identification, said that he would return to give the company any
further help he could in the matter. The following day Mr. Jephtha D.
Howe, attorney of St. Louis, arrived in Philadelphia, accompanied by
Alice Pitezel, a daughter of the deceased. Howe explained that Pitezel
had taken the name of Perry owing to financial difficulties. The company
said that they accepted the fact that Perry and Pitezel were one and the
same man, but were not convinced that the body was Pitezel's body.
The visit of Holmes was mentioned. Howe said that he did not know Mr.
Holmes, but would be willing to meet him. At this moment Holmes arrived
at the office. He was introduced to Howe as a stranger, and recognised
as a friend by Alice Pitezel, a shy, awkward girl of fourteen or fifteen
years of age. It was then arranged that all the parties should meet
again next day to identify, if possible, the body, which had been
disinterred for that purpose.

The unpleasant duty of identifying the rapidly decomposing remains was
greatly curtailed by the readiness of Mr. Holmes. When the party met on
the 22nd at the Potter's Field, where the body had been disinterred and
laid out, the doctor present was unable to find the distinctive marks
which would show Perry and Pitezel to have been the same man. Holmes at
once stepped into the breach, took off his coat, rolled up his sleeves,
put on the rubber gloves, and taking a surgeon's knife from his pocket,
cut off the wart at the back of the neck, showed the injury to the
leg, and revealed also a bruised thumbnail which had been another
distinctive mark of Pitezel. The body was then covered up all but
the teeth; the girl Alice was brought in, and she said that the teeth
appeared to be like those of her father. The insurance company declared
themselves satisfied, and handed to Mr. Howe a cheque for 9,175 dollars,
and to Mr. Holmes ten dollars for his expenses. Smith, the carpenter,
had been present at the proceedings at the Potter's Field. For a moment
he thought he detected a likeness in Mr. Holmes to the man who had
visited Perry at Callowhill Street on August 22 and gone upstairs with
him, but he did not feel sure enough of the fact to make any mention of
it.

In the prison at St. Louis there languished in the year 1894 one Marion
Hedgspeth, serving a sentence of twenty years' imprisonment for
an audacious train robbery. On the night of November 30, 1891, the
'Friscow express from St. Louis had been boarded by four ruffians, the
express car blown open with dynamite, and 10,000 dollars carried off.
Hedgspeth and another man were tried for the robbery, and sentenced to
twenty years' imprisonment. On October 9, 1894, Hegspeth{sic} made a
statement to the Governor of the St. Louis prison, which he said he
wished to be communicated to the Fidelity Mutual Life Association. In
the previous July Hedgspeth said that he had met in the prison a man
of the name of H. M. Howard, who was charged with fraud, but had
been released on bail later in the month. While in prison Howard told
Hedgspeth that he had devised a scheme for swindling an insurance
company of 10,000 dollars, and promised Hedgspeth that, if he would
recommend him a lawyer suitable for such an enterprise, he should have
500 dollars as his share of the proceeds. Hedgspeth recommended Jephtha
D. Howe. The latter entered with enthusiasm into the scheme, and told
Hedgspeth that he thought Mr. Howard "one of the smoothest and slickest"
men he had ever known. A corpse was to be found answering to Pitezel's
description, and to be so treated as to appear to have been the victim
of an accidental explosion, while Pitezel himself would disappear to
Germany. From Howe Hedgspeth learnt that the swindle had been carried
out successfully, but he had never received from Howard the 500 dollars
promised him. Consequently, he had but little compunction in divulging
the plot to the authorities.

It was realised at once that H. M. Howard and H. H. Holmes were the same
person, and that Jephtha D. Howe and Mr. Holmes were not the
strangers to each other that they had affected to be when they met
in Philadelphia. Though somewhat doubtful of the truth of Hedgspeth's
statement, the insurance company decided to set Pinkerton's detectives
on the track of Mr. H. H. Holmes. After more than a month's search he
was traced to his father's house at Gilmanton, N. H., and arrested in
Boston on November 17.

Inquiry showed that, early in 1894, Holmes and Pitezel had acquired some
real property at Fort Worth in Texas and commenced building operations,
but had soon after left Texas under a cloud, arising from the theft of a
horse and other dubious transactions.

Holmes had obtained the property at Fort Worth from a Miss Minnie
Williams, and transferred it to Pitezel. Pitezel was a drunken "crook,"
of mean intelligence, a mesmeric subject entirely under the influence of
Holmes, who claimed to have considerable hypnotic powers. Pitezel had a
wife living at St. Louis and five children, three girls--Dessie, Alice,
and Nellie--a boy, Howard, and a baby in arms. At the time of Holmes'
arrest Mrs. Pitezel, with her eldest daughter, Dessie, and her little
baby, was living at a house rented by Holmes at Burlington, Vermont. She
also was arrested on a charge of complicity in the insurance fraud and
brought to Boston.

Two days after his arrest Holmes, who dreaded being sent back to Texas
on a charge of horse-stealing, for which in that State the punishment is
apt to be rough and ready, made a statement to the police, in which he
acknowledged the fraud practised by him and Pitezel on the insurance
company. The body substituted for Pitezel had been obtained, said
Holmes, from a doctor in New York, packed in a trunk and sent to
Philadelphia, but he declined for the present to give the doctor's name.
Pitezel, he said, had gone with three of his children--Alice, Nellie
and Howard--to South America. This fact, however, Holmes had not
communicated to Mrs. Pitezel. When she arrived at Boston, the poor woman
was in great distress of mind. Questioned by the officers, she attempted
to deny any complicity in the fraud, but her real anxiety was to get
news of her husband and her three children. Alice she had not seen since
the girl had gone to Philadelphia to identify the supposed remains of
her father. Shortly after this Holmes had come to Mrs. Pitezel at St.
Louis, and taken away Nellie and Howard to join Alice, who, he said,
was in the care of a widow lady at Ovington, Kentucky. Since then Mrs.
Pitezel had seen nothing of the children or her husband. At Holmes'
direction she had gone to Detroit, Toronto, Ogdensberg and, lastly, to
Burlington in the hope of meeting either Pitezel or the children, but
in vain. She believed that her husband had deserted her; her only desire
was to recover her children.

On November 20 Holmes and Mrs. Pitezel were transferred from Boston
to Philadelphia, and there, along with Benjamin Pitezel and Jephtha
D. Howe, were charged with defrauding the Fidelity Life Association of
10,000 dollars. Soon after his arrival in Philadelphia Holmes, who was
never averse to talking, was asked by an inspector of the insurance
company who it was that had helped him to double up the body sent from
New York and pack it into the trunk. He replied that he had done it
alone, having learned the trick when studying medicine in Michigan. The
inspector recollected that the body when removed from Callowhill Street
had been straight and rigid. He asked Holmes what trick he had learnt in
the course of his medical studies by which it was possible to re-stiffen
a body once the rigor mortis had been broken. To this Holmes made no
reply. But he realised his mistake, and a few weeks later volunteered
a second statement. He now said that Pitezel, in a fit of depression,
aggravated by his drinking habits, had committed suicide on the third
story of the house in Callowhill Street. There Holmes had found his
body, carried it down on to the floor below, and arranged it in the
manner agreed upon for deceiving the insurance company. Pitezel, he
said, had taken his life by lying on the floor and allowing chloroform
to run slowly into his mouth through a rubber tube placed on a chair.
The three children, Holmes now stated, had gone to England with a friend
of his, Miss Minnie Williams.

Miss Minnie Williams was the lady, from whom Holmes was said to have
acquired the property in Texas which he and Pitezel had set about
developing. There was quite a tragedy, according to Holmes, connected
with the life of Miss Williams. She had come to Holmes in 1893, as
secretary, at a drug store which he was then keeping in Chicago. Their
relations had become more intimate, and later in the year Miss Williams
wrote to her sister, Nannie, saying that she was going to be married,
and inviting her to the wedding. Nannie arrived, but unfortunately a
violent quarrel broke out between the two sisters, and Holmes came home
to find that Minnie in her rage had killed her sister. He had helped
her out of the trouble by dropping Nannie's body into the Chicago lake.
After such a distressing occurrence Miss Williams was only too glad of
the opportunity of leaving America with the Pitezel children. In the
meantime Holmes, under the name of Bond, and Pitezel, under that of
Lyman, had proceeded to deal with Miss Williams' property in Texas.

For women Holmes would always appear to have possessed some power of
attraction, a power of which he availed himself generously. Holmes,
whose real name was Herman W. Mudgett, was thirty-four years of age
at the time of his arrest. As a boy he had spent his life farming in
Vermont, after which he had taken up medicine and acquired some kind
of medical degree. In the course of his training Holmes and a fellow
student, finding a body that bore a striking resemblance to the latter;
obtained 1,000 dollars from an insurance company by a fraud similar
to that in which Holmes had engaged subsequently with Pitezel. After
spending some time on the staff of a lunatic asylum in Pennsylvania,
Holmes set up as a druggist in Chicago. His affairs in this city
prospered, and he was enabled to erect, at the corner of Wallace and
Sixty-Third Streets, the four-storied building known later as "Holmes
Castle." It was a singular structure. The lower part consisted of a shop
and offices. Holmes occupied the second floor, and had a laboratory on
the third. In his office was a vault, air proof and sound proof. In the
bathroom a trap-door, covered by a rug, opened on to a secret staircase
leading down to the cellar, and a similar staircase connected the cellar
with the laboratory. In the cellar was a large grate. To this building
Miss Minnie Williams had invited her sister to come for her wedding
with Holmes, and it was in this building, according to Holmes, that the
tragedy of Nannie's untimely death occurred.

In hoping to become Holmes' wife, Miss Minnie Williams was not to enjoy
an exclusive privilege. At the time of his arrest Holmes had three
wives, each ignorant of the others' existence. He had married the first
in 1878, under the name of Mudgett, and was visiting her at Burlington,
Vermont, when the Pinkerton detectives first got on his track. The
second he had married at Chicago, under the name of Howard, and the
third at Denver as recently as January, 1894, under the name of Holmes.
The third Mrs. Holmes had been with him when he came to Philadelphia to
identify Pitezel's body. The appearance of Holmes was commonplace, but
he was a man of plausible and ingratiating address, apparent candour,
and able in case of necessity to "let loose," as he phrased it, "the
fount of emotion."

The year 1895 opened to find the much enduring Holmes still a prisoner
in Philadelphia. The authorities seemed in no haste to indict him for
fraud; their interest was concentrated rather in endeavouring to find
the whereabouts of Miss Williams and her children, and of one Edward
Hatch, whom Holmes had described as helping him in arranging for
their departure. The "great humiliation" of being a prisoner was very
distressing to Holmes.

     "I only know the sky has lost its blue,
     The days are weary and the night is drear."

These struck him as two beautiful lines very appropriate to his
situation. He made a New Year's resolve to give up meat during his close
confinement. The visits of his third wife brought him some comfort. He
was "agreeably surprised" to find that, as an unconvicted prisoner, he
could order in his own meals and receive newspapers and periodicals. But
he was hurt at an unfriendly suggestion on the part of the authorities
that Pitezel had not died by his own hand, and that Edward Hatch was but
a figment of his rich imagination. He would like to have been released
on bail, but in the same unfriendly spirit was informed that, if he
were, he would be detained on a charge of murder. And so the months
dragged on. Holmes, studious, patient, injured, the authorities puzzled,
suspicions, baffled--still no news of Miss Williams or the three
children. It was not until June 3 that Holmes was put on his trial for
fraud, and the following day pleaded guilty. Sentence was postponed.

The same day Holmes was sent for to the office of the District Attorney,
who thus addressed him: "It is strongly suspected, Holmes, that you have
not only murdered Pitezel, but that you have killed the children. The
best way to remove this suspicion is to produce the children at once.
Now, where are they?" Unfriendly as was this approach, Holmes met it
calmly, reiterated his previous statement that the children had gone
with Miss Williams to England, and gave her address in London, 80 Veder
or Vadar Street, where, he said, Miss Williams had opened a massage
establishment. He offered to draw up and insert a cipher advertisement
in the New York Herald, by means of which, he said, Miss Williams and he
had agreed to communicate, and almost tearfully he added, "Why should I
kill innocent children?"

Asked to give the name of any person who had seen Miss Williams and the
children in the course of their journeyings in America, he resented
the disbelief implied in such a question, and strong was his manly
indignation when one of the gentlemen present expressed his opinion that
the story was a lie from beginning to end. This rude estimate of
Holmes' veracity was, however, in some degree confirmed when a cipher
advertisement published in the New York Herald according to Holmes'
directions, produced no reply from Miss Williams, and inquiry showed
that no such street as Veder or Vadar Street was to be found in London.

In spite of these disappointments, Holmes' quiet confidence in his
own good faith continued unshaken. When the hapless Mrs. Pitezel was
released, he wrote her a long letter. "Knowing me as you do," he said,
"can you imagine me killing little and innocent children, especially
without any motive?" But even Mrs. Pitezel was not wholly reassured. She
recollected how Holmes had taken her just before his arrest to a house
he had rented at Burlington, Vermont, how he had written asking her to
carry a package of nitro-glycerine from the bottom to the top of the
house, and how one day she had found him busily removing the boards in
the cellar.


II THE WANDERING ASSASSIN


The District Attorney and the Insurance Company were not in agreement
as to the fate of the Pitezel children. The former still inclined to the
hope and belief that they were in England with Miss Williams, but the
insurance company took a more sinister view. No trace of them existed
except a tin box found among Holmes' effects, containing letters
they had written to their mother and grandparents from Cincinnati,
Indianapolis, and Detroit, which had been given to Holmes to dispatch
but had never reached their destination. The box contained letters from
Mrs. Pitezel to her children, which Holmes had presumably intercepted.

It was decided to make a final attempt to resolve all doubts by sending
an experienced detective over the route taken by the children in
America. He was to make exhaustive inquiries in each city with a view to
tracing the visits of Holmes or the three children. For this purpose a
detective of the name of Geyer was chosen. The record of his search is a
remarkable story of patient and persistent investigation.

Alice Pitezel had not seen her mother since she had gone with Holmes
to identify her father's remains in Philadelphia. From there Holmes had
taken her to Indianapolis. In the meantime he had visited Mrs. Pitezel
at St. Louis, and taken away with him the girl, Nellie, and the boy,
Howard, alleging as his reason for doing so that they and Alice were to
join their father, whose temporary effacement was necessary to carry out
successfully the fraud on the insurance company, to which Mrs. Pitezel
had been from the first an unwilling party. Holmes, Nellie and Howard
had joined Alice at Indianapolis, and from there all four were believed
to have gone to Cincinnati. It was here, accordingly, on June 27, 1895,
that Geyer commenced his search.

After calling at a number of hotels, Geyer found that on Friday,
September 28, 1894, a man, giving the name of Alexander E. Cook, and
three children had stayed at a hotel called the Atlantic House. Geyer
recollected that Holmes, when later on he had sent Mrs. Pitezel to the
house in Burlington, had described her as Mrs. A. E. Cook and, though
not positive, the hotel clerk thought that he recognised in the
photographs of Holmes and he three children, which Geyer showed him, the
four visitors to the hotel.

They had left the Atlantic House the next day, and on that same day, the
29th, Geyer found that Mr. A. E. Cook and three children had registered
at the Bristol Hotel, where they had stayed until Sunday the 30th.

Knowing Holmes' habit of renting houses, Geyer did not confine his
enquiries to the hotels. He visited a number of estate agents and learnt
that a man and a boy, identified as Holmes and Howard Pitezel, had
occupied a house No. 305 Poplar Street. The man had given the name of A.
C. Hayes. He had taken the house on Friday the 28th, and on the 29th had
driven up to it with the boy in a furniture wagon. A curious neighbour,
interested in the advent of a newcomer, saw the wagon arrive, and was
somewhat astonished to observe that the only furniture taken into the
house was a large iron cylinder stove. She was still further surprised
when, on the following day, Mr. Hayes told her that he was not going
after all to occupy the house, and made her a present of the cylinder
stove.

From Cincinnati Geyer went to Indianapolis. Here inquiry showed that
on September 30 three children had been brought by a man identified as
Holmes to the Hotel English, and registered in the name of Canning.
This was the maiden name of Mrs. Pitezel. The children had stayed at the
hotel one night. After that Geyer seemed to lose track of them until he
was reminded of a hotel then closed, called the Circle House. With some
difficulty he got a sight of the books of the hotel, and found that the
three Canning children had arrived there on October 1 and stayed until
the 10th. From the former proprietor of the hotel he learnt that Holmes
had described himself as the children's uncle, and had said that Howard
was a bad boy, whom he was trying to place in some institution. The
children seldom went out; they would sit in their room drawing or
writing, often they were found crying; they seemed homesick and unhappy.

There are letters of the children written from Indianapolis to their
mothers, letters found in Holmes' possession, which had never reached
her. In these letters they ask their mother why she does not write to
them. She had written, but her letters were in Holmes' possession. Alice
writes that she is reading "Uncle Tom's Cabin." She has read so much
that her eyes hurt; they have bought a crystal pen for five cents which
gives them some amusement; they had been to the Zoo in Cincinnati the
Sunday before: "I expect this Sunday will pass away slower than I don't
know--Howard is two (sic) dirty to be seen out on the street to-day."
Sometimes they go and watch a man who paints "genuine oil paintings"
in a shoe store, which are given away with every dollar purchase of
shoes--"he can paint a picture in one and a half minutes, ain't that
quick!" Howard was getting a little troublesome. "I don't like to tell
you," writes Alice, "but you ask me, so I will have to. Howard won't
mind me at all. He wanted a book and I got 'Life of General Sheridan,'
and it is awful nice, but now he don't read it at all hardly." Poor
Howard! One morning, says Alice, Mr. Holmes told him to stay in and wait
for him, as he was coming to take him out, but Howard was disobedient,
and when Mr. Holmes arrived he had gone out. Better for Howard had he
never returned! "We have written two or three letters to you," Alice
tells her mother, "and I guess you will begin to get them now." She
will not get them. Mr. Holmes is so very particular that the insurance
company shall get no clue to the whereabouts of any member of the
Pitezel family.

Geyer knew that from Indianapolis Holmes had gone to Detroit. He
ascertained that two girls, "Etta and Nellie Canning," had registered
on October 12 at the New Western Hotel in that city, and from there had
moved on the 15th to a boarding-house in Congress Street. From Detroit
Alice had written to her grandparents. It was cold and wet, she wrote;
she and Etta had colds and chapped hands: "We have to stay in all the
time. All that Nell and I can do is to draw, and I get so tired sitting
that I could get up and fly almost. I wish I could see you all. I am
getting so homesick that I don't know what to do. I suppose Wharton
(their baby brother) walks by this time, don't he? I would like to have
him here, he would pass away the time a good deal." As a fact little
Wharton, his mother and sister Dessie, were at this very moment in
Detroit, within ten minutes' walk of the hotel at which Holmes had
registered "Etta and Nellie Canning."

On October 14 there had arrived in that city a weary, anxious-looking
woman, with a girl and a little baby. They took a room at Geis's Hotel,
registering as Mrs. Adams and daughter. Mrs. Adams seemed in great
distress of mind, and never left her room.

The housekeeper, being shown their photographs, identified the woman
and the girl as Mrs. Pitezel and her eldest daughter Dessie. As the same
time there had been staying at another hotel in Detroit a Mr. and Mrs.
Holmes, whose photographs showed them to be the Mr. Holmes in question
and his third wife. These three parties--the two children, Mrs. Pitezel
and her baby, and the third Mrs. Holmes--were all ignorant of each
other's presence in Detroit; and under the secret guidance of Mr. Holmes
the three parties (still unaware of their proximity to each other), left
Detroit for Canada, arriving in Toronto on or about October 18, and
registering at three separate hotels. The only one who had not to all
appearances reached Toronto was the boy Howard.

In Toronto "Alice and Nellie Canning" stayed at the Albion Hotel.

They arrived there on October 19, and left on the 25th. During their
stay a man, identified as Holmes, had called every morning for the two
children, and taken them out; but they had come back alone, usually in
time for supper. On the 25th he had called and taken them out, but they
had not returned to supper. After that date Geyer could find no trace
of them. Bearing in mind Holmes' custom of renting houses, he compiled a
list of all the house agents in Toronto, and laboriously applied to each
one for information. The process was a slow one, and the result seemed
likely to be disappointing.

To aid his search Geyer decided to call in the assistance of the Press.
The newspapers readily published long accounts of the case and portraits
of Holmes and the children. At last, after eight days of patient and
untiring investigation, after following up more than one false clue,
Geyer received a report that there was a house--No. 16 St. Vincent
Street--which had been rented in the previous October by a man answering
to the description of Holmes. The information came from an old Scottish
gentleman living next door. Geyer hastened to see him. The old gentleman
said that the man who had occupied No. 16 in October had told him that
he had taken the house for his widowed sister, and he recognised the
photograph of Alice Pitezel as one of the two girls accompanying
him. The only furniture the man had taken into the house was a bed, a
mattress and a trunk. During his stay at No. 16 this man had called on
his neighbour about four o'clock one afternoon and borrowed a spade,
saying that he wanted to dig a place in the cellar where his widowed
sister could keep potatoes; he had returned the spade the following
morning. The lady to whom the house belonged recognised Holmes' portrait
as that of the man to whom she had let No. 16.

At last Geyer seemed to be on the right track. He hurried back to St.
Vincent Street, borrowed from the old gentleman at No. 18 the very
spade which he had lent to Holmes in the previous October, and got the
permission of the present occupier of No. 16 to make a search. In the
centre of the kitchen Geyer found a trap-door leading down into a small
cellar. In one corner of the cellar he saw that the earth had been
recently dug up. With the help of the spade the loose earth was removed,
and at a depth of some three feet, in a state of advanced decomposition,
lay the remains of what appeared to be two children. A little toy wooden
egg with a snake inside it, belonging to the Pitezel children, had been
found by the tenant who had taken the house after Holmes; a later tenant
had found stuffed into the chimney, but not burnt, some clothing that
answered the description of that worn by Alice and Etta Pitezel; and by
the teeth and hair of the two corpses Mrs. Pitezel was able to identify
them as those of her two daughters. The very day that Alice and Etta had
met their deaths at St. Vincent Street, their mother had been staying
near them at a hotel in the same city, and later on the same day Holmes
had persuaded her to leave Toronto for Ogdensburg. He said that they
were being watched by detectives, and so it would be impossible for her
husband to come to see her there.

But the problem was not yet wholly solved. What had become of Howard? So
far Geyer's search had shown that Holmes had rented three houses, one in
Cincinnati, one in Detroit, and one in Toronto. Howard had been with his
sisters at the hotels in Indianapolis, and in Detroit the house agents
had said that, when Holmes had rented a house there, he had been
accompanied by a boy. Yet an exhaustive search of that house had
revealed no trace of him. Geyer returned to Detroit and again questioned
the house agents; on being pressed their recollection of the boy who had
accompanied Holmes seemed very vague and uncertain. This served only to
justify a conclusion at which Geyer had already arrived, that Howard
had never reached Detroit, but had disappeared in Indianapolis. Alice's
letters, written from there, had described how Holmes had wanted to take
Howard out one day and how the boy had refused to stay in and wait for
him. In the same way Holmes had called for the two girls at the Albion
Hotel in Toronto on October 25 and taken them out with him, after which
they had never been seen alive except by the old gentleman at No. 18 St.
Vincent Street.

If Geyer could discover that Holmes had not departed in Indianapolis
from his usual custom of renting houses, he might be on the high way
to solving the mystery of Howard's fate. Accordingly he returned to
Indianapolis.

In the meantime, Holmes, in his prison at Philadelphia, learnt of the
discovery at Toronto. "On the morning of the 16th of July," he writes
in his journal, "my newspaper was delivered to me about 8.30 a.m., and I
had hardly opened it before I saw in large headlines the announcement
of the finding of the children in Toronto. For the moment it seemed
so impossible that I was inclined to think it was one of the frequent
newspaper excitements that had attended the earlier part of the case,
but, in attempting to gain some accurate comprehension of what was
stated in the article, I became convinced that at least certain bodies
had been found there, and upon comparing the date when the house was
hired I knew it to be the same as when the children had been in Toronto;
and thus being forced to realise the awfulness of what had probably
happened, I gave up trying to read the article, and saw instead the two
little faces as they had looked when I hurriedly left them--felt the
innocent child's kiss so timidly given, and heard again their earnest
words of farewell, and realised that I had received another burden to
carry to my grave with me, equal, if not worse, than the horrors of
Nannie Williams' death."

Questioned by the district attorney, Holmes met this fresh evidence by
evoking once again the mythical Edward Hatch and suggesting that Miss
Minnie Williams, in a "hellish wish for vengeance" because of Holmes'
fancied desertion, and in order to make it appear probable that he,
and not she, had murdered her sister, had prompted Hatch to commit the
horrid deed. Holmes asked to be allowed to go to Toronto that he might
collect any evidence which he could find there in his favour. The
district attorney refused his request; he had determined to try Holmes
in Philadelphia. "What more could, be said?" writes Holmes. Indeed,
under the circumstances, and in the unaccountable absence of Edward
Hatch and Minnie Williams, there was little more to be said.

Detective Geyer reopened his search in Indianapolis by obtaining a list
of advertisements of houses to let in the city in 1894. Nine hundred
of these were followed up in vain. He then turned his attention to the
small towns lying around Indianapolis with no happier result. Geyer
wrote in something of despair to his superiors: "By Monday we will
have searched every outlying town except Irvington. After Irvington, I
scarcely know where we shall go." Thither he went on August 27, exactly
two months from the day on which his quest had begun. As he entered the
town he noticed the advertisement of an estate agent. He called at
the office and found a "pleasant-faced old gentleman," who greeted him
amiably. Once again Geyer opened his now soiled and ragged packet of
photographs, and asked the gentleman if in October, 1894, he had let
a house to a man who said that he wanted one for a widowed sister. He
showed him the portrait of Holmes.

The old man put on his glasses and looked at the photograph for some
time. Yes, he said, he did remember that he had given the keys of
a cottage in October, 1894, to a man of Holmes' appearance, and he
recollected the man the more distinctly for the uncivil abruptness with
which he had asked for the keys; "I felt," he said, "he should have had
more respect for my grey hairs."

From the old gentleman's office Geyer hastened to the cottage, and
made at once for the cellar. There he could find no sign of recent
disturbance. But beneath the floor of a piazza adjoining the house he
found the remains of a trunk, answering to the description of that which
the Pitezel children had had with them, and in an outhouse he discovered
the inevitable stove, Holmes' one indispensable piece of furniture. It
was stained with blood on the top. A neighbour had seen Holmes in the
same October drive up to the house in the furniture wagon accompanied
by a boy, and later in the day Holmes had asked him to come over to the
cottage and help him to put up a stove. The neighbour asked him why he
did not use gas; Holmes replied that he did not think gas was healthy
for children. While the two men were putting up the stove, the
little boy stood by and watched them. After further search there were
discovered in the cellar chimney some bones, teeth, a pelvis and the
baked remains of a stomach, liver and spleen.

Medical examination showed them to be the remains of a child between
seven and ten years of age. A spinning top, a scarf-pin, a pair of shoes
and some articles of clothing that had belonged to the little Pitezels,
had been found in the house at different times, and were handed over to
Geyer.

His search was ended. On September 1 he returned to Philadelphia.

Holmes was put on his trial on October 28, 1895, before the Court of
Oyer and Terminer in Philadelphia, charged with the murder of Benjamin
Pitezel. In the course of the trial the district attorney offered to put
in evidence showing that Holmes had also murdered the three children of
Pitezel, contending that such evidence was admissible on the ground
that the murders of the children and their father were parts of the same
transaction. The judge refused to admit the evidence, though expressing
a doubt as to its inadmissibility. The defence did not dispute the
identity of the body found in Callowhill Street, but contended that
Pitezel had committed suicide. The medical evidence negatived such a
theory. The position of the body, its condition when discovered,
were entirely inconsistent with self-destruction, and the absence of
irritation in the stomach showed that the chloroform found there must
have been poured into it after death. In all probability, Holmes had
chloroformed Pitezel when he was drunk or asleep. He had taken the
chloroform to Callowhill Street as a proposed ingredient in a solution
for cleaning clothes, which he and Pitezel were to patent. It was no
doubt with the help of the same drug that he had done to death the
little children, and failing the nitro-glycerine, with that drug he had
intended to put Mrs. Pitezel and her two remaining children out of the
way at the house in Burlington; for after his trial there was found
there, hidden away in the cellar, a bottle containing eight or ten
ounces of chloroform.

Though assisted by counsel, Holmes took an active part in his defence.
He betrayed no feeling at the sight of Mrs. Pitezel, the greater part of
whose family he had destroyed, but the appearance of his third wife as a
witness he made an opportunity for "letting loose the fount of emotion,"
taking care to inform his counsel beforehand that he intended to perform
this touching feat. He was convicted and sentenced to death on November
2.

Previous to the trial of Holmes the police had made an exhaustive
investigation of the mysterious building in Chicago known as "Holmes'
Castle." The result was sufficiently sinister. In the stove in the
cellar charred human bones were found, and in the middle of the room
stood a large dissecting table stained with blood. On digging up the
cellar floor some human ribs, sections of vertebrae and teeth were
discovered buried in quicklime, and in other parts of the "castle" the
police found more charred bones, some metal buttons, a trunk, and a
piece of a watch chain.

The trunk and piece of watch chain were identified as having belonged to
Miss Minnie Williams.

Inquiry showed that Miss Williams had entered Holmes' employment as a
typist in 1893, and had lived with him at the castle. In the latter part
of the year she had invited her sister, Nannie, to be present at her
wedding with Holmes. Nannie had come to Chicago for that purpose, and
since then the two sisters had never been seen alive. In February in the
following year Pitezel, under the name of Lyman, had deposited at Fort
Worth, Texas, a deed according to which a man named Bond had transferred
to him property in that city which had belonged to Miss Williams, and
shortly after, Holmes, under the name of Pratt, joined him at Fort
Worth, whereupon the two commenced building on Miss Williams' land.

Other mysterious cases besides those of the Williams sisters revealed
the Bluebeard-like character of this latterday castle of Mr. Holmes. In
1887 a man of the name of Connor entered Holmes' employment. He brought
with him to the castle a handsome, intelligent wife and a little girl of
eight or nine years of age.

After a short time Connor quarrelled with his wife and went away,
leaving Mrs. Connor and the little girl with Holmes. After 1892 Mrs.
Connor and her daughter had disappeared, but in August, 1895, the police
found in the castle some clothes identified as theirs, and the janitor,
Quinlan, admitted having seen the dead body of Mrs. Connor in the
castle. Holmes, questioned in his prison in Philadelphia, said that Mrs.
Connor had died under an operation, but that he did not know what had
become of the little girl.

In the year of Mrs. Connor's disappearance, a typist named Emily
Cigrand, who had been employed in a hospital in which Benjamin Pitezel
had been a patient, was recommended by the latter to Holmes. She entered
his employment, and she and Holmes soon became intimate, passing as
"Mr. and Mrs. Gordon." Emily Cigrand had been in the habit of writing
regularly to her parents in Indiana, but after December 6, 1892, they
had never heard from her again, nor could any further trace of her be
found.

A man who worked for Holmes as a handy man at the castle stated to the
police that in 1892 Holmes had given him a skeleton of a man to mount,
and in January, 1893, showed him in the laboratory another male skeleton
with some flesh still on it, which also he asked him to mount. As there
was a set of surgical instruments in the laboratory and also a tank
filled with a fluid preparation for removing flesh, the handy man
thought that Holmes was engaged in some kind of surgical work.

About a month before his execution, when Holmes' appeals from his
sentence had failed and death appeared imminent, he sold to the
newspapers for 7,500 dollars a confession in which he claimed to have
committed twenty-seven murders in the course of his career. The day
after it appeared he declared the whole confession to be a "fake."
He was tired, he said, of being accused by the newspapers of having
committed every mysterious murder that had occurred during the last
ten years. When it was pointed out to him that the account given in his
confession of the murder of the Pitezel children was clearly untrue,
he replied, "Of course, it is not true, but the newspapers wanted
a sensation and they have got it." The confession was certainly
sensational enough to satisfy the most exacting of penny-a-liners, and a
lasting tribute to Holmes' undoubted power of extravagant romancing.

According to his story, some of his twenty-seven victims had met their
death by poison, some by more violent methods, some had died a lingering
death in the air-tight and sound-proof vault of the castle. Most of
these he mentioned by name, but some of these were proved afterwards to
be alive. Holmes had actually perpetrated, in all probability, about ten
murders. But, given further time and opportunity, there is no reason why
this peripatetic assassin should not have attained to the considerable
figure with which he credited himself in his bogus confession.

Holmes was executed in Philadelphia on May 7, 1896. He seemed to meet
his fate with indifference.

The motive of Holmes in murdering Pitezel and three of his children and
in planning to murder his wife and remaining children, originated in all
probability in a quarrel that occurred between Pitezel and himself in
the July of 1894. Pitezel had tired apparently of Holmes and his doings,
and wanted to break off the connection. But he must have known enough
of Holmes' past to make him a dangerous enemy. It was Pitezel who had
introduced to Holmes, Emily Cigrand, the typist, who had disappeared
so mysteriously in the castle; Pitezel had been his partner in the
fraudulent appropriation of Miss Minnie Williams' property in Texas; it
is more than likely, therefore, that Pitezel knew something of the fate
of Miss Williams and her sister. By reviving, with Pitezel's help, his
old plan for defrauding insurance companies, Holmes saw the opportunity
of making 10,000 dollars, which he needed sorely, and at the same time
removing his inconvenient and now lukewarm associate. Having killed
Pitezel and received the insurance money, Holmes appropriated to his
own use the greater part of the 10,000 dollars, giving Mrs. Pitezel
in return for her share of the plunder a bogus bill for 5,000 dollars.
Having robbed Mrs. Pitezel of both her husband and her money, to
this thoroughgoing criminal there seemed only one satisfactory way of
escaping detection, and that was to exterminate her and the whole of her
family.

Had Holmes not confided his scheme of the insurance fraud to Hedgspeth
in St. Louis prison and then broken faith with him, there is no reason
why the fraud should ever have been discovered. The subsequent murders
had been so cunningly contrived that, had the Insurance Company not put
the Pinkerton detectives on his track, Holmes would in all probability
have ended by successfully disposing of Mrs. Pitezel, Dessie, and the
baby at the house in Burlington, Vermont, and the entire Pitezel family
would have disappeared as completely as his other victims.

Holmes admitted afterwards that his one mistake had been his confiding
to Hedgspeth his plans for defrauding an insurance company--a mistake,
the unfortunate results of which might have been avoided, if he had kept
faith with the train robber and given him the 500 dollars which he had
promised.

The case of Holmes illustrates the practical as well as the purely
ethical value of "honour among thieves," and shows how a comparatively
insignificant misdeed may ruin a great and comprehensive plan of crime.
To dare to attempt the extermination of a family of seven persons, and
to succeed so nearly in effecting it, could be the work of no tyro, no
beginner like J. B. Troppmann. It was the act of one who having
already succeeded in putting out of the way a number of other persons
undetected, might well and justifiably believe that he was born for
greater and more compendious achievements in robbery and murder than
any who had gone before him. One can almost subscribe to America's claim
that Holmes is the "greatest criminal" of a century boasting no mean
record in such persons.

In the remarkable character of his achievements as an assassin we are
apt to lose sight of Holmes' singular skill and daring as a liar and
a bigamist. As an instance of the former may be cited his audacious
explanation to his family, when they heard of his having married a
second time. He said that he had met with a serious accident to his
head, and that when he left the hospital, found that he had entirely
lost his memory; that, while in this state of oblivion, he had married
again and then, when his memory returned, realised to his horror his
unfortunate position. Plausibility would seem to have been one of
Holmes' most useful gifts; men and women alike--particularly the
latter--he seems to have deceived with ease. His appearance was
commonplace, in no way suggesting the conventional criminal, his
manner courteous, ingratiating and seemingly candid, and like so many
scoundrels, he could play consummately the man of sentiment.

The weak spot in Holmes' armour as an enemy of society was a dangerous
tendency to loquacity, the defect no doubt of his qualities of plausible
and insinuating address and ever ready mendacity.




The Widow Gras


Report of the trial of the woman Gras and Gaudry in the Gazette
des Tribunaux. The case is dealt with also by Mace in his "Femmes
Criminelles."

I

THE CHARMER

Jenny Amenaide Brecourt was born in Paris in the year 1837. Her father
was a printer, her mother sold vegetables. The parents neglected the
child, but a lady of title took pity on her, and when she was five years
old adopted her. Even as a little girl she was haughty and imperious. At
the age of eight she refused to play with another child on the ground
of her companion's social inferiority. "The daughter of a Baroness," she
said, "cannot play with the daughter of a wine-merchant." When she was
eleven years old, her parents took her away from her protectress and
sent her into the streets to sell gingerbread--a dangerous experience
for a child of tender years. After six years of street life, Amenaide
sought out her benefactress and begged her to take her back. The
Baroness consented, and found her employment in a silk manufactory. One
day the girl, now eighteen years old, attended the wedding of one of
her companions in the factory. She returned home after the ceremony
thoughtful.

She said that she wanted to get married. The Baroness did not take her
statement seriously, and on the grocer calling one day, said in jest to
Amenaide, "You want a husband, there's one."

But Amenaide was in earnest. She accepted the suggestion and, to the
Baroness' surprise, insisted on taking the grocer as her husband.
Reluctantly the good lady gave her consent, and in 1855 Amenaide
Brecourt became the wife of the grocer Gras.

A union, so hasty and ill-considered, was not likely to be of long
duration. With the help of the worthy Baroness the newly married couple
started a grocery business. But Amenaide was too economical for her
husband and mother-in-law. Quarrels ensued, recriminations. In a spirit
of unamiable prophecy husband and wife foretold each other's future.
"You will die in a hospital," said the wife. "You will land your carcase
in prison," retorted the husband. In both instances they were correct in
their anticipations. One day the husband disappeared. For a short time
Amenaide returned to her long-suffering protectress, and then she too
disappeared.

When she is heard of again, Amenaide Brecourt has become Jeanne de la
Cour. Jeanne de la Cour is a courtesan. She has tried commerce, acting,
literature, journalism, and failed at them all. Henceforth men are
to make her fortune for her. Such charms as she may possess, such
allurements as she can offer, she is ready to employ without heart or
feeling to accomplish her end. Without real passion, she has an almost
abnormal, erotic sensibility, which serves in its stead. She cares
only for one person, her sister. To her Jeanne de la Cour unfolded her
philosophy of life. While pretending to love men, she is going to make
them suffer. They are to be her playthings, she knows how to snare them:
"All is dust and lies. So much the worse for the men who get in my way.
Men are mere stepping-stones to me. As soon as they begin to fail or are
played out, I put them scornfully aside. Society is a vast chess-board,
men the pawns, some white, some black; I move them as I please, and
break them when they bore me."

The early years of Jeanne de la Cour's career as a Phryne were hardly
more successful than her attempts at literature, acting and journalism.
True to her philosophy, she had driven one lover, a German, to suicide,
and brought another to his death by over-doses of cantharides. On
learning of the death of the first, she reflected patriotically,
"One German the less in Paris!" That of the second elicited the
matter-of-fact comment, "It was bound to happen; he had no moderation."
A third admirer, who died in a hospital, was dismissed as "a fool who,
in spite of all, still respects women." But, in ruining her lovers, she
had ruined her own health. In 1865 she was compelled to enter a private
asylum. There she is described as "dark in complexion, with dark
expressive eyes, very pale, and of a nervous temperament, agreeable, and
pretty." She was suffering at the time of her admission from hysterical
seizures, accompanied by insane exaltation, convulsions and loss of
speech. In speaking of her humble parents she said, "I don't know such
people"; her manner was bombastic, and she was fond of posing as a fine
lady.

After a few months Jeanne de la Cour was discharged from the asylum as
cured, and on the advice of her doctors went to Vittel.

There she assumed the rank of Baroness and recommenced her career, but
this time in a more reasonable and businesslike manner. Her comments,
written to her sister, on her fellow guests at the hotel are caustic.
She mocks at some respectable married women who are trying to convert
her to Catholicism. To others who refuse her recognition, she makes
herself so mischievous and objectionable that in self-defence they are
frightened into acknowledging her. Admirers among men she has many,
ex-ministers, prefects. It was at Vittel that occurred the incident
of the wounded pigeon. There had been some pigeon-shooting. One of the
wounded birds flew into the room of the Baroness de la Cour. She took
pity on it, tended it, taught it not to be afraid of her and to stay in
her room. So touching was her conduct considered by some of those who
heard it, that she was nicknamed "the Charmer." But she is well aware,
she writes to her sister, that with the true ingratitude of the male,
the pigeon will leave her as soon as it needs her help no longer.

However, for the moment, "disfigured as it is, beautiful or ugly," she
loves it. "Don't forget," she writes, "that a woman who is practical and
foreseeing, she too enjoys her pigeon shooting, but the birds are her
lovers."

Shortly after she left Vittel an event occurred which afforded Jeanne de
la Cour the prospect of acquiring that settled position in life which,
"practical and foreseeing," she now regarded as indispensable to her
future welfare. Her husband, Gras, died, as she had foretold, in the
Charity Hospital. The widow was free. If she could bring down her bird,
it was now in her power to make it hers for life. Henceforth all her
efforts were directed to that end. She was reaching her fortieth year,
her hair was turning grey, her charms were waning. Poverty, degradation,
a miserable old age, a return to the wretched surroundings of her
childhood, such she knew to be the fate of many of her kind. There was
nothing to be hoped for from the generosity of men. Her lovers were
leaving her. Blackmail, speculation on the Bourse, even the desperate
expedient of a supposititious child, all these she tried as means of
acquiring a competence. But fortune was shy of the widow. There was
need for dispatch. The time was drawing near when it might be man's
unkind privilege to put her scornfully aside as a thing spent and done
with. She must bring down her bird, and that quickly. It was at this
critical point in the widow's career, in the year 1873, that she met at
a public ball for the first time Georges de Saint Pierre.(16)


     (16) For obvious reasons I have suppressed the real name of the widow's
lover.


Georges de Saint Pierre was twenty years of age when he made the
acquaintance of the Widow Gras. He had lost his mother at an early age,
and since then lived with relatives in the country. He was a young man
of independent means, idle, of a simple, confiding and affectionate
disposition. Four months after his first meeting with the widow they
met again. The end of the year 1873 saw the commencement of an intimacy,
which to all appearances was characterised by a more lasting and sincere
affection than is usually associated with unions of this kind. There can
be no doubt that during the three years the Widow Gras was the mistress
of Georges de Saint Pierre, she had succeeded in subjugating entirely
the senses and the affection of her young lover. In spite of the twenty
years between them, Georges de Saint Pierre idolised his middle-aged
mistress. She was astute enough to play not only the lover, but the
mother to this motherless youth. After three years of intimacy he writes
to her: "It is enough for me that you love me, because I don't weary
you, and I, I love you with all my heart. I cannot bear to leave you.
We will live happily together. You will always love me truly, and as for
me, my loving care will ever protect you. I don't know what would become
of me if I did not feel that your love watched over me." The confidence
of Georges in the widow was absolute. When, in 1876, he spent six months
in Egypt, he made her free of his rooms in Paris, she was at liberty to
go there when she liked; he trusted her entirely, idolised her. Whatever
her faults, he was blind to them. "Your form," he writes, "is ever
before my eyes; I wish I could enshrine your pure heart in gold and
crystal."

The widow's conquest, to all appearances, was complete. But Georges was
very young. He had a family anxious for his future; they knew of his
liaison; they would be hopeful, no doubt, of one day breaking it off and
of marrying him to some desirable young person. From the widow's point
of view the situation lacked finality. How was that to be secured?

One day, toward the end of the year 1876, after the return of Georges
from Egypt, the widow happened to be at the house of a friend, a ballet
dancer. She saw her friend lead into the room a young man; he was
sightless, and her friend with tender care guided him to a seat on the
sofa. The widow was touched by the spectacle. When they were alone, she
inquired of her friend the reason of her solicitude for the young man.
"I love this victim of nature," she replied, "and look after him with
every care. He is young, rich, without family, and is going to marry
me. Like you, I am just on forty; my hair is turning grey, my youth
vanishing. I shall soon be cast adrift on the sea, a wreck. This boy is
the providential spar to which I am going to cling that I may reach land
in safety." "You mean, then," said the widow, "that you will soon be
beyond the reach of want?" "Yes," answered the friend, "I needn't worry
any more about the future."

"I congratulate you," said the widow, "and what is more, your lover will
never see you grow old."

To be cast adrift on the sea and to have found a providential spar! The
widow was greatly impressed by her friend's rare good fortune. Indeed,
her experience gave the widow furiously to think, as she revolved in her
brain various expedients by which Georges de Saint Pierre might become
the "providential spar" in her own impending wreck. The picture of
the blind young man tenderly cared for, dependent utterly on the
ministrations of his devoted wife, fixed itself in the widow's mind;
there was something inexpressibly pathetic in the picture, whilst its
practical significance had its sinister appeal to one in her situation.

At this point in the story there appears on the scene a character as
remarkable in his way as the widow herself, remarkable at least for
his share in the drama that is to follow. Nathalis Gaudry, of humble
parentage, rude and uncultivated, had been a playmate of the widow when
she was a child in her parents' house.

They had grown up together, but, after Gaudry entered the army, had
lost sight of each other. Gaudry served through the Italian war of 1859,
gaining a medal for valour. In 1864 he had married.

Eleven years later his wife died, leaving him with two children. He came
to Paris and obtained employment in an oil refinery at Saint Denis. His
character was excellent; he was a good workman, honest, hard-working,
his record unblemished. When he returned to Paris, Gaudry renewed his
friendship with the companion of his youth. But Jeanne Brecourt was now
Jeanne de la Cour, living in refinement and some luxury, moving in a
sphere altogether remote from and unapproachable by the humble workman
in an oil refinery. He could do no more than worship from afar
this strange being, to him wonderfully seductive in her charm and
distinction.

On her side the widow was quite friendly toward her homely admirer.
She refused to marry him, as he would have wished, but she did her best
without success to marry him to others of her acquaintance. Neither a
sempstress nor an inferior actress could she persuade, for all her
zeal, to unite themselves with a hand in an oil mill, a widower with two
children. It is typical of the widow's nervous energy that she should
have undertaken so hopeless a task. In the meantime she made use of
her admirer. On Sundays he helped her in her apartment, carried coals,
bottled wine, scrubbed the floors, and made himself generally useful. He
was supposed by those about the house to be her brother. Occasionally,
in the absence of a maid, the widow allowed him to attend on her
personally, even to assist her in her toilette and perform for her such
offices as one woman would perform for another. The man soon came to be
madly in love with the woman; his passion, excited but not gratified,
enslaved and consumed him. To some of his fellow-workmen who saw him
moody and preoccupied, he confessed that he ardently desired to marry a
friend of his childhood, not a working woman but a lady.

Such was the situation and state of mind of Nathalis Gaudry when, in
November, 1876, he received a letter from the widow, in which she wrote,
"Come at once. I want you on a matter of business. Tell your employer
it is a family affair; I will make up your wages." In obedience to this
message Gaudry was absent from the distillery from the 17th to the 23rd
of November.

The "matter of business" about which the widow wished to consult with
Gaudry turned out to be a scheme of revenge. She told him that she had
been basely defrauded by a man to whom she had entrusted money. She
desired to be revenged on him, and could think of no better way than to
strike at his dearest affections by seriously injuring his son. This she
proposed to do with the help of a knuckle-duster, which she produced and
gave to Gaudry. Armed with this formidable weapon, Gaudry was to strike
her enemy's son so forcibly in the pit of the stomach as to disable him
for life. The widow offered to point out to Gaudry the young man whom he
was to attack. She took him outside the young man's club and showed him
his victim. He was Georges de Saint Pierre.

The good fortune of her friend, the ballet-dancer, had proved a
veritable toxin in the intellectual system of the Widow Gras. The poison
of envy, disappointment, suspicion, apprehension had entered into her
soul. Of what use to her was a lover, however generous and faithful,
who was free to take her up and lay her aside at will? But such was her
situation relative to Georges de Saint Pierre. She remembered that the
wounded pigeon, as long as it was dependent on her kind offices, had
been compelled to stay by her side; recovered, it had flown away. Only a
pigeon, maimed beyond hope of recovery, could she be sure of compelling
to be hers for all time, tied to her by its helpless infirmity, too
suffering and disfigured to be lured from its captivity. And so, in
accordance with her philosophy of life, the widow, by a blow in the pit
of the stomach with a knuckle-duster, was to bring down her bird which
henceforth would be tended and cared for by "the Charmer" to her own
satisfaction and the admiration of all beholders.

For some reason, the natural reluctance of Gaudry, or perhaps a feeling
of compunction in the heart of the widow, this plan was not put into
immediate execution. Possibly she hesitated before adopting a plan more
cruel, more efficacious. Her hesitation did not last long.

With the dawn of the year 1877 the vigilant apprehension of the widow
was roused by the tone of M. de Saint Pierre's letters. He wrote from
his home in the country, "I cannot bear leaving you, and I don't
mean to. We will live together." But he adds that he is depressed by
difficulties with his family, "not about money or business but of a kind
he can only communicate to her verbally." To the widow it was clear that
these difficulties must relate to the subject of marriage. The character
of Georges was not a strong one; sooner or later he might yield to the
importunities of his family; her reign would be ended, a modest and
insufficient pension the utmost she could hope for. She had passed the
meridian of her life as a charmer of men, her health was giving way, she
was greedy, ambitious, acquisitive. In January she asked her nephew, who
worked as a gilder, to get her some vitriol for cleaning her copper. He
complied with her request.

During Jeanne de la Cour's brief and unsuccessful appearance as an
actress she had taken part in a play with the rather cumbrous title, Who
Puts out the Eyes must Pay for Them. The widow may have forgotten
this event; its occurrence so many years before may have been merely
a sinister coincidence. But the incident of the ballet-dancer and her
sightless lover was fresh in her mind.

Early in January the widow wrote to Georges, who was in the country, and
asked him to take her to the masked ball at the Opera on the 13th. Her
lover was rather surprised at her request, nor did he wish to appear
with her at so public a gathering. "I don't understand," he writes, "why
you are so anxious to go to the Opera. I can't see any real reason for
your wanting to tire yourself out at such a disreputable gathering.
However, if you are happy and well, and promise to be careful, I will
take you. I would be the last person, my dear little wife, to deny you
anything that would give you pleasure." But for some reason Georges was
unhappy, depressed. Some undefined presentiment of evil seems to have
oppressed him. His brother noticed his preoccupation.

He himself alludes to it in writing to his mistress: "I am depressed
this evening. For a very little I could break down altogether and give
way to tears. You can't imagine what horrid thoughts possess me. If I
felt your love close to me, I should be less sad." Against his better
inclination Georges promised to take the widow to the ball on the 13th.
He was to come to Paris on the night of the 12th.



II

THE WOUNDED PIGEON


On the afternoon of January 11, Gaudry called to see the widow. There
had been an accident at the distillery that morning, and work was
suspended for three days. The widow showed Gaudry the bottle containing
the vitriol which her nephew had procured for her use. She was ill,
suffering, she said; the only thing that could make her well again would
be the execution of her revenge on the son of the man who had defrauded
her so wickedly: "Make him suffer, here are the means, and I swear I
will be yours." She dropped a little of the vitriol on to the floor to
show its virulent effect. At first Gaudry was shocked, horrified. He
protested that he was a soldier, that he could not do such a deed; he
suggested that he should provoke the young man to a duel and kill
him. "That is no use," said the widow, always sensitive to social
distinctions; "he is not of your class, he would refuse to fight with
you." Mad with desire for the woman, his senses irritated and excited,
the ultimate gratification of his passion held alluringly before him,
the honest soldier consented to play the cowardly ruffian. The trick was
done. The widow explained to her accomplice his method of proceeding.
The building in the Rue de Boulogne, in which the widow had her
apartment, stood at the end of a drive some twenty-seven and a half
yards long and five and a half yards wide. About half-way up the drive,
on either side, there were two small houses, or pavilions, standing by
themselves and occupied by single gentlemen. The whole was shut off from
the street by a large gate, generally kept closed, in which a smaller
gate served to admit persons going in or out. According to the widow's
plan, the young man, her enemy's son, was to take her to the ball at the
Opera on the night of January 13. Gaudry was to wait in her apartment
until their return. When he heard the bell ring, which communicated with
the outer gate, he was to come down, take his place in the shadow of one
of the pavilions on either side of the drive, and from the cover of this
position fling in the face of the young man the vitriol which she had
given him. The widow herself, under the pretence of closing the smaller
gate, would be well behind the victim, and take care to leave the gate
open so that Gaudry could make his escape.

In spite of his reluctance, his sense of foreboding, Georges de Saint
Pierre came to Paris on the night of the 12th, which he spent at the
widow's apartment. He went to his own rooms on the morning of the 13th.

This eventful day, which, to quote Iago, was either to "make or
fordo quite" the widow, found her as calm, cool and deliberate in the
execution of her purpose as the Ancient himself. Gaudry came to her
apartment about five o'clock in the afternoon. The widow showed him the
vitriol and gave him final directions. She would, she said, return from
the ball about three o'clock in the morning. Gaudry was then sent
away till ten o'clock, as Georges was dining with her. He returned at
half-past ten and found the widow dressing, arraying herself in a pink
domino and a blonde wig. She was in excellent spirits. When Georges came
to fetch her, she put Gaudry into an alcove in the drawing-room which
was curtained off from the rest of the room. Always thoughtful, she had
placed a stool there that he might rest himself. Gaudry could hear her
laughing and joking with her lover. She reproached him playfully with
hindering her in her dressing. To keep him quiet, she gave him a book to
read, Montaigne's "Essays." Georges opened it and read the thirty-fifth
chapter of the second book, the essay on "Three Good Women," which tells
how three brave women of antiquity endured death or suffering in order
to share their husbands' fate. Curiously enough, the essay concludes
with these words, almost prophetic for the unhappy reader: "I am
enforced to live, and sometimes to live is magnanimity." Whilst Georges
went to fetch a cab, the widow released Gaudry from his place of
concealment, exhorted him to have courage, and promised him, if he
succeeded, the accomplishment of his desire. And so the gay couple
departed for the ball. There the widow's high spirits, her complete
enjoyment, were remarked by more than one of her acquaintances; she
danced one dance with her lover, and with another young man made an
engagement for the following week.

Meanwhile, at the Rue de Boulogne, Gaudry sat and waited in the widow's
bedroom. From the window he could see the gate and the lights of the cab
that was to bring the revellers home. The hours passed slowly. He tried
to read the volume of Montaigne where Georges had left it open, but the
words conveyed little to him, and he fell asleep. Between two and three
o'clock in the morning he was waked by the noise of wheels. They had
returned. He hurried downstairs and took up his position in the shadow
of one of the pavilions. As Georges de Saint Pierre walked up the drive
alone, for the widow had stayed behind to fasten the gate, he thought he
saw the figure of a man in the darkness. The next moment he was blinded
by the burning liquid flung in his face. The widow had brought down her
pigeon.

At first she would seem to have succeeded perfectly in her attempt.
Georges was injured for life, the sight of one eye gone, that of the
other threatened, his face sadly disfigured. Neither he nor anyone
else suspected the real author of the crime. It was believed that the
unfortunate man had been mistaken for some other person, and made by
accident the victim of an act of vengeance directed against another.
Georges was indeed all the widow's now, lodged in her own house to
nurse and care for. She undertook the duty with every appearance of
affectionate devotion. The unhappy patient was consumed with gratitude
for her untiring solicitude; thirty nights she spent by his bedside. His
belief in her was absolute. It was his own wish that she alone should
nurse him. His family were kept away, any attempts his relatives or
friends made to see or communicate with him frustrated by the zealous
widow.

It was this uncompromising attitude on her part toward the friends of
Georges, and a rumour which reached the ears of one of them that she
intended as soon as possible to take her patient away to Italy, that
sounded the first note of danger to her peace of mind. This friend
happened to be acquainted with the son of one of the Deputy Public
Prosecutors in Paris. To that official he confided his belief that there
were suspicious circumstances in the case of Georges de Saint Pierre.
The judicial authorities were informed and the case placed in the hands
of an examining magistrate. On February 2, nearly a month after the
crime, the magistrate, accompanied by Mace, then a commissary of police,
afterwards head of the Detective Department, paid a visit to the Rue de
Boulogne. Their reception was not cordial. It was only after they had
made known their official character that they got audience of the widow.
She entered the room, carrying in her hand a surgical spray, with which
she played nervously while the men of the law asked to see her charge.
She replied that it was impossible. Mace placed himself in front of the
door by which she had entered, and told her that her attitude was not
seemly. "Leave that spray alone," he said; "it might shoot over us, and
then perhaps we should be sprinkled as M. de Saint Pierre was." From
that moment, writes Mace, issue was joined between the widow and
himself.

The magistrate insisted on seeing the patient. He sat by his bedside.
M. de Saint Pierre told him that, having no enemies, he was sure he had
been the victim of some mistake, and that, as he claimed no damages
for his injuries, he did not wish his misfortune to be made public.
He wanted to be left alone with his brave and devoted nurse, and to be
spared the nervous excitement of a meeting with his family. He intended,
he added, to leave Paris shortly for change of scene and air. The widow
cut short the interview on the ground that her patient was tired.

It was inhuman, she said, to make him suffer so. The magistrate, before
leaving, asked her whither she intended taking her patient. She replied,
"To Italy." That, said the magistrate, would be impossible until his
inquiry was closed. In the meantime she might take him to any place
within the Department of the Seine; but she must be prepared to be under
the surveillance of M. Mace, who would have the right to enter her
house whenever he should think it expedient. With this disconcerting
intelligence the men of the law took leave of the widow.

She was no longer to be left in undisturbed possession of her prize.
Her movements were watched by two detectives. She was seen to go to
the bachelor lodgings of Georges and take away a portable desk, which
contained money and correspondence. More mysterious, however, was a
visit she paid to the Charonne Cemetery, where she had an interview with
an unknown, who was dressed in the clothes of a workman. She left the
cemetery alone, and the detectives lost track of her companion. This
meeting took place on February 11. Shortly after the widow left Paris
with Georges de Saint Pierre for the suburb of Courbevoie.

Mace had elicited certain facts from the porter at the Rue de Boulogne
and other witnesses, which confirmed his suspicion that the widow had
played a sinister part in her lover's misfortune. Her insistence that
he should take her to the ball on January 13; the fact that, contrary to
the ordinary politeness of a gentleman, he was walking in front of her
at the time of the attack; and that someone must have been holding the
gate open to enable the assailant to escape it was a heavy gate, which,
if left to itself after being opened, would swing too quickly on its
hinges and shut of its own accord--these facts were sufficient to
excite suspicion. The disappearance, too, of the man calling himself
her brother, who had been seen at her apartment on the afternoon of the
13th, coupled with the mysterious interview in the cemetery, suggested
the possibility of a crime in which the widow had had the help of an
accomplice. To facilitate investigation it was necessary to separate the
widow from her lover. The examining magistrate, having ascertained from
a medical report that such a separation would not be hurtful to the
patient, ordered the widow to be sent back to Paris, and the family of
M. de Saint Pierre to take her place. The change was made on March 6. On
leaving Courbevoie the widow was taken to the office of Mace. There the
commissary informed her that she must consider herself under provisional
arrest. "But who," she asked indignantly, "is to look after my Georges?"
"His family," was the curt reply. The widow, walking up and down the
room like a panther, stormed and threatened. When she had in some
degree recovered herself, Mace asked her certain questions. Why had she
insisted on her lover going to the ball? She had done nothing of the
kind. How was it his assailant had got away so quickly by the open gate?
She did not know. What was the name and address of her reputed brother?
She was not going to deliver an honest father of a family into the
clutches of the police. What was the meaning of her visit to the
Charonne Cemetery? She went there to pray, not to keep assignations.
"And if you want to know," she exclaimed, "I have had typhoid
fever, which makes me often forget things. So I shall say nothing
more--nothing--nothing."

Taken before the examining magistrate, her attitude continued to
be defiant and arrogant. "Your cleverest policemen," she told the
magistrate, "will never find any evidence against me. Think well before
you send me to prison. I am not the woman to live long among thieves and
prostitutes." Before deciding finally whether the widow should be thrown
into such uncongenial society, the magistrate ordered Mace to search her
apartment in the Rue de Boulogne.

On entering the apartment the widow asked that all the windows should be
opened. "Let in the air," she said; "the police are coming in; they
make a nasty smell." She was invited to sit down while the officers
made their search. Her letters and papers were carefully examined;
they presented a strange mixture of order and disorder. Carefully kept
account books of her personal expenses were mixed up with billets
dous, paints and pomades, moneylenders' circulars, belladonna and
cantharides. But most astounding of all were the contents of the widows'
prie-Dieu. In this devotional article of furniture were stored all the
inmost secrets of her profligate career. Affectionate letters from the
elderly gentleman on whom she had imposed a supposititious child lay
side by side with a black-edged card, on which was written the last
message of a young lover who had killed himself on her account. "Jeanne,
in the flush of my youth I die because of you, but I forgive you.--M."
With these genuine outpourings of misplaced affection were mingled the
indecent verses of a more vulgar admirer, and little jars of hashish.
The widow, unmoved by this rude exposure of her way of life, only broke
her silence to ask Mace the current prices on the Stock Exchange.

One discovery, however, disturbed her equanimity. In the drawer of a
cupboard, hidden under some linen, Mace found a leather case containing
a sheaf of partially-burnt letters. As he was about to open it the widow
protested that it was the property of M. de Saint Pierre. Regardless of
her protest, Mace opened the case, and, looking through the letters, saw
that they were addressed to M. de Saint Pierre and were plainly of an
intimate character. "I found them on the floor near the stove in the
dining-room," said the widow, "and I kept them. I admit it was a wrong
thing to do, but Georges will forgive me when he knows why I did it."
From his better acquaintance with her character Mace surmised that
an action admitted by the widow to be "wrong" was in all probability
something worse. Without delay he took the prisoner back to his office,
and himself left for Courbevoie, there to enlighten, if possible, her
unhappy victim as to the real character of his enchantress.

The interview was a painful one. The lover refused to hear a word
against his mistress. "Jeanne is my Antigone," he said. "She has
lavished on me all her care, her tenderness, her love, and she believes
in God." Mace told him of her past, of the revelations contained in the
prie-Dieu of this true believer, but he could make no impression. "I
forgive her past, I accept her present, and please understand me, no one
has the power to separate me from her." It was only when Mace placed in
his hands the bundle of burnt letters, that he might feel what he could
not see, and read him some passages from them, that the unhappy man
realised the full extent of his mistress' treachery. Feeling himself
dangerously ill, dying perhaps, M. de Saint Pierre had told the widow to
bring from his rooms to the Rue de Boulogne the contents of his private
desk. It contained some letters compromising to a woman's honour. These
he was anxious to destroy before it was too late. As he went through the
papers, his eyes bandaged, he gave them to the widow to throw into the
stove. He could hear the fire burning and feel its warmth. He heard the
widow take up the tongs. He asked her why she did so. She answered that
it was to keep the burning papers inside the stove. Now from Mace he
learnt the real truth. She had used the tongs to take out some of the
letters half burnt, letters which in her possession might be one day
useful instruments for levying blackmail on her lover. "To blind me,"
exclaimed M. de Saint Pierre, "to torture me, and then profit by my
condition to lie to me, to betray me--it's infamous--infamous!" His
dream was shattered. Mace had succeeded in his task; the disenchantment
of M. de Saint Pierre was complete. That night the fastidious widow
joined the thieves and prostitutes in the St. Lazare Prison.

It was all very well to imprison the widow, but her participation in the
outrage on M. de Saint Pierre was by no means established.

The reputed brother, who had been in the habit of attending on her at
the Rue de Boulogne, still eluded the searches of the police. In silence
lay the widow's only hope of baffling her enemies. Unfortunately for the
widow, confinement told on her nerves. She became anxious, excited. Her
very ignorance of what was going on around her, her lover's silence
made her apprehensive; she began to fear the worst. At length--the widow
always had an itch for writing--she determined to communicate at all
costs with Gaudry and invoke his aid. She wrote appealing to him to
come forward and admit that he was the man the police were seeking, for
sheltering whom she had been thrown into prison. She drew a harrowing
picture of her sufferings in jail. She had refused food and been
forcibly fed; she would like to dash her head against the walls. If any
misfortune overtake Gaudry, she promises to adopt his son and leave him
a third of her property. She persuaded a fellow-prisoner; an Italian
dancer undergoing six months' imprisonment for theft, who was on the
point of being released, to take the letter and promise to deliver it to
Gaudry at Saint Denis. On her release the dancer told her lover of her
promise. He refused to allow her to mix herself up in such a case, and
destroyed the letter. Then the dancer blabbed to others, until her story
reached the ears of the police. Mace sent for her. At first she could
remember only that the name Nathalis occurred in the letter, but after
visiting accidentally the Cathedral at Saint Denis, she recollected that
this Nathalis lived there, and worked in an oil factory. It was easy
after this for the police to trace Gaudry. He was arrested. At his
house, letters from the widow were found, warning him not to come to her
apartment, and appointing to meet him in Charonne Cemetery. Gaudry made
a full confession. It was his passion for the widow, and a promise on
her part to marry him, which, he said, had induced him to perpetrate so
abominable a crime. He was sent to the Mazas Prison.

In the meantime the Widow Gras was getting more and more desperate.
Her complete ignorance tormented her. At last she gave up all hope, and
twice attempted suicide with powdered glass and verdigris. On May 12 the
examining magistrate confronted her with Gaudry. The man told his story,
the widow feigned surprise that the "friend of her childhood" should
malign her so cruelly. But to her desperate appeals Gaudry would only
reply, "It is too late!" They were sent for trial.

The trial of the widow and her accomplice opened before the Paris Assize
Court on July 23, 1877, and lasted three days. The widow was defended by
Lachaud, one of the greatest criminal advocates of France, the defender
of Madame Lafarge, La Pommerais, Troppmann, and Marshal Bazaine. M.
Demange (famous later for his defence of Dreyfus) appeared for Gaudry.
The case had aroused considerable interest. Among those present at the
trial were Halevy, the dramatist, and Mounet-Sully and Coquelin, from
the Comedie Francaise. Fernand Rodays thus described the widow in the
Figaro: "She looks more than her age, of moderate height, well made,
neither blatant nor ill at ease, with nothing of the air of a woman of
the town. Her hands are small. Her bust is flat, and her back round, her
hair quite white. Beneath her brows glitter two jet-black eyes--the eyes
of a tigress, that seem to breathe hatred and revenge."

Gaudry was interrogated first. Asked by the President the motive of
his crime, he answered, "I was mad for Madame Gras; I would have done
anything she told me. I had known her as a child, I had been brought
up with her. Then I saw her again. I loved her, I was mad for her, I
couldn't resist it. Her wish was law to me."

Asked if Gaudry had spoken the truth, the widow said that he lied. The
President asked what could be his motive for accusing her unjustly.
The widow was silent. Lachaud begged her to answer. "I cannot," she
faltered. The President invited her to sit down. After a pause the widow
seemed to recover her nerve.

President: Was Gaudry at your house while you were at the ball?

Widow: No, no! He daren't look me in the face and say so.

President: But he is looking at you now.

Widow: No, he daren't! (She fixes her eyes on Gaudry, who lowers his
head.)

President: I, whose duty it is to interrogate you, look you in the face
and repeat my question: Was Gaudry at your house at half-past ten that
night?

Widow: No.

President: You hear her, Gaudry?

Gaudry: Yes, Monsieur, but I was there.

Widow: It is absolutely impossible! Can anyone believe me guilty of such
a thing.

President: Woman Gras, you prefer to feign indignation and deny
everything. You have the right. I will read your examination before the
examining magistrate. I see M. Lachaud makes a gesture, but I must beg
the counsel for the defence not to impart unnecessary passion into these
proceedings.

Lachaud: My gesture was merely meant to express that the woman Gras
is on her trial, and that under the circumstances her indignation is
natural.

President: Very good.

The appearance in the witness box of the widow's unhappy victim
evoked sympathy. He gave his evidence quietly, without resentment or
indignation. As he told his story the widow, whose eyes were fixed on
him all the time, murmured: "Georges! Georges! Defend me! Defend me!" "I
state the facts," he replied.

The prisoners could only defend themselves by trying to throw on each
other the guilt of the crime. M. Demange represented Gaudry as acting
under the influence of his passion for the Widow Gras. Lachaud, on the
other hand, attributed the crime solely to Gaudry's jealousy of the
widow's lover, and contended that he was the sole author of the outrage.

The jury by their verdict assigned to the widow the greater share of
responsibility. She was found guilty in the full degree, but to Gaudry
were accorded extenuating circumstances. The widow was condemned
to fifteen years' penal servitude, her accomplice to five years'
imprisonment.

It is dreadful to think how very near the Widow Gras came to
accomplishing successfully her diabolical crime. A little less
percipitancy on her part, and she might have secured the fruits of
her cruelty. Her undoubted powers of fascination, in spite of the
fiendishness of her real character, are doubly proved by the devotion of
her lover and the guilt of her accomplice. At the same time, with that
strange contradiction inherent in human nature, the Jekyll and Hyde
elements which, in varying degree, are present in all men and women, the
Widow Gras had a genuine love for her young sister. Her hatred of men
was reasoned, deliberate, merciless and implacable. There is something
almost sadistic in the combination in her character of erotic sensibility
with extreme cruelty.




Vitalis and Marie Boyer


I found the story of this case in a brochure published in Paris as
one of a series of modern causes celebres. I have compared it with the
reports of the trial in the Gazette des Tribunaux.

I In the May of 1874, in the town of Montpellier, M. Boyer, a retired
merchant, some forty-six years of age, lay dying. For some months
previous to his death he had been confined to his bed, crippled by
rheumatic gout. As the hour of his death drew near, M. Boyer was filled
with a great longing to see his daughter, Marie, a girl of fifteen, and
embrace her for the last time. The girl was being educated in a convent
at Marseilles. One of M. Boyer's friends offered to go there to fetch
her. On arriving at the convent, he was told that Marie had become
greatly attracted by the prospect of a religious life. "You are happy,"
the Mother Superior had written to her mother, "very happy never to
have allowed the impure breath of the world to have soiled this little
flower. She loves you and her father more than one can say." Her
father's friend found the girl dressed in the costume of a novice, and
was told that she had expressed her desire to take, one day, her final
vows. He informed Marie of her father's dying state, of his earnest wish
to see her for the last time, and told her that he had come to take
her to his bedside. "Take me away from here?" she exclaimed. The Mother
Superior, surprised at her apparent reluctance to go, impressed on her
the duty of acceding to her father's wish. To the astonishment of both,
Marie refused to leave the convent. If she could save her father's life,
she said, she would go, but, as that was impossible and she dreaded
going out into the world again, she would stay and pray for her father
in the chapel of the convent, where her prayers would be quite as
effective as by his bedside. In vain the friend and the Mother Superior
tried to bend her resolution.

Happily M. Boyer died before he could learn of his daughter's singular
refusal. But it had made an unfavourable impression on the friend's
mind. He looked on Marie as a girl without real feeling, an egoist, her
religion purely superficial, hiding a cold and selfish disposition; he
felt some doubt as to the future development of her character.

M. Boyer left a widow, a dark handsome woman, forty years of age.

Some twenty years before his death, Marie Salat had come to live with
M. Boyer as a domestic servant. He fell in love with her, she became his
mistress, and a few months before the birth of Marie, M. Boyer made her
his wife. Madame Boyer was at heart a woman of ardent and voluptuous
passions that only wanted opportunity to become careless in their
gratification. Her husband's long illness gave her such an opportunity.
At the time of his death she was carrying on an intrigue with a
bookseller's assistant, Leon Vitalis, a young man of twenty-one. Her
bed-ridden husband, ignorant of her infidelity, accepted gratefully
the help of Vitalis, whom his wife described as a relative, in the
regulation of his affairs. At length the unsuspecting Boyer died. The
night of his death Madame Boyer spent with her lover.

The mother had never felt any great affection for her only child.

During her husband's lifetime she was glad to have Marie out of the way
at the convent. But the death of M. Boyer changed the situation. He
had left almost the whole of his fortune, about 100,000 francs, to his
daughter, appointing her mother her legal guardian with a right to the
enjoyment of the income on the capital until Marie should come of age.
Madame Boyer had not hitherto taken her daughter's religious devotion
very seriously. But now that the greater part of her husband's fortune
was left to Marie, she realised that, should her daughter persist in
her intention of taking the veil, that fortune would in a very few
years pass into the hands of the sisterhood. Without delay Madame Boyer
exercised her authority, and withdrew Marie from the convent. The girl
quitted it with every demonstration of genuine regret.

Marie Boyer when she left the convent was growing into a tall and
attractive woman, her figure slight and elegant, her hair and eyes
dark, dainty and charming in her manner. Removed from the influences of
convent life, her religious devotion became a thing of the past. In her
new surroundings she gave herself up to the enjoyments of music and
the theatre. She realised that she was a pretty girl, whose beauty
well repaid the hours she now spent in the adornment of her person. The
charms of Marie were not lost on Leon Vitalis. Mean and significant
in appearance, Vitalis would seem to have been one of those men who,
without any great physical recommendation, have the knack of making
themselves attractive to women. After her husband's death Madame Boyer
had yielded herself completely to his influence and her own undoubted
passion for him. She had given him the money with which to purchase
a business of his own as a second-hand bookseller. This trade the
enterprising and greedy young man combined with money-lending and he
clandestine sale of improper books and photographs. To such a man the
coming of Marie Boyer was a significant event. She was younger, more
attractive than her mother; in a very few years the whole of her
father's fortune would be hers. Slowly Vitalis set himself to win the
girl's affections. The mother's suspicions were aroused; her jealousy
was excited. She sent Marie to complete her education at a convent
school in Lyons. This was in the April of 1875. By this time Marie
and Vitalis had become friendly enough to arrange to correspond
clandestinely during the girl's absence from home. Marie was so far
ignorant of the relations of Vitalis with her mother.

Her daughter sent away, Madame Boyer surrendered herself with complete
abandonment to her passion for her lover. At Castelnau, close to
Montpellier, she bought a small country house. There she could give full
rein to her desire. To the scandal of the occasional passerby she and
her lover would bathe in a stream that passed through the property,
and sport together on the grass. Indoors there were always books from
Vitalis' collection to stimulate their lascivious appetites. This life
of pastoral impropriety lasted until the middle of August, when Marie
Boyer came home from Lyons.

Vitalis would have concealed from the young girl as long as he could the
nature of his relations with Madame Boyer, but his mistress by her own
deliberate conduct made all concealment impossible. Whether from the
utter recklessness of her passion for Vitalis, or a desire to kill in
her daughter's heart any attachment which she may have felt towards her
lover, the mother paraded openly before her daughter the intimacy of her
relations with Vitalis, and with the help of the literature with which
the young bookseller supplied her, set about corrupting her child's mind
to her own depraved level. The effect of her extraordinary conduct was,
however, the opposite to what she had intended. The mind of the young
girl was corrupted; she was familiarised with vice. But in her heart
she did not blame Vitalis for what she saw and suffered; she pitied, she
excused him. It was her mother whom she grew to hate, with a hate all
the more determined for the cold passionless exterior beneath which it
was concealed.

Madame Boyer's deliberate display of her passion for Vitalis served only
to aggravate and intensify in Marie Boyer an unnatural jealousy that was
fast growing up between mother and daughter.

Marie did not return to the school at Lyons. In the winter of 1875,
Madame Boyer gave up the country house and, with her daughter, settled
in one of the suburbs of Montpellier. In the January of 1876 a theft
occurred in her household which obliged Madame Boyer to communicate
with the police. Spendthrift and incompetent in the management of her
affairs, she was hoarding and suspicious about money itself. Cash and
bonds she would hide away in unexpected places, such as books, dresses,
even a soup tureen. One of her most ingenious hiding places was a
portrait of her late husband, behind which she concealed some bearer
bonds in landed security, amounting to about 11,000 francs. One day in
January these bonds disappeared. She suspected a theft, and informed
the police. Three days later she withdrew her complaint, and no more
was heard of the matter. As Marie and Vitalis were the only persons who
could have known her secret, the inference is obvious. When, later in
the year, Vitalis announced his intention of going to Paris on business,
his mistress expressed to him the hope that he would "have a good time"
with her bonds. Vitalis left for Paris. But there was now a distinct
understanding between Marie and himself. Vitalis had declared himself
her lover and asked her to marry him. The following letter, written to
him by Marie Boyer in the October of 1876, shows her attitude toward his
proposal:


"I thank you very sincerely for your letter, which has given me very
great pleasure, because it tells me that you are well. It sets my mind
at rest, for my feelings towards you are the same as ever. I don't say
they are those of love, for I don't know myself; I don't know what such
feelings are. But I feel a real affection for you which may well turn to
love. How should I not hold in affectionate remembrance one who has done
everything for me? But love does not come to order. So I can't and don't
wish to give any positive answer about our marriage--all depends on
circumstances. I don't want any promise from you, I want you to be as
free as I am. I am not fickle, you know me well enough for that. So
don't ask me to give you any promise. You may find my letter a little
cold. But I know too much of life to pledge myself lightly. I assure
you I think on it often. Sometimes I blush when I think what marriage
means."


Madame Boyer, displeased at the theft, had let her lover go without any
great reluctance. No sooner had he gone than she began to miss him. Life
seemed dull without him. Mother and daughter were united at least in
their common regret at the absence of the young bookseller. To vary the
monotony of existence, to find if possible a husband for her daughter,
Madame Boyer decided to leave Montpellier for Marseilles, and there
start some kind of business. The daughter, who foresaw greater amusement
and pleasure in the life of a large city, assented willingly. On October
6, 1876, they arrived at Marseilles, and soon after Madame bought at
a price considerably higher than their value, two shops adjoining one
another in the Rue de la Republique. One was a cheese shop, the other a
milliner's.

The mother arranged that she should look after the cheese shop, while
her daughter presided over the milliner's. The two shops were next door
to one another. Behind the milliner's was a drawing-room, behind the
cheese shop a kitchen; these two rooms communicated with each other by
a large dark room at the back of the building. In the kitchen was a
trap-door leading to a cellar. The two women shared a bedroom in an
adjoining house.

Vitalis had opposed the scheme of his mistress to start shop-keeping in
Marseilles. He knew how unfitted she was to undertake a business of
any kind. But neither mother nor daughter would relinquish the plan. It
remained therefore to make the best of it. Vitalis saw that he must get
the business into his own hands; and to do that, to obtain full control
of Madame Boyer's affairs, he must continue to play the lover to her. To
the satisfaction of the two women, he announced his intention of coming
to Marseilles in the New Year of 1877. It was arranged that he should
pass as a nephew of Madame Boyer, the cousin of Marie. He arrived at
Marseilles on January 1, and received a cordial welcome. Of the domestic
arrangements that ensued, it is sufficient to say that they were
calculated to whet the jealousy and inflame the hatred that Marie felt
towards her mother, who now persisted as before in parading before her
daughter the intimacy of her relations with Vitalis.

In these circumstances Vitalis succeeded in extracting from his mistress
a power of attorney, giving him authority to deal with her affairs and
sell the two businesses, which were turning out unprofitable. This done,
he told Marie, whose growing attachment to him, strange as it may seem,
had turned to love, that now at last they could be free. He would sell
the two shops, and with the money released by the sale they could go
away to-gether. Suddenly Madame Boyer fell ill, and was confined to her
bed. Left to themselves, the growing passion of Marie Boyer for Vitalis
culminated in her surrender. But for the sick mother the happiness of
the lovers was complete. If only her illness were more serious, more
likely to be fatal in its result! "If only God would take her!" said
Vitalis. "Yes," replied her daughter, "she has caused us so much
suffering!"

To Madame Boyer her illness had brought hours of torment, and at last
remorse. She realised the duplicity of her lover, she knew that he meant
to desert her for her daughter, she saw what wrong she had done that
daughter, she suspected even that Marie and Vitalis were poisoning her.
Irreligious till now, her thoughts turned to religion. As soon as she
could leave her bed she would go to Mass and make atonement for her sin;
she would recover her power of attorney, get rid of Vitalis for good
and all, and send her daughter back to a convent. But it was too late.
Nemesis was swift to overtake the hapless woman. Try as he might,
Vitalis had found it impossible to sell the shops at anything but a
worthless figure. He had no money of his own, with which to take Marie
away. He knew that her mother had resolved on his instant dismissal.

As soon as Madame Boyer was recovered sufficiently to leave her bed,
she turned on her former lover, denounced his treachery, accused him
of robbing and swindling her, and bade him go without delay. To Vitalis
dismissal meant ruin, to Marie it meant the loss of her lover. During
her illness the two young people had wished Madame Boyer dead, but she
had recovered. Providence or Nature having refused to assist Vitalis,
he resolved to fall back on art. He gave up a whole night's rest to
the consideration of the question. As a result of his deliberations he
suggested to the girl of seventeen the murder of her mother. "This must
end," said Vitalis. "Yes, it must," replied Marie. Vitalis asked her if
she had any objection to such a crime. Marie hesitated, the victim was
her mother. Vitalis reminded her what sort of a mother she had been to
her. The girl said that she was terrified at the sight of blood; Vitalis
promised that her mother should be strangled. At length Marie consented.
That night on some slight pretext Madame Boyer broke out into violent
reproaches against her daughter. She little knew that every reproach
she uttered served only to harden in her daughter's heart her unnatural
resolve.

On the morning of March 19 Madame Boyer rose early to go to Mass.

Before she went out, she reminded Vitalis that this was his last day in
her service, that when she returned she would expect to find him gone.
It was after seven when she left the house. The lovers had no time to
lose; the deed must be done immediately on the mother's return. They
arranged that Vitalis should get rid of the shop-boy, and that, as soon
as he had gone, Marie should shut and lock the front doors of the
two shops. At one o'clock Madame Boyer came back. She expressed her
astonishment and disgust that Vitalis still lingered, and threatened to
send for the police to turn him out. Vitalis told the shop-boy that he
could go away for a few hours; they had some family affairs to settle.
The boy departed. Madame Boyer, tired after her long morning in the
town, was resting on a sofa in the sitting-room, at the back of the
milliner's shop. Vitalis entered the room, and after a few heated words,
struck her a violent blow in the chest. She fell back on the sofa,
calling to her daughter to come to her assistance. The daughter sought
to drown her mother's cries by banging the doors, and opening and
shutting drawers. Vitalis, who was now trying to throttle his victim,
called to Marie to shut the front doors of the two shops.

To do so Marie had to pass through the sitting-room, and was a witness
to the unsuccessful efforts of Vitalis to strangle her mother. Having
closed the doors, she retired into the milliner's shop to await the
issue. After a few moments her lover called to her for the large cheese
knife; he had caught up a kitchen knife, but in his struggles it had
slipped from his grasp. Quickly Marie fetched the knife and returned to
the sitting-room. There a desperate struggle was taking place between
the man and woman. At one moment it seemed as if Madame Boyer would get
the better of Vitalis, whom nature had not endowed greatly for work of
this kind. Marie came to his aid. She kicked and beat her mother, until
at last the wretched creature released her hold and sank back exhausted.
With the cheese knife, which her daughter had fetched, Vitalis killed
Madame Boyer.

They were murderers now, the young lovers. What to do with the body? The
boy would be coming back soon. The cellar under the kitchen seemed
the obvious place of concealment. With the help of a cord the body was
lowered into the cellar, and Marie washed the floor of the sitting-room.
The boy came back. He asked where Madame Boyer was. Vitalis told him
that she was getting ready to return to Montpellier the same evening,
and that he had arranged to go with her, but that he had no intention
of doing so; he would accompany her to the station, he said, and then at
the last moment, just as the train was starting, slip away and let
her go on her journey alone. To the boy, who knew enough of the inner
history of the household to enjoy the piquancy of the situation, such a
trick seemed quite amusing. He went away picturing in his mind the scene
at the railway station and its humorous possibilities.

At seven o'clock Vitalis and Marie Boyer were alone once more with
the murdered woman. They had the whole night before them. Vitalis had
already considered the matter of the disposal of the body. He had bought
a pick and spade. He intended to bury his former mistress in the soil
under the cellar. After that had been done, he and Marie would sell the
business for what it would fetch, and go to Brussels--an admirable plan,
which two unforeseen circumstances defeated. The Rue de la Republique
was built on a rock, blasted out for the purpose. The shop-boy had gone
to the station that evening to enjoy the joke which, he believed, was to
be played on his mistress.

When Vitalis tried to dig a grave into the ground beneath the cellar
he realised the full horror of the disappointment. What was to be done?
They must throw the body into the sea. But how to get it there? The
crime of Billoir, an old soldier, who the year before in Paris had
killed his mistress in a fit of anger and cut up her body, was fresh in
the recollection of Vitalis. The guilty couple decided to dismember
the body of Madame Boyer and so disfigure her face as to render it
unrecognisable. In the presence of Marie, Vitalis did this, and the two
lovers set out at midnight to discover some place convenient for the
reception of the remains. They found the harbour too busy for their
purpose, and decided to wait until the morrow, when they would go
farther afield. They returned home and retired for the night, occupying
the bed in which Madame Boyer had slept the night before.

On the morning of the 20th the lovers rose early, and a curious
neighbour, looking through the keyhole, saw them counting joyously money
and valuables, as they took them from Madame Boyer's cashbox. When the
shop-boy arrived, he asked Vitalis for news of Madame Boyer. Vitalis
told him that he had gone with her to the station, that she had taken
the train to Montpellier, and that, in accordance with his plan, he had
given her the slip just as the train was starting. This the boy knew to
be false: he had been to the station himself to enjoy the fun, and had
seen neither Vitalis nor Madame Boyer. He began to suspect some mystery.
In the evening, when the shops had been closed, and he had been sent
about his business, he waited and watched. In a short time he saw
Vitalis and Marie Boyer leave the house, the former dragging a hand-cart
containing two large parcels, while Marie walked by his side. They
travelled some distance with their burden, leaving the city behind
them, hoping to find some deserted spot along the coast where they could
conceal the evidence of their crime. Their nerves were shaken by meeting
with a custom-house officer, who asked them what it was they had in
the cart. Vitalis answered that it was a traveller's luggage, and the
officer let them pass on. But soon after, afraid to risk another such
experience, the guilty couple turned out the parcels into a ditch,
covered them with stones and sand, and hurried home.

The next day, the shop-boy and the inquisitive neighbour having
consulted together, went to the Commissary of Police and told him of
the mysterious disappearance of Madame Boyer. The Commissary promised to
investigate the matter, and had just dismissed his informants when word
was brought to him of the discovery, in a ditch outside Marseilles, of
two parcels containing human remains. He called back the boy and took
him to view the body at the Morgue. The boy was able, by the clothes,
to identify the body as that of his late mistress. The Commissary went
straight to the shops in the Rue de la Republique, where he found the
young lovers preparing for flight. At first they denied all knowledge of
the crime, and said that Madame Boyer had gone to Montpellier. They were
arrested, and it was not long before they both confessed their guilt to
the examining magistrate.

Vitalis and Marie Boyer were tried before the Assize Court at Aix
on July 2, 1877. Vitalis is described as mean and insignificant in
appearance, thin, round-backed, of a bilious complexion; Marie Boyer
as a pretty, dark girl, her features cold in expression, dainty and
elegant. At her trial she seemed to be still so greatly under the
influence of Vitalis that during her interrogatory the President sent
him out of court. To the examining magistrate Marie Boyer, in describing
her mother's murder, had written, "I cannot think how I came to take
part in it. I, who wouldn't have stayed in the presence of a corpse for
all the money in the world." Vitalis was condemned to death, and was
executed on August 17. He died fearful and penitent, acknowledging
his miserable career to be a warning to misguided youth. Extenuating
circumstances were accorded to Marie Boyer, and she was sentenced to
penal servitude for life. Her conduct in prison was so repentant and
exemplary that she was released in 1892.

M. Proal, a distinguished French judge, and the author of some important
works on crime, acted as the examining magistrate in the case of Vitalis
and Marie Boyer. He thus sums up his impression of the two criminals:
"Here is an instance of how greed and baseness on the one side, lust and
jealousy on the other, bring about by degrees a change in the
characters of criminals, and, after some hesitation, the suggestion and
accomplishment of parricide, Is it necessary to seek an explanation
of the crime in any psychic abnormality which is negatived to all
appearances by the antecedents of the guilty pair? Is it necessary to
ask it of anatomy or physiology? Is not the crime the result of moral
degradation gradually asserting itself in two individuals, whose moral
and intellectual faculties are the same as those of other men, but
who fall, step by step, into vice and crime? It is by a succession of
wrongful acts that a man first reaches the frontier of crime and then at
length crosses it."




The Fenayrou Case


There is an account of this case in Bataille "Causes Criminelles et
Mondaines" (1882), and in Mace's book, "Femmes Criminelles." It is
alluded to in "Souvenirs d'un President d'Assises," by Berard des
Glajeux. The murder of the chemist Aubert by Marin Fenayrou and his wife
Gabrielle was perpetrated near Paris in the year 1882. In its beginning
the story is commonplace enough. Fenayrou was the son of a small
chemist in the South of France, and had come to Paris from the Aveyron
Department to follow his father's vocation. He obtained a situation
as apprentice in the Rue de la Ferme des Mathurins in the shop of a M.
Gibon. On the death of M. Gibon his widow thought she saw in Fenayrou
a man capable of carrying on her late husband's business. She gave her
daughter in marriage to her apprentice, and installed him in the
shop. The ungrateful son-in-law, sure of his wife and his business and
contrary to his express promise, turned the old lady out of the house.
This occurred in the year 1870, Fenayrou being then thirty years of age,
his wife, Gabrielle, seventeen.

They were an ill-assorted and unattractive couple. The man, a compound
of coarse brutality and shrewd cunning, was at heart lazy and selfish,
the woman a spoilt child, in whom a real want of feeling was supplied by
a shallow sentimentalism. Vain of the superior refinement conferred
on her by a good middle-class education, she despised and soon came to
loathe her coarse husband, and lapsed into a condition of disappointment
and discontent that was only relieved superficially by an extravagant
devotion to religious exercises.

It was in 1875, when the disillusionment of Mme. Fenayrou was complete,
that her husband received into his shop a pupil, a youth of twenty-one,
Louis Aubert. He was the son of a Norman tradesman. The ambitious father
had wished his son to enter the church, but the son preferred to be a
chemist. He was a shrewd, hard-working fellow, with an eye to the main
chance and a taste for pleasures that cost him nothing, jovial, but
vulgar and self-satisfied, the kind of man who, having enjoyed the
favours of woman, treats her with arrogance and contempt, till from
loving she comes to loathe him--a characteristic example, according
to M. Bourget, of le faux homme a femmes. Such was Aubert, Fenayrou's
pupil. He was soon to become something more than pupil.

Fenayrou as chemist had not answered to the expectations of his
mother-in-law. His innate laziness and love of coarse pleasures had
asserted themselves. At first his wife had shared in the enjoyments, but
as time went on and after the birth of their two children, things became
less prosperous. She was left at home while Fenayrou spent his time
in drinking bocks of beer, betting and attending race-meetings. It was
necessary, under these circumstances, that someone should attend to
the business of the shop. In Aubert Fenayrou found a ready and willing
assistant.

From 1876 to 1880, save for an occasional absence for military service,
Aubert lived with the Fenayrous, managing the business and making love
to the bored and neglected wife, who after a few months became his
mistress. Did Fenayrou know of this intrigue or not? That is a crucial
question in the case. If he did not, it was not for want of warning from
certain of his friends and neighbours, to whom the intrigue was a matter
of common knowledge. Did he refuse to believe in his wife's guilt? or,
dependent as he was for his living on the exertions of his assistant,
did he deliberately ignore it, relying on his wife's attractions to
keep the assiduous Aubert at work in the shop? In any case Aubert's
arrogance, which had increased with the consciousness of his importance
to the husband and his conquest of the wife, led in August of 1880, to
a rupture. Aubert left the Fenayrous and bought a business of his own on
the Boulevard Malesherbes.

Before his departure Aubert had tried to persuade Mme. Gibon to sell up
her son-in-law by claiming from him the unpaid purchase-money for her
husband's shop. He represented Fenayrou as an idle gambler, and hinted
that he would find her a new purchaser. Such an underhand proceeding was
likely to provoke resentment if it should come to the ears of Fenayrou.
During the two years that elapsed between his departure from Fenayrou's
house and his murder, Aubert had prospered in his shop on the Boulevard
Malesherbes, whilst the fortunes of the Fenayrous had steadily
deteriorated.

At the end of the year 1881 Fenayrou sold his shop and went with
his family to live on one of the outer boulevards, that of
Gouvion-Saint-Cyr. He had obtained a post in a shady mining company, in
which he had persuaded his mother-in-law to invest 20,000 francs. He had
attempted also to make money by selling fradulent imitations of a
famous table-water. For this offence, at the beginning of 1882, he
was condemned by the Correctional Tribunal of Paris to three months'
imprisonment and 1,000 francs costs.

In March of 1882 the situation of the Fenayrous was parlous, that of
Aubert still prosperous.

Since Aubert's departure Mme. Fenayrou had entertained another lover, a
gentleman on the staff of a sporting newspaper, one of Fenayrou's turf
acquaintances. This gentleman had found her a cold mistress, preferring
the ideal to the real. As a murderess Madame Fenayrou overcame this
weakness.

If we are to believe Fenayrou's story, the most critical day in his life
was March 22, 1882, for it was on that day, according to his account,
that he learnt for the first time of his wife's intrigue with Aubert.
Horrified and enraged at the discovery, he took from her her nuptial
wreath, her wedding-ring, her jewellery, removed from its frame her
picture in charcoal which hung in the drawing-room, and told her,
paralysed with terror, that the only means of saving her life was to
help him to murder her lover.

Two months later, with her assistance, this outraged husband
accomplished his purpose with diabolical deliberation. He must have been
well aware that, had he acted on the natural impulse of the moment and
revenged himself then and there on Aubert, he would have committed what
is regarded by a French jury as the most venial of crimes, and would
have escaped with little or no punishment. He preferred, for reasons of
his own, to set about the commission of a deliberate and cold-blooded
murder that bears the stamp of a more sinister motive than the vengeance
of a wronged husband.

The only step he took after the alleged confession of his wife on March
22 was to go to a commissary of police and ask him to recover from
Aubert certain letters of his wife's that were in his possession. This
the commissary refused to do. Mme. Gibon, the mother-in-law, was sent to
Aubert to try to recover the letters, but Aubert declined to give them
up, and wrote to Mme. Fenayrou:


"Madame, to my displeasure I have had a visit this morning from your
mother, who has come to my home and made a most unnecessary scene
and reproached me with facts so serious that I must beg you to see me
without delay. It concerns your honour and mine.... I have no fear of
being confronted with your husband and yourself. I am ready, when
you wish, to justify myself.... Please do all you can to prevent
a repetition of your mother's visit or I shall have to call in the
police."


It is clear that the Fenayrous attached the utmost importance to the
recovery of this correspondence, which disappeared with Aubert's death.
Was the prime motive of the murder the recovery and destruction of these
letters? Was Aubert possessed of some knowledge concerning the Fenayrous
that placed them at his mercy?

It would seem so. To a friend who had warned him of the danger to which
his intimacy with Gabrielle Fenayrou exposed him, Aubert had replied,
"Bah! I've nothing to fear. I hold them in my power." The nature of
the hold which Aubert boasted that he possessed over these two persons
remains the unsolved mystery of the case, "that limit of investigation,"
in the words of a French judge, "one finds in most great cases, beyond
which justice strays into the unknown."

That such a hold existed, Aubert's own statement and the desperate
attempts made by the Fenayrous to get back these letters, would seem
to prove beyond question. Had Aubert consented to return them, would
he have saved his life? It seems probable. As it was, he was doomed.
Fenayrou hated him. They had had a row on a race-course, in the course
of which Aubert had humiliated his former master. More than this, Aubert
had boasted openly of his relations with Mme. Fenayrou, and the fact
had reached the ears of the husband. Fenayrou believed also, though
erroneously, that Aubert had informed against him in the matter of the
table-water fraud. Whether his knowledge of Aubert's relations with
his wife was recent or of long standing, he had other grounds of hate
against his former pupil. He himself had failed in life, but he saw his
rival prosperous, arrogant in his prosperity, threatening, dangerous
to his peace of mind; he envied and feared as well as hated him.
Cruel, cunning and sinister, Fenayrou spent the next two months in the
meditation of a revenge that was not only to remove the man he feared,
but was to give him a truly fiendish opportunity of satisfying his
ferocious hatred.

And the wife what of her share in the business? Had she also come to
hate Aubert? Or did she seek to expiate her guilt by assisting her
husband in the punishment of her seducer? A witness at the trial
described Mme. Fenayrou as "a soft paste" that could be moulded equally
well to vice or virtue, a woman destitute of real feeling or strength of
will, who, under the direction of her husband, carried out implicitly,
precisely and carefully her part in an atrocious murder, whose only
effort to prevent the commission of such a deed was to slip away into a
church a few minutes before she was to meet the man she was decoying to
his death, and pray that his murder might be averted.

Her religious sense, like the images in the hat of Louis XI., was a
source of comfort and consolation in the doing of evil, but powerless
to restrain her from the act itself, in the presence of a will stronger
than her own. At the time of his death Aubert contemplated marriage, and
had advertised for a wife. If Mme. Fenayrou was aware of this, it may
have served to stimulate her resentment against her lover, but there
seems little reason to doubt that, left to herself, she would never have
had the will or the energy to give that resentment practical expression.
It required the dictation of the vindictive and malevolent Fenayrou to
crystallise her hatred of Aubert into a deliberate participation in his
murder.

Eight or nine miles north-west of Paris lies the small town of Chatou, a
pleasant country resort for tired Parisians. Here Madeleine Brohan, the
famous actress, had inhabited a small villa, a two-storied building. At
the beginning of 1882 it was to let. In the April of that year a person
of the name of "Hess" agreed to take it at a quarterly rent of 1,200
francs, and paid 300 in advance. "Hess" was no other than Fenayrou--the
villa that had belonged to Madeleine Brohan the scene chosen for
Aubert's murder. Fenayrou was determined to spare no expense in the
execution of his design: it was to cost him some 3,000 francs before he
had finished with it.

As to the actual manner of his betrayer's death, the outraged husband
found it difficult to make up his mind. It was not to be prompt, nor
was unnecessary suffering to be avoided. At first he favoured a pair of
"infernal" opera-glasses that concealed a couple of steel points which,
by means of a spring, would dart out into the eyes of anyone using them
and destroy their sight. This rather elaborate and uncertain machine was
abandoned later in favour of a trap for catching wolves. This was to be
placed under the table, and seize in its huge iron teeth the legs of the
victim. In the end simplicity, in the shape of a hammer and sword-stick,
won the day. An assistant was taken in the person of Lucien Fenayrou, a
brother of Marin.

This humble and obliging individual, a maker of children's toys,
regarded his brother the chemist with something like veneration as the
gentleman and man of education of the family. Fifty francs must
have seemed to him an almost superfluous inducement to assist in the
execution of what appeared to be an act of legitimate vengeance, an
affair of family honour in which the wife and brother of the injured
husband were in duty bound to participate. Mme. Fenayrou, with
characteristic superstition, chose the day of her boy's first communion
to broach the subject of the murder to Lucien. By what was perhaps more
than coincidence, Ascension Day, May 18, was selected as the day for the
crime itself. There were practical reasons also. It was a Thursday and
a public holiday. On Thursdays the Fenayrou children spent the day with
their grandmother, and at holiday time there was a special midnight
train from Chatou to Paris that would enable the murderers to return to
town after the commission of their crime. A goat chaise and twenty-six
feet of gas piping had been purchased by Fenayrou and taken down to the
villa.

Nothing remained but to secure the presence of the victim. At the
direction of her husband Mme. Fenayrou wrote to Aubert on May 14, a
letter in which she protested her undying love for him, and expressed
a desire to resume their previous relations. Aubert demurred at first,
but, as she became more pressing, yielded at length to her suggestion.
If it cost him nothing, Aubert was the last man to decline an invitation
of the kind. A trip to Chatou was arranged for Ascension Day, May 18, by
the train leaving Paris from the St. Lazare Station, at half-past eight
in the evening.

On the afternoon of that day Fenayrou, his wife and his brother sent
the children to their grandmother and left Paris for Chatou at three
o'clock. Arrived there, they went to the villa, Fenayrou carrying
the twenty-six feet of gas-piping wound round him like some huge
hunting-horn. He spent the afternoon in beating out the piping till it
was flat, and in making a gag. He tried to take up the flooring in the
kitchen, but this plan for the concealment of the body was abandoned
in favour of the river. As soon as these preparations, in which he was
assisted by his two relatives, had been completed, Fenayrou placed a
candle, some matches and the sword-stick on the drawing-room table and
returned to Paris.

The three conspirators dined together heartily in the Avenue de
Clichy--soup, fish, entree, sweet and cheese, washed down by a bottle
of claret and a pint of burgundy, coffee to follow, with a glass of
chartreuse for Madame. To the waiter the party seemed in the best of
spirits. Dinner ended, the two men returned to Chatou by the 7.35 train,
leaving Gabrielle to follow an hour later with Aubert. Fenayrou had
taken three second-class return tickets for his wife, his brother and
himself, and a single for their visitor. It was during the interval
between the departure of her husband and her meeting with Aubert that
Mme. Fenayrou went into the church of St. Louis d'Antin and prayed.

At half-past eight she met Aubert at the St. Lazare Station, gave
him his ticket and the two set out for Chatou--a strange journey Mme.
Fenayrou was asked what they talked about in the railway carriage. "Mere
nothings," she replied. Aubert abused her mother; for her own part, she
was very agitated--tres emotionnee. It was about half-past nine when
they reached their destination. The sight of the little villa pleased
Aubert.

"Ah!" he said, "this is good. I should like a house like this and
twenty thousand francs a year!" As he entered the hall, surprised at
the darkness, he exclaimed: "The devil! it's precious dark! 'tu sais,
Gabrielle, que je ne suis pas un heros d'aventure.'" The woman pushed
him into the drawing-room. He struck a match on his trousers. Fenayrou,
who had been lurking in the darkness in his shirt sleeves, made a blow
at him with the hammer, but it was ineffectual. A struggle ensued. The
room was plunged in darkness. Gabrielle waited outside. After a little,
her husband called for a light; she came in and lit a candle on the
mantelpiece. Fenayrou was getting the worst of the encounter. She ran
to his help, and dragged off his opponent. Fenayrou was free. He struck
again with the hammer. Aubert fell, and for some ten minutes Fenayrou
stood over the battered and bleeding man abusing and insulting
him, exulting in his vengeance. Then he stabbed him twice with the
sword-stick, and so ended the business.

The murderers had to wait till past eleven to get rid of the body, as
the streets were full of holiday-makers. When all was quiet they put it
into the goat chaise, wrapped round with the gas-piping, and wheeled it
on to the Chatou bridge. To prevent noise they let the body down by a
rope into the water. It was heavier than they thought, and fell with a
loud splash into the river. "Hullo!" exclaimed a night-fisherman, who
was mending his tackle not far from the bridge, "there go those butchers
again, chucking their filth into the Seine!"

As soon as they had taken the chaise back to the villa, the three
assassins hurried to the station to catch the last train. Arriving there
a little before their time, they went into a neighbouring cafe. Fenayrou
had three bocks, Lucien one, and Madame another glass of chartreuse.
So home to Paris. Lucien reached his house about two in the morning.
"Well," asked his wife, "did you have a good day?" "Splendid," was the
reply.

Eleven days passed. Fenayrou paid a visit to the villa to clean it
and put it in order. Otherwise he went about his business as usual,
attending race meetings, indulging in a picnic and a visit to the Salon.
On May 27 a man named Bailly, who, by a strange coincidence, was
known by the nickname of "the Chemist," walking by the river, had his
attention called by a bargeman to a corpse that was floating on the
water. He fished it out. It was that of Aubert. In spite of a gag tired
over his mouth the water had got into the body, and, notwithstanding the
weight of the lead piping, it had risen to the surface.

As soon as the police had been informed of the disappearance of Aubert,
their suspicions had fallen on the Fenayrous in consequence of the
request which Marin Fenayrou had made to the commissary of police to
aid him in the recovery from Aubert of his wife's letters. But there
had been nothing further in their conduct to provoke suspicion. When,
however, the body was discovered and at the same time an anonymous
letter received denouncing the Fenayrous as the murderers of Aubert, the
police decided on their arrest. On the morning of June 8 M. Mace,
then head of the Detective Department, called at their house. He found
Fenayrou in a dressing-gown. This righteous avenger of his wife's
seduction denied his guilt, like any common criminal, but M. Mace handed
him over to one of his men, to be taken immediately to Versailles. He
himself took charge of Madame, and, in the first-class carriage full of
people, in which they travelled together to Versailles, she whispered to
the detective a full confession of the crime.

Mace has left us an account of this singular railway journey. It was two
o'clock in the afternoon. In the carriage were five ladies and a young
man who was reading La Vie Parisienne. Mme. Fenayrou was silent and
thoughtful. "You're thinking of your present position?" asked the
detective. "No, I'm thinking of my mother and my dear children." "They
don't seem to care much about their father," remarked Mace. "Perhaps
not." "Why?" asked M. Mace. "Because of his violent temper," was the
reply. After some further conversation and the departure at Courbevoie
of the young man with La Vie Parisienne, Mme. Fenayrou asked abruptly:
"Do you think my husband guilty?" "I'm sure of it." "So does Aubert's
sister." "Certainly," answered M. Mace; "she looks on the crime as one
of revenge." "But my brother-in-law," urged the woman, "could have had
no motive for vengeance against Aubert." Mace answered coldly that he
would have to explain how he had employed his time on Ascension Day.
"You see criminals everywhere," answered Madame.

After the train had left St. Cloud, where the other occupants of the
carriage had alighted, the detective and his prisoner were alone, free
of interruption till Versailles should be reached. Hitherto they had
spoken in whispers; now Mace seized the opportunity to urge the woman to
unbosom herself to him, to reveal her part in the crime. She burst into
tears. There was an interval of silence; then she thanked Mace for the
kindness and consideration he had shown her. "You wish me," she asked,
"to betray my husband?" "Without any design or intention on your
part," discreetly answered the detective; "but by the sole force of
circumstances you are placed in such a position that you cannot help
betraying him."

Whether convinced or not of this tyranny of circumstance, Mme. Fenayrou
obeyed her mentor, and calmly, coldly, without regret or remorse, told
him the story of the assassination. Towards the end of her narration she
softened a little. "I know I am a criminal," she exclaimed. "Since this
morning I have done nothing but lie. I am sick of it; it makes me
suffer too much. Don't tell my husband until this evening that I have
confessed; there's no need, for, after what I have told you, you can
easily expose his falsehoods and so get at the truth."

That evening the three prisoners--Lucien had been arrested at the
same time as the other two--were brought to Chatou. Identified by
the gardener as the lessee of the villa, Fenayrou abandoned his
protestations of innocence and admitted his guilt. The crime was then
and there reconstituted in the presence of the examining magistrate.
With the help of a gendarme, who impersonated Aubert, Fenayrou repeated
the incidents of the murder. The goat-chaise was wheeled to the bridge,
and there in the presence of an indignant crowd, the murderer showed how
the body had been lowered into the river.

After a magisterial investigation lasting two months, which failed
to shed any new light on the more mysterious elements in the case,
Fenayrou, his wife and brother were indicted on August 19 before the
Assize Court for the Seine-et-Oise Department, sitting at Versailles.

The attitude of the three culprits was hardly such as to provoke the
sympathies of even a French jury. Fenayrou seemed to be giving a clumsy
and unconvincing performance of the role of the wronged husband; his
heavy figure clothed in an ill-fitting suit of "blue dittos," his
ill-kempt red beard and bock-stained moustache did not help him in his
impersonation. Mme. Fenayrou, pale, colourless, insignificant, was cold
and impenetrable. She described the murder of her lover "as if she were
giving her cook a household recipe for making apricot Jam." Lucien was
humble and lachrymose.

In his interrogatory of the husband the President, M. Berard des
Glajeux, showed himself frankly sceptical as to the ingenuousness of
Fenayrou's motives in assassinating Aubert. "Now, what was the motive of
this horrible crime?" he asked. "Revenge," answered Fenayrou.

President: But consider the care you took to hide the body and destroy
all trace of your guilt; that is not the way in which a husband sets out
to avenge his honour; these are the methods of the assassin! With your
wife's help you could have caught Aubert in flagrante delicto and killed
him on the spot, and the law would have absolved you. Instead of
which you decoy him into a hideous snare. Public opinion suggests that
jealousy of your former assistant's success, and mortification at your
own failure, were the real motives. Or was it not perhaps that you had
been in the habit of rendering somewhat dubious services to some of your
promiscuous clients?

Fenayrou: Nothing of the kind, I swear it!

President: Do not protest too much. Remember that among your
acquaintances you were suspected of cheating at cards. As a chemist you
had been convinced of fraud. Perhaps Aubert knew something against you.
Some act of poisoning, or abortion, in which you had been concerned?
Many witnesses have believed this.

Your mother-in-law is said to have remarked, "My son-in-law will end in
jail."

Fenayrou (bursting into tears): This is too dreadful.

President: And Dr. Durand, an old friend of Aubert, remembers the
deceased saying to him, "One has nothing to fear from people one holds
in one's hands."

Fenayrou: I don't know what he meant.

President: Or, considering the cruelty, cowardice, the cold calculation
displayed in the commission of the crime, shall we say this was a
woman's not a man's revenge. You have said your wife acted as your
slave--was it not the other way about?

Fenayrou: No; it was my revenge, mine alone.

The view that regarded Mme. Fenayrou as a soft, malleable paste was not
the view of the President.

"Why," he asked the woman, "did you commit this horrible murder, decoy
your lover to his death?" "Because I had repented," was the answer; "I
had wronged my husband, and since he had been condemned for fraud,
I loved him the more for being unfortunate. And then I feared for my
children."

President: Is that really the case?

Mme. Fenayrou: Certainly it is.

President: Then your whole existence has been one of lies and hypocrisy.
Whilst you were deceiving your husband and teaching your children to
despise him you were covering him with caresses.

You have played false to both husband and lover--to Aubert in decoying
him to his death, to your husband by denouncing him directly you were
arrested. You have betrayed everybody. The only person you have not
betrayed is yourself. What sort of a woman are you? As you and Aubert
went into the drawing-room on the evening of the murder you said loudly,
"This is the way," so that your husband, hearing your voice outside,
should not strike you by mistake in the darkness. If Lucien had not told
us that you attacked Aubert whilst he was struggling with your husband,
we should never have known it, for you would never have admitted it, and
your husband has all along refused to implicate you.... You have said
that you had ceased to care for your lover: he had ceased to care for
you. He was prosperous, happy, about to marry: you hated him, and you
showed your hate when, during the murder, you flung yourself upon him
and cried, "Wretch!" Is that the behaviour of a woman who represents
herself to have been the timid slave of her husband? No. This crime is
the revenge of a cowardly and pitiless woman, who writes down in her
account book the expenses of the trip to Chatou and, after the murder,
picnics merrily in the green fields. It was you who steeled your husband
to the task.

How far the President was justified in thus inverting the parts played
by the husband and wife in the crime must be a matter of opinion. In his
volume of Souvenirs M. Berard des Glajeux modifies considerably the view
which he perhaps felt it his duty to express in his interrogatory of
Gabrielle Fenayrou. He describes her as soft and flexible by nature, the
repentant slave of her husband, seeking to atone for her wrong to him
by helping him in his revenge. The one feature in the character of
Mme. Fenayrou that seems most clearly demonstrated is its absolute
insensibility under any circumstances whatsoever.

The submissive Lucien had little to say for himself, nor could any
motive for joining in the murder beyond a readiness to oblige his
brother be suggested. In his Souvenirs M. Berard des Glajeux states that
to-day it would seem to be clearly established that Lucien acted blindly
at the bidding of his sister-in-law, "qu'il avait beaucoup aimee et qui
n'avait pas ete cruelle a son egard."

The evidence recapitulated for the most part the facts already set
out. The description of Mme. Fenayrou by the gentleman on the sporting
newspaper who had succeeded Aubert in her affections is, under the
circumstances, interesting: "She was sad, melancholy; I questioned
her, and she told me she was married to a coarse man who neglected her,
failed to understand her, and had never loved her. I became her lover
but, except on a few occasions, our relations were those of good
friends. She was a woman with few material wants, affectionate,
expansive, an idealist, one who had suffered much and sought from
without a happiness her marriage had never brought her. I believe her to
have been the blind tool of her husband."

From motives of delicacy the evidence of this gentleman was read in
his presence; he was not examined orally. His eulogy of his mistress
is loyal. Against it may be set the words of the Procureur de la
Republique, M. Delegorgue: "Never has a more thorough-paced, a more
hideous monster been seated in the dock of an assize court. This woman
is the personification of falsehood, depravity, cowardice and treachery.
She is worthy of the supreme penalty." The jury were not of this
opinion. They preferred to regard Mme. Fenayrou as playing a secondary
part to that of her husband. They accorded in both her case and that
of Lucien extenuating circumstances. The woman was sentenced to penal
servitude for life, Lucien to seven years. Fenayrou, for whose conduct
the jury could find no extenuation, was condemned to death.

It is the custom in certain assize towns for the President, after
pronouncing sentence, to visit a prisoner who had been ordered for
execution. M. Berard des Glajeux describes his visit to Fenayrou at
Versailles. He was already in prison dress, sobbing.

His iron nature, which during five days had never flinched, had
broken down; but it was not for himself he wept, but for his wife, his
children, his brother; of his own fate he took no account. At the same
moment his wife was in the lodge of the courthouse waiting for the cab
that was to take her to her prison. Freed from the anxieties of the
trial, knowing her life to be spared, without so much as a thought for
the husband whom she had never loved, she had tidied herself up, and
now, with all the ease of a woman, whose misfortunes have not destroyed
her self-possession, was doing the honours of the jail. It was she who
received her judge.

But Fenayrou was not to die. The Court of Cassation, to which he had
made the usual appeal after condemnation, decided that the proceedings
at Versailles had been vitiated by the fact that the evidence of
Gabrielle Fenayrou's second lover had not been taken ORALLY, within the
requirements of the criminal code; consequently a new trial was ordered
before the Paris Assize Court. This second trial, which commenced on
October 12, saved Fenayrou's head. The Parisian jury showed themselves
more lenient than their colleagues at Versailles. Not only was Fenayrou
accorded extenuating circumstances, but Lucien was acquitted altogether.
The only person to whom these new proceedings brought no benefit was
Mme. Fenayrou, whose sentence remained unaltered.

Marin Fenayrou was sent to New Caledonia to serve his punishment.

There he was allowed to open a dispensary, but, proving dishonest, he
lost his license and became a ferryman--a very Charon for terrestrial
passengers. He died in New Caledonia of cancer of the liver.

Gabrielle Fenayrou made an exemplary prisoner, so exemplary that, owing
to her good conduct and a certain ascendancy she exercised over her
fellow-prisoners, she was made forewoman of one of the workshops. Whilst
holding this position she had the honour of receiving, among those
entrusted to her charge, another Gabrielle, murderess, Gabrielle
Bompard, the history of whose crime is next to be related.




Eyraud and Bompard


There are accounts of this case in Bataille "Causes Criminelles et
Mondaines," 1890, and in Volume X. of Fouquier "Causes Celebres."
"L'Affaire Gouffe" by Dr. Lacassagne, Lyons, 1891, and Goron "L'Amour
Criminel" may be consulted.

ON July 27, in the year 1889, the Parisian police were informed of the
disappearance of one Gouffe, a bailiff. He had been last seen by two
friends on the Boulevard Montmartre at about ten minutes past seven on
the evening of the 26th, a Friday. Since then nothing had been heard of
him, either at his office in the Rue Montmartre, or at his private
house in the Rue Rougemont. This was surprising in the case of a man of
regular habits even in his irregularities, robust health, and cheerful
spirits.

Gouffe was a widower, forty-two years of age. He had three daughters
who lived happily with him in the Rue Rougemont. He did a good trade as
bailiff and process-server, and at times had considerable sums of money
in his possession. These he would never leave behind him at his office,
but carry home at the end of the day's work, except on Fridays. Friday
nights Gouffe always spent away from home. As the society he sought
on these nights was of a promiscuous character, he was in the habit
of leaving at his office any large sum of money that had come into his
hands during the day.

About nine o'clock on this particular Friday night, July 26, the
hall-porter at Gouffe's office in the Rue Montmartre heard someone, whom
he had taken at first to be the bailiff himself, enter the hall and go
upstairs to the office, where he remained a few minutes. As he descended
the stairs the porter came out of his lodge and, seeing it was a
stranger, accosted him. But the man hurried away without giving the
porter time to see his face.

When the office was examined the next day everything was found in
perfect order, and a sum of 14,000 francs, hidden away behind some
papers, untouched. The safe had not been tampered with; there was, in
short, nothing unusual about the room except ten long matches that were
lying half burnt on the floor.

On hearing of the bailiff's disappearance and the mysterious visitor
to his office, the police, who were convinced that Gouffe had been the
victim of some criminal design, inquired closely into his habits, his
friends, his associates, men and women. But the one man who could have
breathed the name that would have set the police on the track of the
real culprits was, for reasons of his own, silent. The police examined
many persons, but without arriving at any useful result.

However, on August 15, in a thicket at the foot of a slope running down
from the road that passes through the district of Millery, about
ten miles from Lyons, a roadmender, attracted by a peculiar smell,
discovered the remains of what appeared to be a human body. They were
wrapped in a cloth, but so decomposed as to make identification almost
impossible. M. Goron, at that time head of the Parisian detective
police, believed them to be the remains of Gouffe, but a relative of the
missing man, whom he sent to Lyons, failed to identify them. Two days
after the discovery of the corpse, there were found near Millery the
broken fragments of a trunk, the lock of which fitted a key that had
been picked up near the body. A label on the trunk showed that it had
been dispatched from Paris to Lyons on July 27, 188--, but the final
figure of the date was obliterated. Reference to the books of the
railway company showed that on July 27, 1889, the day following the
disappearance of Gouffe, a trunk similar in size and weight to that
found near Millery had been sent from Paris to Lyons.

The judicial authorities at Lyons scouted the idea that either the
corpse or the trunk found at Millery had any connection with the
disappearance of Gouffe. When M. Goron, bent on following up what he
believed to be important clues, went himself to Lyons he found that
the remains, after being photographed, had been interred in the common
burying-ground. The young doctor who had made the autopsy produced
triumphantly some hair taken from the head of the corpse and showed M.
Goron that whilst Gouffe's hair was admittedly auburn and cut short,
this was black, and had evidently been worn long. M. Goron, after
looking carefully at the hair, asked for some distilled water. He put
the lock of hair into it and, after a few minutes' immersion, cleansed
of the blood, grease and dust that had caked them together, the hairs
appeared clearly to be short and auburn. The doctor admitted his error.

Fortified by this success, Goron was able to procure the exhumation of
the body. A fresh autopsy was performed by Dr. Lacassagne, the eminent
medical jurist of the Lyons School of Medicine. He was able to pronounce
with certainty that the remains were those of the bailiff, Gouffe. An
injury to the right ankle, a weakness of the right leg, the absence of
a particular tooth and other admitted peculiarities in Gouffe's physical
conformation, were present in the corpse, placing its identity beyond
question. This second post-mortem revealed furthermore an injury to the
thyroid cartilage of the larynx that had been inflicted beyond any doubt
whatever, declared Dr. Lacassagne, before death.

There was little reason to doubt that Gouffe had been the victim of
murder by strangulation.

But by whom had the crime been committed? It was now the end of
November. Four months had passed since the bailiff's murder, and the
police had no clue to its perpetrators. At one time a friend of Gouffe's
had been suspected and placed under arrest, but he was released for want
of evidence.

One day toward the close of November, in the course of a conversation
with M. Goron, a witness who had known Gouffe surprised him by saying
abruptly, "There's another man who disappeared about the same time as
Gouffe." M. Goron pricked up his ears. The witness explained that he
had not mentioned the fact before, as he had not connected it with his
friend's disappearance; the man's name, he said, was Eyraud, Michel
Eyraud, M. Goron made some inquires as to this Michel Eyraud. He learnt
that he was a married man, forty-six years of age, once a distiller at
Sevres, recently commission-agent to a bankrupt firm, that he had left
France suddenly, about the time of the disappearance of Gouffe, and that
he had a mistress, one Gabrielle Bompard, who had disappeared with him.
Instinctively M. Goron connected this fugitive couple with the fate of
the murdered bailiff.

Confirmation of his suspicions was to come from London. The remains of
the trunk found at Millery had been skilfully put together and exposed
at the Morgue in Paris, whilst the Gouffe family had offered a reward
of 500 francs to anybody who could in any way identify the trunk. Beyond
producing a large crop of anonymous letters, in one of which the crime
was attributed to General Boulanger, then in Jersey, these measures
seemed likely to prove fruitless. But one day in December, from the
keeper of a boarding-house in Gower Street, M. Goron received a letter
informing him that the writer believed that Eyraud and Gabrielle Bompard
had stayed recently at his house, and that on July 14 the woman, whom he
knew only as "Gabrielle," had left for France, crossing by Newhaven and
Dieppe, and taking with her a large and almost empty trunk, which
she had purchased in London. Inquires made by the French detectives
established the correctness of this correspondent's information. An
assistant at a trunk shop in the Euston Road was able to identify the
trunk--brought over from Paris for the purpose--as one purchased in his
shop on July 12 by a Frenchman answering to the description of Michel
Eyraud. The wife of the boarding-house keeper recollected having
expressed to Gabrielle her surprise that she should buy such an enormous
piece of luggage when she had only one dress to put into it. "Oh that's
all right," answered Gabrielle smilingly, "we shall have plenty to fill
it with in Paris!" Gabrielle had gone to Paris with the trunk on July
14, come back to London on the 17th, and on the 20th she and Eyraud
returned together to Paris From these facts it seemed more than probable
that these two were the assassins so eagerly sought for by the police,
and it seemed clear also that the murder had been done in Paris. But
what had become of this couple, in what street, in what house in Paris
had the crime been committed? These were questions the police were
powerless to answer.

The year 1889 came to an end, the murderers were still at large. But
on January 21, 1890, M. Goron found lying on his table a large letter
bearing the New York postmark. He opened it, and to his astonishment
read at the end the signature "Michel Eyraud." It was a curious letter,
but undoubtedly genuine. In it Eyraud protested against the suspicions
directed against himself; they were, he wrote, merely unfortunate
coincidences. Gouffe had been his friend; he had had no share whatever
in his death; his only misfortune had been his association with "that
serpent, Gabrielle Bompard." He had certainly bought a large trunk for
her, but she told him that she had sold it. They had gone to America
together, he to avoid financial difficulties in which he had been
involved by the dishonesty of the Jews. There Gabrielle had deserted him
for another man. He concluded a very long letter by declaring his belief
in Gabrielle's innocence--"the great trouble with her is that she is
such a liar and also has a dozen lovers after her." He promised that, as
soon as he learnt that Gabrielle had returned to Paris, he would, of his
own free will, place himself in the hands of M. Goron.

He was to have an early opportunity of redeeming his pledge, for on
the day following the receipt of his letter a short, well-made woman,
dressed neatly in black, with dyed hair, greyish-blue eyes, good teeth,
a disproportionately large head and a lively and intelligent expression
of face, presented herself at the Prefecture of Police and asked for an
interview with the Prefect.

Requested to give her name, she replied, with a smile, "Gabrielle
Bompard." She was accompanied by a middle-aged gentleman, who appeared
to be devoted to her. Gabrielle Bompard and her friend were taken to the
private room of M. Loze, the Prefect of Police. There, in a half-amused
way, without the least concern, sitting at times on the edge of the
Prefect's writing-table, Gabrielle Bompard told how she had been the
unwilling accomplice of her lover, Eyraud, in the murder of the bailiff,
Gouffe. The crime, she stated, had been committed in No. 3 in the Rue
Tronson-Ducoudray, but she had not been present; she knew nothing of
it but what had been told her by Eyraud. After the murder she had
accompanied him to America; there they had met the middle-aged
gentleman, her companion. Eyraud had proposed that they should murder
and rob him, but she had divulged the plot to the gentleman and asked
him to take her away. It was acting on his advice that she had returned
to France, determined to give her evidence to the judicial authorities
in Paris. The middle-aged gentleman declared himself ready to vouch for
the truth of a great part of this interesting narrative. There they both
imagined apparently that the affair would be ended. They were extremely
surprised when the Prefect, after listening to their statements, sent
for a detective-inspector who showed Gabrielle Bompard a warrant for
her arrest. After an affecting parting, at least on the part of the
middle-aged gentleman, Gabrielle Bompard was taken to prison. There
she soon recovered her spirits, which had at no time been very gravely
depressed by her critical situation.

According to Eyraud's letters, if anyone knew anything about Gouffe's
murder, it was Gabrielle Bompard; according to the woman's statement,
it was Eyraud, and Eyraud alone, who had committed it. As they were both
liars--the woman perhaps the greater liar of the two--their statements
are not to be taken as other than forlorn attempts to shift the blame on
to each other's shoulders.

Before extracting from their various avowals, which grew more complete
as time went on, the story of the crime, let us follow Eyraud in his
flight from justice, which terminated in the May of 1890 by his arrest
in Havana.

Immediately after the arrest of Gabrielle, two French detectives set out
for America to trace and run down if possible her deserted lover. For
more than a month they traversed Canada and the United States in search
of their prey. The track of the fugitive was marked from New York to San
Francisco by acts of thieving and swindling. At the former city he had
made the acquaintance of a wealthy Turk, from whom, under the pretence
of wishing to be photographed in it, he had borrowed a magnificent
oriental robe. The photograph was taken, but Eyraud forgot to return the
costly robe.

At another time he was lodging in the same house as a young American
actor, called in the French accounts of the incident "Sir Stout."
To "Sir Stout" Eyraud would appear to have given a most convincing
performance of the betrayed husband; his wife, he said, had deserted him
for another man; he raved and stormed audibly in his bedroom, deploring
his fate and vowing vengeance. These noisy representations so impressed
"Sir Stout" that, on the outraged husband declaring himself to be a
Mexican for the moment without funds, the benevolent comedian lent him
eighty dollars, which, it is almost needless to add, he never saw
again. In narrating this incident to the French detectives, "Sir Stout"
describes Eyraud's performance as great, surpassing even those of
Coquelin.

Similar stories of theft and debauchery met the detectives at every
turn, but, helped in a great measure by the publicity the American
newspapers gave to the movements of his pursuers, Eyraud was able to
elude them, and in March they returned to France to concert further
plans for his capture.

Eyraud had gone to Mexico. From there he had written a letter to M.
Rochefort's newspaper, L'Intransigeant, in which he declared Gouffe
to have been murdered by Gabrielle and an unknown. But, when official
inquiries were made in Mexico as to his whereabouts, the bird had flown.

At Havana, in Cuba, there lived a French dressmaker and clothes-merchant
named Puchen. In the month of February a stranger, ragged and unkempt,
but evidently a fellow-countryman, visited her shop and offered to sell
her a superb Turkish costume. The contrast between the wretchedness of
the vendor and the magnificence of his wares struck Madame Puchen at the
time. But her surprise was converted into suspicion when she read in
the American newspapers a description of the Turkish garment stolen by
Michel Eyraud, the reputed assassin of the bailiff Gouffe. It was one
morning in the middle of May that Mme. Puchen read the description of
the robe that had been offered her in February by her strange visitor.
To her astonishment, about two o'clock the same afternoon, she saw the
stranger standing before her door. She beckoned to him, and asked him
if he still had his Turkish robe with him; he seemed confused, and said
that he had sold it. The conversation drifted on to ordinary topics;
the stranger described some of his recent adventures in Mexico. "Oh!"
exclaimed the dressmaker, "they say Eyraud, the murderer, is in Mexico!
Did you come across him? Were you in Paris at the time of the murder?"
The stranger answered in the negative, but his face betrayed his
uneasiness. "Do you know you're rather like him?" said the woman, in
a half-joking way. The stranger laughed, and shortly after went out,
saying he would return. He did return on May 15, bringing with him
a number of the Republique Illustree that contained an almost
unrecognisable portrait of Eyraud. He said he had picked it up in a
cafe. "What a blackguard he looks!" he exclaimed as he threw the paper
on the table. But the dressmaker's suspicions were not allayed by the
stranger's uncomplimentary reference to the murderer. As soon as he had
gone, she went to the French Consul and told him her story.

By one of those singular coincidences that are inadmissable in fiction
or drama, but occur at times in real life, there happened to be in
Havana, of all places, a man who had been employed by Eyraud at the time
that he had owned a distillery at Sevres. The Consul, on hearing the
statement of Mme. Puchen, sent for this man and told him that a person
believed to be Eyraud was in Havana. As the man left the Consulate, whom
should he meet in the street but Eyraud himself! The fugitive had been
watching the movements of Mme. Puchen; he had suspected, after the
interview, that the woman would denounce him to the authorities. He now
saw that disguise was useless. He greeted his ex-employe, took him into
a cafe, there admitted his identity and begged him not to betray him.
It was midnight when they left the cafe. Eyraud, repenting of his
confidence, and no doubt anxious to rid himself of a dangerous witness,
took his friend into an ill-lighted and deserted street; but the friend,
conscious of his delicate situation, hailed a passing cab and made off
as quickly as he could.

Next day, the 20th, the search for Eyraud was set about in earnest. The
Spanish authorities, informed of his presence in Havana, directed the
police to spare no effort to lay hands on him. The Hotel Roma, at which
he had been staying, was visited; but Eyraud, scenting danger, had gone
to an hotel opposite the railway station. His things were packed ready
for flight on the following morning. How was he to pass the night? True
to his instincts, a house of ill-fame, at which he had been entertained
already, seemed the safest and most pleasant refuge; but, when, seedy
and shabby, he presented himself at the door, he was sent back into the
street. It was past one in the morning. The lonely murderer wandered
aimlessly in the streets, restless, nervous, a prey to apprehension,
not knowing where to go. Again the man from Sevres met him. "It's all
up with me!" said Eyraud, and disappeared in the darkness. At two in the
morning a police officer, who had been patrolling the town in search of
the criminal, saw, in the distance, a man walking to and fro, seemingly
uncertain which way to turn. Hearing footsteps the man turned round and
walked resolutely past the policeman, saying good-night in Spanish.
"Who are you? What's your address?" the officer asked abruptly. "Gorski,
Hotel Roma!" was the answer. This was enough for the officer. Eyraud was
know{sic} to have passed as "Gorski," the Hotel Roma had already been
searched as one of his hiding-places. To seize and handcuff "Gorski"
was the work of a moment. An examination of the luggage left by the
so-called Gorski at his last hotel and a determined attempt at suicide
made by their prisoner during the night proved conclusively that to the
Spanish police was the credit of having laid by the heels, ten months
after the commission of the crime, Michel Eyraud, one of the assassins
of the bailiff Gouffe.

On June 16 Eyraud was delivered over to the French police. He reached
France on the 20th, and on July 1 made his first appearance before the
examining magistrate.

It will be well at this point in the narrative to describe how Eyraud
and Gabrielle Bompard came to be associated together in crime. Gabrielle
Bompard was twenty-two years of age at the time of her arrest, the
fourth child of a merchant of Lille, a strong, hardworking, respectable
man. Her mother, a delicate woman, had died of lung disease when
Gabrielle was thirteen. Even as a child lying and vicious, thinking only
of men and clothes, Gabrielle, after being expelled as incorrigible from
four educational establishments, stayed at a fifth for some three years.
There she astonished those in authority over her by her precocious
propensity for vice, her treacherous and lying disposition, and a
lewdness of tongue rare in one of her age and comparative inexperience.
At eighteen she returned to her father's house, only to quit it for a
lover whom, she alleged, had hypnotised and then seduced her. Gabrielle
was singularly susceptible to hypnotic suggestion. Her father implored
the family doctor to endeavour to persuade her, while in the hypnotic
state, to reform her deplorable conduct. The doctor did his best but
with no success. He declared Gabrielle to be a neuropath, who had not
found in her home such influences as would have tended to overcome her
vicious instincts. Perhaps the doctor was inclined to sympathise rather
too readily with his patient, if we are to accept the report of those
distinguished medical gentlemen who, at a later date, examined carefully
into the mental and physical characteristics of Gabrielle Bompard.

This girl of twenty had developed into a supreme instance of the
"unmoral" woman, the conscienceless egoist, morally colour-blind, vain,
lewd, the intelligence quick and alert but having no influence whatever
on conduct. One instance will suffice to show the sinister levity, the
utter absence of all moral sense in this strange creature.

After the murder of Gouffe, Gabrielle spent the night alone with the
trunk containing the bailiff's corpse. Asked by M. Goron what were her
sensations during this ghastly vigil, she replied with a smile, "You'd
never guess what a funny idea come into my head! You see it was not very
pleasant for me being thus tete-a-tete with a corpse, I couldn't sleep.
So I thought what fun it would be to go into the street and pick up some
respectable gentleman from the provinces. I'd bring him up to the room,
and just as he was beginning to enjoy himself say, 'Would you like to
see a bailiff?' open the trunk suddenly and, before he could recover
from his horror, run out into the street and fetch the police. Just
think what a fool the respectable gentleman would have looked when the
officers came!"

Such callousness is almost unsurpassed in the annals of criminal
insensibility. Nero fiddling over burning Rome, Thurtell fresh from the
murder of Weare, inviting Hunt, the singer and his accomplice, to "tip
them a stave" after supper, Edwards, the Camberwell murderer, reading
with gusto to friends the report of a fashionable divorce case, post
from the murder of a young married couple and their baby--even examples
such as these pale before the levity of the "little demon," as the
French detectives christened Gabrielle.

Such was Gabrielle Bompard when, on July 26, exactly one year to a day
before the murder of Gouffe, she met in Paris Michel Eyraud. These two
were made for each other. If Gabrielle were unmoral, Eyraud was immoral.
Forty-six at the time of Gouffe's murder, he was sufficiently practised
in vice to appreciate and enjoy the flagrantly vicious propensities
of the young Gabrielle. All his life Eyraud had spent his substance in
debauchery. His passions were violent and at times uncontrollable,
but unlike many remarkable men of a similar temperament, this strong
animalism was not in his case accompanied by a capacity for vigorous
intellectual exertion or a great power of work. "Understand this," said
Eyraud to one of the detectives who brought him back to France, "I have
never done any work, and I never will do any work." To him work was
derogatory; better anything than that. Unfortunately it could not be
avoided altogether, but with Eyraud such work as he was compelled at
different times to endure was only a means for procuring money for
his degraded pleasures, and when honest work became too troublesome,
dishonesty served in its stead. When he met Gabrielle he was almost at
the end of his tether, bankrupt and discredited. At a pinch he might
squeeze a little money out of his wife, with whom he continued to live
in spite of his open infidelities.

Save for such help as he could get from her small dowry, he was without
resources. A deserter from the army during the Mexican war in 1869, he
had since then engaged in various commercial enterprises, all of
which had failed, chiefly through his own extravagance, violence and
dishonesty. Gabrielle was quick to empty his pockets of what little
remained in them. The proceeds of her own immorality, which Eyraud
was quite ready to share, soon proved insufficient to replenish them.
Confronted with ruin, Eyraud and Gompard hit on a plan by which the
woman should decoy some would-be admirer to a convenient trysting-place.
There, dead or alive, the victim was to be made the means of supplying
their wants.

On further reflection dead seemed more expedient than alive, extortion
from a living victim too risky an enterprise. Their plans were carefully
prepared. Gabrielle was to hire a ground-floor apartment, so that any
noise, such as footsteps or the fall of a body, would not be heard by
persons living underneath.

At the beginning of July, 1889, Eyraud and Bompard were in London. There
they bought at a West End draper's a red and white silk girdle, and at
a shop in Gower Street a large travelling trunk. They bought, also in
London, about thirteen feet of cording, a pulley and, on returning to
Paris on July 20, some twenty feet of packing-cloth, which Gabrielle,
sitting at her window on the fine summer evenings, sewed up into a large
bag.

The necessary ground-floor apartment had been found at No. 3 Rue
Tronson-Ducoudray. Here Gabrielle installed herself on July 24. The
bedroom was convenient for the assassins' purpose, the bed standing in
an alcove separated by curtains from the rest of the room. To the beam
forming the crosspiece at the entrance into the alcove Eyraud fixed a
pulley. Through the pulley ran a rope, having at one end of it a swivel,
so that a man, hiding behind the curtains could, by pulling the rope
strongly, haul up anything that might be attached to the swivel at the
other end. It was with the help of this simple piece of mechanism and a
good long pull from Eyraud that the impecunious couple hoped to refill
their pockets.

The victim was chosen on the 25th. Eyraud had already known of Gouffe's
existence, but on that day, Thursday, in a conversation with a common
friend, Eyraud learnt that the bailiff Gouffe was rich, that he was in
the habit of having considerable sums of money in his care, and that on
Friday nights Gouffe made it his habit to sleep from home. There was no
time to lose. The next day Gabrielle accosted Gouffe as he was going to
his dejeuner and, after some little conversation agreed to meet him at
eight o'clock that evening.

The afternoon was spent in preparing for the bailiff's reception in the
Rue Tronson-Ducoudray. A lounge-chair was so arranged that it stood with
its back to the alcove, within which the pulley and rope had been
fixed by Eyraud. Gouffe was to sit on the chair, Gabrielle on his knee.
Gabrielle was then playfully to slip round his neck, in the form of a
noose, the cord of her dressing gown and, unseen by him, attach one end
of it to the swivel of the rope held by Eyraud. Her accomplice had only
to give a strong pull and the bailiff's course was run.(17)


     (17) One writer on the case has suggested that the story of the murder
by rope and pulley was invented by Eyraud and Bompard to mitigate the
full extent of their guilt, and that the bailiff was strangled while
in bed with the woman. But the purchase of the necessary materials in
London would seem to imply a more practical motive for the use of rope
and pulley.


At six o'clock Eyraud and Bompard dined together, after which Eyraud
returned to the apartment, whilst Bompard went to meet Gouffe near the
Madeline Church. What occurred afterwards at No. 3 Rue Tronson-Ducoudray
is best described in the statement made by Eyraud at his trial.

"At a quarter past eight there was a ring at the bell. I hid myself
behind the curtain. Gouffe came in. 'You've a nice little nest here,' he
said. 'Yes, a fancy of mine,' replied Gabrielle, 'Eyraud knows nothing
about it.' 'Oh, you're tired of him,' asked Gouffe. 'Yes,' she replied,
'that's all over.' Gabrielle drew Gouffe down on to the chair. She
showed him the cord of her dressing-gown and said that a wealthy admirer
had given it to her. 'Very elegant,' said Gouffe, 'but I didn't come
here to see that.'

"She then sat on his knee and, as if in play, slipped the cord round his
neck; then putting her hand behind him, she fixed the end of the cord
into the swivel, and said to him laughingly, 'What a nice necktie it
makes!' That was the signal. Eyraud pulled the cord vigorously and, in
two minutes, Gouffe had ceased to live."

Eyraud took from the dead man his watch and ring, 150 francs and his
keys. With these he hurried to Gouffe's office and made a fevered search
for money. It was fruitless. In his trembling haste the murderer missed
a sum of 14,000 francs that was lying behind some papers, and returned,
baffled and despairing, to his mistress and the corpse. The crime had
been a ghastly failure. Fortified by brandy and champagne, and with the
help of the woman, Eyraud stripped the body, put it into the bag that
had been sewn by Gabrielle, and pushed the bag into the trunk. Leaving
his mistress to spend the night with their hateful luggage, Eyraud
returned home and, in his own words, "worn out by the excitement of the
day, slept heavily."


The next day Eyraud, after saying good-bye to his wife and daughter,
left with Gabrielle for Lyons. On the 28th they got rid at Millery of
the body of Gouffe and the trunk in which it had travelled; his boots
and clothes they threw into the sea at Marseilles. There Eyraud borrowed
500 francs from his brother. Gabrielle raised 2,000 francs in Paris,
where they spent August 18 and 19, after which they left for England,
and from England sailed for America. During their short stay in
Paris Eyraud had the audacity to call at the apartment in the Rue
Tronson-Ducoudray for his hat, which he had left behind; in the hurry of
the crime he had taken away Gouffe's by mistake.


Eyraud had been brought back to Paris from Cuba at the end of June,
1890. Soon after his return, in the room in which Gouffe had been done
to death and in the presence of the examining magistrate, M. Goron, and
some fifteen other persons, Eyraud was confronted with his accomplice.
Each denied vehemently, with hatred and passion, the other's story.
Neither denied the murder, but each tried to represent the other as the
more guilty of the two. Eyraud said that the suggestion and plan of the
crime had come from Gabrielle; that she had placed around Gouffe's neck
the cord that throttled him. Gabrielle attributed the inception of the
murder to Eyraud, and said that he had strangled the bailiff with his
own hands.

Eyraud, since his return, had seemed indifferent to his own fate;
whatever it might be, he wished that his mistress should share it. He
had no objection to going to the guillotine as long as he was sure that
Gabrielle would accompany him. She sought to escape such a consummation
by representing herself as a mere instrument in Eyraud's hands. It was
even urged in her defence that, in committing the crime, she had
acted under the influence of hypnotic suggestion on the part of her
accomplice. Three doctors appointed by the examining magistrate to
report on her mental state came unanimously to the conclusion that,
though undoubtedly susceptible to hypnotic suggestion, there was no
ground for thinking that she had been acting under such influence when
she participated in the murder of Gouffe. Intellectually the medical
gentlemen found her alert and sane enough, but morally blind.

The trial of Eyraud and Bompard took place before the Paris Assize Court
on December 16, 1890. It had been delayed owing to the proceedings of an
enterprising journalist. The names of the jurymen who were to be called
on to serve at the assize had been published. The journalist conceived
the brilliant idea of interviewing some of these gentlemen.

He succeeded in seeing four of them, but in his article which appeared
in the Matin newspaper said that he had seen twenty-one. Nine of them,
he stated, had declared themselves in favour of Gabrielle Bompard, but
in some of these he had discerned a certain "eroticism of the pupil of
the eye" to which he attributed their leniency. A month's imprisonment
was the reward of these flights of journalistic imagination.

A further scandal in connection with the trial was caused by the lavish
distribution of tickets of admission to all sorts and kinds of persons
by the presiding judge, M. Robert, whose occasional levities in the
course of the proceedings are melancholy reading. As a result of
his indulgence a circular was issued shortly after the trial by M.
Fallieres, then Minister of Justice, limiting the powers of presidents
of assize in admitting visitors into the reserved part of the court.

The proceedings at the trial added little to the known facts of the
case. Both Eyraud and Bompard continued to endeavour to shift the blame
on to each other's shoulders. A curious feature of the trial was the
appearance for the defence of a M. Liegeois, a professor of law at
Nancy. To the dismay of the Court, he took advantage of a clause in
the Code of Criminal Instruction which permits a witness to give his
evidence without interruption, to deliver an address lasting four hours
on hypnotic suggestion. He undertook to prove that, not only Gabrielle
Bompard, but Troppmann, Madame Weiss, and Gabrielle Fenayrou also, had
committed murder under the influence of suggestion.(18) In replying
to this rather fantastic defence, the Procureur-General, M. Quesnay de
Beaurepaire, quoted a statement of Dr. Brouardel, the eminent medical
jurist who had been called for the prosecution, that "there exists no
instance of a crime, or attempted crime committed under the influence of
hypnotic suggestion." As to the influence of Eyraud over Bompard, M. de
Beaurepaire said: "The one outstanding fact that has been eternally true
for six thousand years is that the stronger will can possess the weaker:
that is no peculiar part of the history of hypnotism; it belongs to the
history of the world. Dr. Liegeois himself, in coming to this court
to-day, has fallen a victim to the suggestion of the young advocate who
has persuaded him to come here to air his theories." The Court wisely
declined to allow an attempt to be made to hypnotise the woman Bompard
in the presence of her judges, and M. Henri Robert, her advocate, in his
appeal to the jury, threw over altogether any idea of hypnotic
suggestion, resting his plea on the moral weakness and irresponsibility
of his client.


     (18) Moll in his "Hypnotism" (London, 1909) states that, after Gabrielle
Bompard's release M. Liegeois succeeded in putting her into a hypnotic
state, in which she reacted the scene in which the crime was originally
suggested to her. The value of such experiments with a woman as
mischievous and untruthful as Gabrielle Bompard must be very doubtful.
No trustworthy instance seems to be recorded in which a crime has
been committed under, or brought about by, hypnotic or post-hypnotic
suggestion, though, according to Moll, "the possibility of such a crime
cannot be unconditionally denied."


In sheer wickedness there seems little enough to choose between Eyraud
and Bompard. But, in asking a verdict without extenuating circumstances
against the woman, the Procureur-General was by no means insistent. He
could not, he said, ask for less, his duty would not permit it: "But I
am ready to confess that my feelings as a man suffer by the duty imposed
on me as a magistrate. On one occasion, at the outset of my career, it
fell to my lot to ask from a jury the head of a woman. I felt then
the same kind of distress of mind I feel to-day. The jury rejected my
demand; they accorded extenuating circumstances; though defeated, I left
the court a happier man. What are you going to do to-day, gentlemen? It
rests with you. What I cannot ask of you, you have the right to accord.
But when the supreme moment comes to return your verdict, remember
that you have sworn to judge firmly and fearlessly." The jury accorded
extenuating circumstances to the woman, but refused them to the man.
After a trial lasting four days Eyraud was sentenced to death, Bompard
to twenty years penal servitude.

At first Eyraud appeared to accept his fate with resignation. He wrote
to his daughter that he was tired of life, and that his death was the
best thing that could happen for her mother and herself. But, as time
went on and the efforts of his advocate to obtain a commutation of his
sentence held out some hope of reprieve, Eyraud became more reluctant to
quit the world.

"There are grounds for a successful appeal," he wrote, "I am pretty
certain that my sentence will be commuted.... You ask me what I do?
Nothing much. I can't write; the pens are so bad. I read part of the
time, smoke pipes, and sleep a great deal. Sometimes I play cards, and
talk a little. I have a room as large as yours at Sevres. I walk up and
down it, thinking of you all."

But his hopes were to be disappointed. The Court of Cassation rejected
his appeal. A petition was addressed to President Carnot, but, with a
firmness that has not characterised some of his successors in office, he
refused to commute the sentence.

On the morning of February 3, 1891, Eyraud noticed that the warders, who
usually went off duty at six o'clock, remained at their posts. An hour
later the Governor of the Roquette prison entered his cell, and informed
him that the time had come for the execution of the sentence. Eyraud
received the intelligence quietly. The only excitement he betrayed was a
sudden outburst of violent animosity against M. Constans, then Minister
of the Interior. Eyraud had been a Boulangist, and so may have nourished
some resentment against the Minister who, by his adroitness, had helped
to bring about the General's ruin. Whatever his precise motive, he
suddenly exclaimed that M. Constans was his murderer: "It's he who is
having me guillotined; he's got what he wanted; I suppose now he'll
decorate Gabrielle!" He died with the name of the hated Minister on his
lips.



CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY

BY
ENRICO FERRI
PROFESSOR OF CRIMINAL LAW
DEPUTY IN THE ITALIAN PARLIMENT, ETC.




PREFACE.

THE following pages are a translation of that portion of Professor
Ferri's volume on Criminal Sociology which is immediately
concerned with the practical problems of criminality.  The Report
of the Government committee appointed to inquire into the
treatment of habitual drunkards, the Report of the committee of
inquiry into the best means of identifying habitual criminals, the
revision of the English criminal returns, the Reports of
committees appointed to inquire into the administration of prisons
and the best methods of dealing with habitual offenders, vagrants,
beggars, inebriate and juvenile delinquents, are all evidence of
the fact that the formidable problem of crime is again pressing
its way to the front and demanding re-examination at the hands of
the present generation.  The real dimensions of the question, as
Professor Ferri points out, are partially hidden by the
superficial interpretations which are so often placed upon the
returns relating to crime.  If the population of prisons or
penitentiaries should happen to be declining, this is immediately
interpreted to mean that crime is<p v> <p vi>on the decrease.  And
yet a cursory examination of the facts is sufficient to show that
a decrease in the prison population is merely the result of
shorter sentences and the substitution of fines or other similar
penalties for imprisonment.  If the list of offences for trial
before a judge and jury should exhibit any symptoms of diminution,
this circumstance is immediately seized upon as a proof that the
criminal population is declining, and yet the diminution may
merely arise from the fact that large numbers of cases which used
to be tried before a jury are now dealt with summarily by a
magistrate.  In other words, what we witness is a change of
judicial procedure, but not necessarily a decrease of crime.
Again, when it is pointed out that the number of persons for trial
for indictable offences in England and Wales amounted to 53,044 in
1874-8 and 56,472 in 1889-93, we are at a loss to see what colour
these figures give to the statement that there has been a real and
substantial decrease of crime.  The increase, it is true, may not
be keeping pace with the growth of the general population, but, as
an eminent judge recently stated from the bench, this is to be
accounted for by the fact that the public is every year becoming
more lenient and more unwilling to prosecute.  But an increase of
leniency, however excellent in itself, is not to be confounded
with a decrease of crime.  In the study of social phenomena our
paramount duty is to look at facts and not appearances.

But whether criminality is keeping pace with the growth of
population or not it is a problem of great <p vii>magnitude all
the same, and it will not be solved, as Professor Ferri points
out, by a mere resort to punishments of greater rigour and
severity.  On this matter he is at one with the Scotch
departmental committee appointed to inquire into the best means of
dealing with habitual offenders, vagrants, and juveniles.  As far
as the suppression of vagrancy is concerned the members of the
committee are unanimously of opinion that ``the severest
enactments of the general law are futile, and that the best
results have been obtained by the milder provisions of more recent
statutes.''  They also speak of the ``utter inadequacy of the
present system in all the variety of detail which it offers to
deter the habitual offender from a course of life which devolves
the cost of his maintenance on the prison and the poorhouse when
he is not preying directly on the public.''  The committee state
that they have had testimony from a large number of witnesses
supporting the view that ``long sentences of imprisonment effect
no good result,'' and they arrive at the conclusion that to double
the present sentences would not diminish the number of habitual
offenders.  In this conclusion they are at one with the views of
the Royal Commission on Penal Servitude, which acquiesced in the
objection to the penal servitude system on the ground that it
``not only fails to reform offenders, but in the case of the less
hardened criminals and especially first offenders produces a
deteriorating effect.''  A similar opinion was recently expressed
by the Prisons Committee presided over by Mr. Herbert Gladstone.
As soon as punishment reaches <p viii>a point at which it makes
men worse than they were before, it becomes useless as an
instrument of reformation or social defence.

The proper method of arriving at a more or less satisfactory
solution of the criminal problem is to inquire into the causes
which are producing the criminal population, and to institute
remedies based upon the results of such an inquiry.  Professor
Ferri's volume has this object in view.  The first chanter, on the
data of Criminal Anthropology, is an inquiry into the individual
conditions which tend to produce criminal habits of mind and
action.  The second chapter, on the data of criminal statistics,
is an examination of the adverse social conditions which tend to
drive certain sections of the population into crime.  It is
Professor Ferri's contention that the volume of crime will not be
materially diminished by codes of criminal law however skilfully
they may be constructed, but by an amelioration of the adverse
individual and social conditions of the community as a whole.
Crime is a product of these adverse conditions, and the only
effective way of grappling with it is to do away as far as
possible with the causes from which it springs.  Although criminal
codes can do comparatively little towards the reduction of crime,
they are absolutely essential for the protection of society.
Accordingly, the last chapter, on Practical Reforms, is intended
to show how criminal law and prison administration may be made
more effective for purposes of social defence.

                                        W. D. M.


CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

                                                PAGE
THE DATA OF CRIMINAL ANTHROPOLOGY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1

Origin of Criminal Sociology, 1--Origin of Criminal Anthropology,
4--Methods of Criminal Anthropology, 4--Relation between Criminal
Anthropology and Criminal Sociology, 5--Criminal Anthropology
studies the organic and mental constitution of the criminal, 7--
The criminal skull and brain, 7--Criminal physiognomy, 8--Physical
insensibility among criminals, 9--Criminal heredity, 9--Criminal
psychology, 9--Moral insensibility among criminals, 10--The
criminal mind, 10.  II. The data of criminal anthropology only
applies to the habitual or congenital criminal, 11--The occasional
and habitual criminal, 11--Comparison between the criminal and
non-criminal skull, 12--Anomalies in the criminal skull, 12--The
habitual criminal, 13--The crimes of habitual criminals, 14--The
criminal type confined to habitual criminals, 18--The proportion
of habitual criminals in the criminal population, 18--Forms of
habitual criminality, 19--Forms of occasional criminality, 21--
Classification of criminals, 23--Criminal lunatics, 26--Moral
insanity, 26--Born criminals, 28--Criminals by acquired habit,
30--Criminal precocity, 31--Nature of juvenile crime, 32--Relapsed
criminals, 35--Precocity and relapse among criminals, 38--
Criminals of passion, 39--Occasional criminals, 41--Differences
between<p ix>


<p x>
                                                PAGE
the occasional and the born criminal, 41--Criminal types shade
into each other, 44--Numbers of several classes of criminals, 46--
Value of a proper classification of criminals, 47--A fourfold
classification, 48.

CHAPTER II.

THE DATA OF CRIMINAL STATISTICS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

Value of criminal statistics, 51--The three factors of crime, 52--
Anthropological factors, 53--Physical factors, 53--Social factors,
53--Crime a product of complex conditions, 54--Social conditions
do not explain crime, 55--Effects of temperature on crime, 58--
Crime a result of biological as well as social conditions, 59--The
measures to be taken against crime are of two kinds, preventive
and eliminative, 61--The fluctuations of crime chiefly produced by
social causes, 61--Steadiness of the graver forms of crime, 63--
Effect of judicial procedure on criminal statistics, 64--Crimes
against the person are high when crimes against property are low,
64--Is crime increasing or decreasing?  64--Official optimism in
criminal statistics, 67--Density of population and crime, 73--
Conditions on which the fluctuations of crime depend, 77--
Quetelet's law of the mechanical regularity of crime, 80--The
effect of environment on crime, 81--The effect of punishment on
crime, 82--The value of punishment is over-estimated, 82--
Statistical proofs of this, 86--Biological and sociological
proofs, 92--Crime is diminished by prevention not by repression,
96--Legislators and administrators rely too much on repression,
98--The basis of the belief in punishment, 99--Natural and legal
punishment, 103--The discipline of consequences, 104--The
uncertainty of legal punishment, 105--Want of foresight among
criminals, 105--Penal codes cannot alter invincible tendencies,
106--Force is no remedy, 107--Negative value of punishment, 109.
II. Substitutes for punishment, 110--The elimination of the causes
of crime, 113--Economic remedies for crime, 114--Drink and crime,
116--Drunkenness an effect of bad social conditions, 120--Taxation
of drink, 120--Laws against

<p xi>
                                                PAGE

drink, 121--Social amelioration a substitute for penal law, 121--
Social legislation and crime, 122--Political amelioration as a
preventive of crime, 124--Decentralisation a preventive, 126--
Legal and administrative preventives, 128--Prisoners' Aid
Societies, 130--Education and crime, 130--Popular entertainments
and crime, 131--Physical education as a remedy for crime, 131--To
diminish crime its causes must be eliminated, 132--The aim and
scope of penal substitutes, 134--Difficulty of applying penal
substitutes, 137--Difference between social and police prevention,
139--Limited efficacy of punishment, 140--Summary of conclusions,
141.

CHAPTER III.

PRACTICAL REFORMS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .143

Criminal sociology and penal legislation, 143--Classification
of punishments, 144--The reform of criminal procedure, 145--The
two principles of judicial procedure, 147--Principles
determining the nature of the sentence, 147--Present principles of
penal procedure a reaction against medi<ae>val abuses, 147--The
``presumption of innocence,'' 148--The verdict of ``Not Proven,''
149--The right of appeal, 151--A second trial, 151--Reparation to
the victims of crime, 152--Need for a Ministry of Justice, 153--
Public and private prosecutors, 154--The growing tendency to drop
criminal charges, 155--The tendency to minimise the official
returns of crime, 156--Roman penal law, 156--Revision of judicial
errors, 158--Reparation to persons wrongly convicted, 158--
Provision of funds for this purpose, 160--Reparation to persons
wrongly prosecuted, 161--Many criminal offences should be tried as
civil offences, 162--The object of a criminal trial, 163.  II. The
crime and the criminal, 164--The stages of a criminal trial, 165--
The evidence, 166--Anthropological evidence, 166--The utilisation
of hypnotism, 168--Psychological and psycho-pathological evidence,
168--The credibility of witnesses, 168 Expert evidence, 169--An
advocate of the poor, 172--The judge and his qualifications, 172--
Civil and criminal judges <p xii>should be distinct functionaries,
173--The student of law should study criminals, 174--Training of
police and prison officers, 174--The status of the criminal judge,
175--The authority of the judge, 176.  III.  The jury, 177--Origin
of the jury, 178--Advantages of the jury, 179--Defects of the
jury, 180--The jury as a protection to liberty, 182--The jury and
criminal law, 184--Juries untrained and irresponsible, 186--
Numbers fatal to wisdom, 188--Defects of judges, 193--Difference
between the English and Continental jury, 194--Social evolution
and the jury, 196--The jury compared to the electorate, 197--How
to utilise the jury, 198.  IV. Existing prison systems a failure,
201--Defects of existing penal systems, 201--The abuse of short
sentences, 202--The growth of recidivism, 203--Garofalo's scheme
of punishments, 204--Von Liszt's scheme of punishments, 206--The
basis of a rational system of punishment, 207--The indeterminate
sentence, 207--Flogging, 210--The indefinite sentence for habitual
offenders, 211--Van Hamel's proposals as to sentences, 212--The
liberation of prisoners on an indefinite sentence, 213--The
supervision of punishment, 213--Conditional release, 215--Good
conduct test in prisons, 216--Police supervision, 216--
Indemnification of the victims Of crime, 217--The duty of the
State towards the victims of crime, 222--Defensive measures must
be adapted to the different classes of criminals, 225--Uniformity
of punishment, 225--The prison staff, 227--Classification of
prisoners, 227--Prison labour, 228.  V. Asylums for criminal
lunatics, 230--The treatment of insane criminals, 232--Crime and
madness, 234--Classification of asylums for criminal lunatics,
237--The treatment of born criminals, 238--The death penalty,
239--Extension of the death penalty, 243--Inadequacy of the death
penalty, 245--Imprisonment for life, 246--Transportation, 248--
Labour settlements, 249--Establishments for habitual criminals,
250--Criminal heredity, 251--Incorrigible offenders, 252--
Cumulative sentences, 253--Uncorrected or incorrigible criminals,
254--Cellular prisons, 256--Solitary confinement, 257--The
progressive system of imprisonment, 257--The evils of cellular
imprisonment, 260 --The cell does not secure separation, 262--
Costliness of the cellular system, 263--Labour under the cellular
system, 264--Open-air work the best for prisoners, 265--The
treatment of habitual criminals, 266--The treatment of occasional
<p xiii>criminals, 267--The treatment of young offenders, 268--
Futility of short sentences, 268--Substitutes for short sentences,
269--Compulsory work without imprisonment, 271 --Conditional
sentences, 271--Conditional sentences in Belgium, 273--Conditional
sentences in the United States, 275--Objections to conditional
sentences, 276--When the conditional sentence is legitimate, 282--
The treatment of criminals of passion, 282--Conclusion, 284.



INTRODUCTION.

_THE POSITIVE SCHOOL OF CRIMINAL LAW_.

DURING the past twelve or fourteen years Italy has poured forth a
stream of new ideas on the subject of crime and criminals; and
only the short-sightedness of her enemies or the vanity of her
flatterers can fail to recognise in this stream something more
than the outcome of individual labours.

A new departure in science is a simple phenomenon of nature,
determined in its origin and progress, like all such phenomena, by
conditions of time and place.  Attention must be drawn to these
conditions at the outset, for it is only by accurately defining
them that the scientific conscience of the student of sociology is
developed and confirmed.

The experimental philosophy of the latter half of our century,
combined with human biology and psychology, and with the natural
study of human society, had already produced an intellectual
atmosphere decidedly favourable to a practical inquiry into the
criminal manifestations of individual and social life.<p xv>
<p xvi>

To these general conditions must be added the plain and everyday
contrast between the metaphysical perfection of criminal law and
the progressive increase of crime, as well as the contrast between
legal theories of crime and the study of the mental
characteristics of a large number of criminals.

From this point onwards, nothing could be more natural than the
rise of a new school, whose object was to make an experimental
study of social pathology in respect of its criminal symptoms, in
order to bring theories of crime and punishment into harmony with
everyday facts.  This is the positive school of criminal law,
whereof the fundamental purpose is to study the natural genesis of
criminality in the criminal, and in the physical and social
conditions of his life, so as to apply the most effectual remedies
to the various causes of crime.

Thus we are not concerned merely with the construction of a theory
of anthropology or psychology, or a system of criminal statistics,
nor merely with the setting of abstract legal theories against
other theories which are still more abstract.  Our task is to show
that the basis of every theory concerning the self-defence of the
community against evil-doers must be the observation of the
individual and of society in their criminal activity.  In one
word, our task is to construct a criminal sociology.

For, as it seems to me, all that general sociology can do is to
furnish the more ordinary and universal inferences concerning the
life of communities; and upon this canvas the several sciences of
sociology are delineated by the specialised observation of each
<p xvii>distinct order of social facts.  In this manner we may
construct a political sociology, an economic sociology, a legal
sociology, by studying the special laws of normal or social
activity amongst human beings, after previously studying the more
general laws of individual and collective existence.  And thus we
may construct a criminal sociology, by studying, with such an aim
and by such a method, the abnormal and anti-social actions of
human beings--or, in other words, by studying crime and criminals.

Neither the Romans, great exponents as they were of the civil law,
nor the practical spirits of the Middle Ages, had been able to lay
down a philosophic system of criminal law.  It was Beccaria,
influenced far more by sentiment than by scientific precision, who
gave a great impetus to the doctrine of crimes and punishments by
summarising the ideas and sentiments of his age.[1]  Out of the
various germs contained in his generous initiative there has been
developed, to his well-deserved credit, the classical school of
criminal law.


[1] Desjardins, in the Introduction to his ``Cahiers des <E'>tats
G<e'>n<e'>raux en 1789 et la L<e'>gislation Criminelle,'' Paris,
1883, gives a good description of the state of public opinion in
that age.  He speaks also of the charges which were brought
against the advocates of the new doctrines concerning crime, that
they upset the moral and social order of things.  Nowadays,
charges against the experimental school are cited from these same
advocates; for the revolutionary of yesterday is very often the
conservative of to-day.


This school had, and still has, a practical purpose, namely, to
diminish all punishments, and to abolish a certain number, by a
magnanimous reaction of humanity against the arbitrary harshness
of medi<ae>val times.  It had also, and still has, a method of its
own, <p xviii>namely, to study crime from its first principles, as
an abstract entity dependent upon law.

Here and there since the time of Beccaria another stream of theory
has made itself manifest.  Thus there is the correctional school,
which Roeder brought into special prominence not many years ago.
But though it flourished in Germany, less in Italy and France, and
somewhat more in Spain, it had no long existence as an independent
school, for it was only too easily confuted by the close sequence
of inexorable facts.  Moreover, it could do no more than oppose a
few humanitarian arguments on the reformation of offenders to the
traditional arguments of the theories of jurisprudence, of
absolute and relative justice, of intimidation, utility, and the
like.

No doubt the principle that punishment ought to have a reforming
effect upon the criminal survives as a rudimentary organ in nearly
all the schools which concern themselves with crime.  But this is
only a secondary principle, and as it were the indirect object of
punishment; and besides, the observations of anthropology,
psychology, and criminal statistics have finally disposed of it,
having established the fact that, under any system of punishment,
with the most severe or the most indulgent methods, there are
always certain types of criminals, representing a large number of
individuals, in regard to whom amendment is simply impossible, or
very transitory, on account of their organic and moral
degeneration.  Nor must we forget that, since the natural roots of
crime spring not only from the individual organism, but also, in
large measure, from its physical and social environment,
<p xix>correction of the individual is not sufficient to prevent
relapse if we do not also, to the best of our ability, reform the
social environment.  The utility and the duty of reformation none
the less survive, even for the positive school, whenever it is
possible, and for certain classes of criminals; but, as a
fundamental principle of a scientific theory, it has passed away.

Hitherto, then, the classical school stands alone, with varying
shades of opinion, but one and distinct as a method, and as a body
of principles and consequences.  And whilst it has achieved its
aim in the most recent penal codes, with a great, and too
frequently an excessive diminution of punishments, so in respect
of theory, in Italy, Germany, and France it has crowned its work
with a series of masterpieces amongst which I will only mention
Carrara's ``Programme of Criminal Law.''  As the author tells us
in one of his later editions, from the <_a!> priori_ principle
that ``crime is a fact dependent upon law, an infraction rather
than an action,'' he deduced--and that by the sheer force of an
admirable logic--a complete symmetrical scheme of legal and
abstract consequences, wherein judges are compelled, whether they
like it or not, to determine the position of every criminal who
comes before them.

But now the classical school, which sprang from the marvellous
little work of Beccaria, has completed its historic cycle.  It has
yielded all it could, and writers of the present day who still
cling to it can only recast the old material.  The youngest of
them, indeed, are condemned to a sort of Byzantine discussion of
<p xx>scholastic formulas, and to a sterile process of scientific
rumination.

And meantime, outside our universities and academies, criminality
continues to grow, and the punishments hitherto inflicted, though
they can neither protect nor indemnify the honest, succeed in
corrupting and degrading evil-doers.  And whilst our treatises and
codes (which are too often mere treatises cut up into segments)
lose themselves in the fog of their legal abstractions, we feel
more strongly every day, in police courts and at assizes, the
necessity for those biological and sociological studies of crime
and criminals which, when logically directed, can throw light as
nothing else can upon the administration of
the penal law.



CHAPTER I.

THE DATA OF CRIMINAL ANTHROPOLOGY.

THE experimental school of criminal sociology took its original
title from its studies of anthropology; it is still commonly
regarded as little more than a ``criminal anthropology school.''
And though this title no longer corresponds with the development
of the school, which also takes into account and investigates the
data of psychology, statistics, and sociology, it is none the less
true that the most characteristic impetus of the new scientific
movement was due to anthropological studies.  This was
conspicuously the case when Lombroso, giving a scientific form to
sundry scattered and fragmentary observations upon criminals,
added fresh life to them by a collection of inquiries which were
not only original but also governed by a distinct idea, and
established the new science of criminal anthropology.

It is possible, of course, to discover a very early origin for
criminal anthropology, as for general anthropology; for, as Pascal
said, man has always been the most wonderful object of study to
himself.  For observations on physiognomy in particular we may go
as far backwards as to Plato, and his comparisons of the human
face and character with those<p 1> of the brutes, or even to
Aristotle, who still earlier observed the physical and
psychological correspondence between the passions of men and their
facial expression.  And after the medi<ae>val gropings in
chiromancy, metoscopy, podomancy and so forth, one comes to the
seventeenth century studies in physiognomy by the Jesuit
Niquetius, by Cortes, Cardanus, De la Chambre, Della Porta, &c.,
who were precursors of Gall, Spurzheim, and Lavater on one side,
and, on the other, of the modern scientific study of the emotions,
with their expression in face and gesture, conducted by Camper,
Bell, Engel, Burgess, Duchenne, Gratiolet, Piderit, Mantegazza,
Schaffhausen, Schack, Heiment, and above all by Darwin.

With regard to the special observation of criminals, over and
above the limited statements of the old physiognomists and
phrenologists, Lauvergne (1841) in France and Attomyr (1842) in
Germany had accurately applied the theories of Gall to the
examination of convicts; and their works, in spite of certain
exaggerations of phrenology, are still a valuable treasury of
observations in anthropology.  In Italy, De Rolandis (1835) had
published his observations on a deceased criminal; in America,
Sampson (1846) had traced the connection between criminality and
cerebral organisation; in Germany, Camper (1854) published a study
on the physiognomy of murderers; and Ave Lallemant (1858-62)
produced a long work on criminals, from the psychological point of
view.

But the science of criminal anthropology, more <p 3>strictly
speaking, only begins with the observations of English gaol
surgeons and other learned men, such as Forbes Winslow (1854),
Mayhew (1860), Thomson (1870), Wilson (1870), Nicolson (1872),
Maudsley (1873), and with the very notable work of Despine (1868),
which indeed gave rise to the inquiries of Thomson, and which, in
spite of its lack of synthetic treatment and systematic unity, is
still, taken in conjunction with the work of Ave Lallemant, the
most important inquiry in the psychological domain anterior to the
work of Lombroso.

Nevertheless, it was only with the first edition of ``The
Criminal'' (1876) that criminal anthropology asserted itself as an
independent science, distinct from the main trunk of general
anthropology, itself quite recent in its origin, having come into
existence with the works of Daubenton, Blumenbach, Soemmering,
Camper, White, and Pritchard.

The work of Lombroso set out with two original faults: the mistake
of having given undue importance, at any rate apparently, to the
data of craniology and anthropometry, rather than to those of
psychology; and, secondly, that of having mixed up, in the first
two editions, all criminals in a single class.  In later editions
these defects were eliminated, Lombroso having adopted the
observation which I made in the first instance, as to the various
anthropological categories of criminals.  This does not prevent
certain critics of criminal anthropology from repeating, with a
strange monotony, the venerable objections as to the
``impossibility of distinguishing a criminal from an honest man by
the shape of his skull,'' or of <p 4>``measuring human
responsibility in accordance with different craniological
types.''[2]


[2] Vol. ii. of the fourth edition of ``The Criminal'' (1889) is
specially concerned with the epileptic and idiotic criminal
(referred to alcoholism, hysteria, mattoidism) whether occasional
or subject to violent impulse; whilst vol. i. is concerned only
with congenital criminality and moral insanity.


But these original faults in no way obscure the two following
noteworthy facts--that within a few years after the publication of
``The Criminal'' there were published, in Italy and elsewhere, a
whole library of studies in criminal anthropology, and that a new
school has been established, having a distinct method and
scientific developments, which are no longer to be looked for in
the classical school of criminal law.


I.


What, then, is criminal anthropology?  And of what nature are its
fundamental data, which lead us up to the general conclusions of
criminal sociology?

If general anthropology is, according to the definition of M. de
Quatrefages, the natural history of man, as zoology is the natural
history of animals, criminal anthropology is but the study of a
single variety of mankind.  In other words, it is the natural
history of the criminal man.

Criminal anthropology studies the criminal man in his organic and
psychical constitution, and in his life as related to his physical
and social environment--just as anthropology has done for man in
general, and for the various races of mankind.  So that, as
already said, whilst the classical observers of crime study
<p 5>various offences in their abstract character, on the
assumption that the criminal, apart from particular cases which
are evident and appreciable, is a man of the ordinary type, under
normal conditions of intelligence and feeling, the anthropological
observers of crime, on the other hand, study the criminal first of
all by means of direct observations, in anatomical and
physiological laboratories, in prisons and madhouses, organically
and physically, comparing him with the typical characteristics of
the normal man, as well as with those of the mad and the
degenerate.

Before recounting the general data of criminal anthropology, it is
necessary to lay particular stress upon a remark which I made in
the original edition of this work, but which our opponents have
too frequently ignored.

We must carefully discriminate between the technical value of
anthropological data concerning the criminal man and their
scientific function in criminal sociology.

For the student of criminal anthropology, who builds up the
natural history of the criminal, every characteristic has an
anatomical, or a physiological, or a psychological value in
itself, apart from the sociological conclusions which it may be
possible to draw from it.  The technical inquiry into these bio-
psychical characteristics is the special work of this new science
of criminal anthropology.

Now these data, which are the conclusions of the anthropologist,
are but starting-points for the criminal sociologist, from which
he has to reach his legal and social conclusions.  Criminal
anthropology is to <p 6>criminal sociology, in its scientific
function, what the biological sciences, in description and
experimentation, are to clinical practice.

In other words, the criminal sociologist is not in duty bound to
conduct for himself the inquiries of criminal anthropology, just
as the clinical operator is not bound to be a physiologist or an
anatomist.  No doubt the direct observation of criminals is a very
serviceable study, even for the criminal sociologist; but the only
duty of the latter is to base his legal and social inferences upon
the positive data of criminal anthropology for the biological
aspects of crime, and upon statistical data for the influences of
physical and social environment, instead of contenting himself
with mere abstract legal syllogisms.

On the other hand it is clear that sundry questions which have a
direct bearing upon criminal anthropology--as, for instance, in
regard to some particular biological characteristic, or to its
evolutionary significance--have no immediate obligation or value
for criminal sociology, which employs only the fundamental and
most indubitable data of criminal anthropology.  So that it is but
a clumsy way of propounding the question to ask, as it is too
frequently asked:  ``What connection can there be between the
cephalic index, or the transverse measurement of a murderer's jaw,
and his responsibility for the crime which he has committed?''
The scientific function of the anthropological data is a very
different thing, and the only legitimate question which sociology
can put to anthropology is this:--``Is the criminal, and in what
respects is he, a normal <p 7>or an abnormal man?  And if he is,
or when he is abnormal, whence is the abnormality derived?  Is it
congenital or contracted, capable or incapable of rectification?''

This is all; and yet it is sufficient to enable the student of
crime to arrive at positive conclusions concerning the measures
which society can take in order to defend itself against crime;
whilst he can draw other conclusions from criminal statistics.

As for the principal data hitherto established by criminal
anthropology, whilst we must refer the reader for detailed
information to the works of specialists, we may repeat that this
new science studies the criminal in his organic and in his
psychical constitution, for these are the two inseparable aspects
of human existence.

A beginning has naturally been made with the organic study of the
criminal, both anatomical and physiological, since we must study
the organ before the function, and the physical before the moral.
This, however, has given rise to a host of misconceptions and one-
sided criticisms, which have not yet ceased; for criminal
anthropology has been charged, by such as consider only the most
conspicuous data with narrowing crime down to the mere result of
conformations of the skull or convolutions of the brain.  The fact
is that purely morphological observations are but preliminary
steps to the histological and physiological study of the brain,
and of the body as a whole.

As for craniology, especially in regard to the two distinct and
characteristic types of criminals--<p 8>murderers and thieves, an
incontestable inferiority has been noted in the shape of the head,
by comparison with normal men, together with a greater frequency
of hereditary and pathological departures from the normal type.
Similarly an examination of the brains of criminals, whilst it
reveals in them an inferiority of form and histological type,
gives also, in a great majority of cases, indications of disease
which were frequently undetected in their lifetime.  Thus M.
Dally, who for twenty years past has displayed exceptional acumen
in problems of this kind, said that ``all the criminals who had
been subjected to autopsy (after execution) gave evidence of
cerebral injury.''[3]


[3] In a discussion at the Medico-Psychological Society of Paris;
``Proceedings'' for 1881, i. 93, 266, 280, 483.


Observations of the physiognomy of criminals, which no one will
undervalue who has studied criminals in their lifetime, with
adequate knowledge, as well as other physical inquiries, external
and internal, have shown the existence of remarkable types, from
the greater frequency of the tattooed man to exceptionally
abnormal conditions of the frame and the organs, dating from
birth, together with many forms of contracted disease.

Finally, inquiries of a physiological nature into the reflex
action of the body, and especially into general and specific
sensibility, and sensibility to pain, and into reflex action under
external agencies, conducted with the aid of instruments which
record the results, have shown abnormal conditions, all tending to
physical insensibility, deep-seated and <p 9>more or less
absolute, but incontestably different in kind from that which
obtains amongst the average men of the same social classes.

These are organic conditions, it must be at once affirmed, which
account as nothing else can for the undeniable fact of the
hereditary transmission of tendencies to crime, as well as of
predisposition to insanity, to suicide, and to other forms of
degeneration.

The second division of criminal anthropology, which is by far the
more important, with a more direct influence upon criminal
sociology, is the psychological study of the criminal.  This
recognition of its greater importance does not prevent our critics
from concentrating their attack upon the organic characterisation
of criminals, in oblivion of the psychological characterisation,
which even in Lombroso's book occupies the larger part of the
text.[4]


[4] A recent example of this infatuation amongst one-sided, and
therefore ineffectual critics is the work of Colajanni,
``Socialism and Criminal Sociology,'' Catania, 1889.  In the first
volume, which is devoted to criminal anthropology, out of four
hundred pages of argumentative criticism (which does not prevent
the author from taking our most fundamental conclusions on the
anthropological classification of criminals, and on crime, as
phenomena of psychical atavism), there are only six pages, 227-
232, for the criticism of psychological types.


Criminal psychology presents us with the characteristics which may
be called specially descriptive, such as the slang, the
handwriting, the secret symbols, the literature and art of the
criminal; and on the other hand it makes known to us the
characteristics which, in combination with organic abnormality,
account for the development of crime in the individual.  And these
characteristics are grouped <p 10>in two psychical and fundamental
abnormalities, namely, moral insensibility and want of foresight.

Moral insensibility, which is decidedly more congenital than
contracted, is either total or partial, and is displayed in
criminals who inflict personal injuries, as much as in others,
with a variety of symptoms which I have recorded elsewhere, and
which are eventually reduced to these conditions of the moral
sense in a large number of criminals--a lack of repugnance to the
idea and execution of the offence, previous to its commission, and
the absence of remorse after committing it.

Outside of these conditions of the moral sense, which is no
special sentiment, but an expression of the entire moral
constitution of the individual, as the temperament is of his
physiological constitution, other sentiments, of selfishness or
even of unselfishness, are not wanting in the majority of
criminals.  Hence arise many illusions for superficial observers
of criminal life.  But these latter sentiments are either
excessive, as hate, cupidity, vanity and the like, and are thus
stimulants to crime, or else, as with religion, love, honour,
loyalty, and so on, they cease to be forces antagonistic to crime,
because they have no foundation in a normal moral sense.

From this fundamental inferiority of sentiment there follows an
inferiority of intelligence, which, however, does not exclude
certain forms of craftiness, though it tends to inability to
foresee the consequences of crime, far in excess of what is
observed in the average members of the classes of society to which
the several criminals belong.
<p 11>

Thus the psychology of the criminal is summed up in a defective
resistance to criminal tendencies and temptations, due to that
ill-balanced impulsiveness which characterises children and
savages.


II.


I have long been convinced, by my study of works on criminal
anthropology, but especially by direct and continuous observation
from a physiological or a psychological point of view of a large
number of criminals, whether mad or of normal intelligence, that
the data of criminal anthropology are not entirely applicable, in
their complete and essential form, to all who commit crimes.  They
are to be confined to a certain number, who may be called
congenital, incorrigible, and habitual criminals.  But apart from
these there is a class of occasional criminals, who do not
exhibit, or who exhibit in slighter degrees, the anatomical,
physiological, and psychological characteristics which constitute
the type described by Lombroso as ``the criminal man.''

Before further defining these two main classes of criminals, in
their natural and descriptive characterisation, I must add a
positive demonstration, which can be attested under two distinct
forms--(1) by the results of anthropological observation of
criminals, and (2) by statistics of relapse, and of the
manifestations of crime which anthropologists have hitherto
chiefly studied.

As for organic anomalies, as I cannot here treat <p 12>the whole
matter in detail, I will simply reproduce from my study of
homicide a summary of results for a single category of these
anomalies, which a methodical observation of every class of
criminals will carry further and render more precise, as Lombroso
has already shown (see the fourth edition of his work, 1889, p.
273).

                                Homicides sentenced
                        To penal        To Imprisonment      Soldiers
                              servitude
 Persons in whom I detected     (346)               (363)            (711)
 No anomaly in the skull      11.9 p. c.          8.2 p. c.         37.2 p. c.
 One or two anomalies         47.2  ''            56.6  ''          51.8  ''
 Three or four anomalies      30.9  ''            32.6  ''          11    ''
 Five or six anomalies        6.7  ''             2.3  ''           0    ''
 Seven or more anomalies        .3  ''              .3  ''           0    ''


That is to say, men with normal skulls were three times as
numerous amongst soldiers as they were amongst criminals; of men
with a noteworthy number of anomalies occurring together (three or
four), there were three times as many amongst criminals as amongst
soldiers; and there was not one soldier amongst those who showed
an extraordinary number (five or more).

This proves to demonstration not only the greater frequency of
anomalous skulls (and the same is true of physiognomical,
physiological, and psychological anomalies) amongst criminals, but
also that amongst these criminals between fifty and sixty per
cent. show very few anomalies, whilst about one-third of the whole
number present a remarkable combination, and one-tenth are normal
in this respect.
<p 13>

Amongst the statistical data exhibiting the primary
characteristics of the majority of criminals, the data connected
with relapsed criminals are especially conspicuous.  Though
relapses, like first offences, are partly due to social
conditions, they also have a manifest biological cause, since,
under the operation of the same penal system, there are some
liberated prisoners who relapse and some who do not.

The statistics of relapse are unfortunately very difficult to
collect, on account of differences in the legislation of different
countries, and in the preparation of records, which, even under
the more general adoption of anthropometrical identification,
rarely succeed in preventing the use of fresh names by
professional criminals.  So that we may still say, in the words of
one who is a very good judge in this matter, M. Yvern<e!>s, not
only that ``the Prisons Congress of London (1872) was compelled to
leave various problems undecided for lack of documentary evidence,
and especially the question of relapsed criminals,'' but also that
to this day (1879), ``we find varying results in different
countries, the exact significance of which is not apparent.''

I have, however, published an essay on international statistics of
relapsed criminals, from which I drew the following general
conclusion: that even in prison statistics, which often give
higher totals of relapsed cases than are given by judicial
statistics, because they are more personal, and therefore less
uncertain, we never obtain the full number of relapses, though the
totals given vary from country to country, from district to
district, and from prison to prison.  It <p 14>would be impossible
to state accurately what proportion the numbers given bear to the
actual number; but I am justified in saying, from all the
materials which I have collected and compared in the aforesaid
essay, that the number of relapses in Europe is generally between
50 and 60 per cent., and certainly rather above than below this
limit.  Whilst the Italian statistics, for instance, give 14 per
cent. of relapses amongst prisoners sentenced to penal servitude,
I found by experience 37 per cent; out of 346 who admitted to me
that they had relapsed; and, amongst those who had been sentenced
to simple imprisonment, I found 60 per cent. out of 363, in place
of the 33 per cent. recorded in the prison statistics.  The
difference may be due to the particular conditions of the prisons
which I visited; but in any case it establishes the inadequacy of
the official figures dealing with relapse.

After this statement of a general fact, which proves, as Lombroso
and Espinas said, that ``the relapsed criminal is the rule rather
than the exception,'' we can proceed to set down the special
proportions of relapse for each particular crime, so as to obtain
an indication of the forms of crime which are most frequently
resorted to by habitual criminals.

For Italy I have found that the highest percentages of relapse are
afforded by persons convicted of theft and petty larceny, forgery,
rape, manslaughter, conspiracy, and, at the correctional courts,
vagrancy and mendicity.  The lowest percentages are amongst those
convicted of assault and bodily harm, murders, and infanticide.
<p 15>

For France, where legal statistics are remarkably adapted for the
most minute inquiry, I have drawn up the following table of
statistics from the lists of persons convicted at the assize
courts and correctional tribunals, taking an average of the years
1877-81, which is not sensibly affected by the results of
succeeding years.

It will be seen that the average of relapses for crimes against
the person is higher than the average for the most serious cases
of murderous and indecent assault, which are clearly an outcome of
the most anti-social tendencies (such as parricide, murder, rape,
inflicting bodily harm on parents, &c.).  Thus homicide and fatal
wounding, though relapse is very frequent in these cases, still
display a less abnormal and more occasional character by their
lower position in the table, as shown in the cases of infanticide,
concealment of birth, and abandonment of infants.  As for the very
frequent occurrence of relapse in special crimes, such as assaults
on officials and resistance to authority, which rarely come before
the assize courts--though even there they tend to support the
higher numbers in the tribunals--these are offences which may also
be committed by criminals of every kind, and which, moreover,
depend in some measure on the social factor of police
organisation, and frequently on the psycho-pathological state of
particular individuals.

The somewhat rare occurrence of relapse in such a grave type of
murder as poisoning is noteworthy.  But this is only an effect of
the special psychology of these criminals, as I have explained
elsewhere.


{Table printed in ``landscape'' mode was not OCR'd.}
FRANCE--CASES OF RELAPSE, 1877-81.



<p 17>

Amongst crimes against property, the most frequent relapses are
found in the case of thieves (not including thefts and breaches of
trust by domestic servants, which thus, proving their more
occasional character, confirm the agreement of statistics with
criminal psychology).  The same thing is observed in regard to
forgers of commercial documents and to fraudulent bankrupts, who
are partly drawn into crime under the stress of personal or
general crises.  And the infrequency of relapse amongst postal
employees condemned for embezzlement, and amongst customs officers
who have been guilty of smuggling, is only a further confirmation
of the inducement to crime by the opportunities met with in each
case, rather than by personal tendencies.

Amongst minor offences, apart from that evasion of supervision
which is no more than a legal condition, there are, both in France
and in Italy, very frequent cases of relapse by vagabonds and
mendicants, which is a consequence of social environment, as well
as of the feeble organisation of the individuals.  Other relapses
above the average, included amongst these offences, constitute a
sort of accessory criminality, existing side by side with the
habitual criminality of thieves, murderers, and the like, such as
drunkenness, attacks on public functionaries, infractions of the
regulations of domicile, &c.

In thefts and resistance to authorities, relapse is less frequent
here than in the assize courts, for in the majority of these minor
offences, in their general forms, there is a greater number of
occasional offences, as is also the case with bankruptcies,
defamation, <p 18>abuse, rural offences, &c., which demonstrate
their more occasional character by their very low figures.

Hence the statistics of general and specific relapse indirectly
confirm the fact that criminals, as a whole, have no uniform
anthropological type; and that the bio-psychical types and
anomalies belong more especially to the category of habitual
criminals and those born into the criminal class, who, after all,
are the only ones hitherto studied by criminal anthropologists.

What, then, is the numerical proportion of habitual criminals to
the aggregate number of criminals?

In the absence of direct inquiry, it is possible to get at this
proportion indirectly, from facts of two kinds.  In the first
place, a study of the works on criminal anthropology supplies us
with an approximate figure, since the biological characteristics
united in individuals, in sufficient number to create a criminal
type, are met with in between forty and fifty per cent. of the
total.

And this conclusion may be confirmed by other data of criminal
statistics.

Whilst the statistics of relapse give us a very limited number of
crimes and offences committed by born and habitual criminals,
science and criminal legislation give us a far more extended
classification.

Ellero reckoned in the penal code of the German Empire 203 crimes
and offences; and I find that the Italian code of 1859 enumerates
about 180, the new code about 200, and the French penal code about
150.  Thus the kind of crimes of habitual criminals <p 19>would
only be about one-tenth of the complete legal classification of
crimes and offences.

It is easy indeed to suppose that born and habitual criminals do
not generally commit political crimes and offences, nor offences
connected with the press, nor against freedom of worship, nor in
corruption of public functionaries, nor misuse of title or
authority; nor calumny, making false attestations or false
reports; nor adultery, incest, or abduction of minors; nor
infanticide, abortion, or palming of children; nor betrayal of
professional secrets; nor bankruptcy offences, nor damage to
property, nor violation of domicile, nor illegal arrests, nor
duels, nor defamation, nor abuse.  I say generally; for, as there
are occasional criminals who commit the offences characteristic of
habitual criminality, such as homicides, robberies, rapes, &c., so
there are born criminals who sometimes commit crimes out of their
ordinary course.

It is now necessary to add a few statistical data in respect of
the classification of crime, which I take, like the others, from
the essay already mentioned.


                                       ITALY.       FRANCE.       BELGIUM.

HABITUAL CRIMINALITY
(homicide, theft, conspiracy, rape,
incendiarism, vagrancy, swindling,  A*   B*   C*   A*  B*   C*   A*   B*   C*
                                   p.c. p.c. p.c. p.c p.c. p.c. p.c. p.c. p.c.
Proportion of the persons
convicted of these crimes
and offences to the total
number of convictions . . .        84   32   38   90   34   35   86   30   30

{* NOTE:  A B and C above are `Assizes,' `Tribunals,' and `Totals,'
respectively.  These are printed ``landscape'' fashion in the book.}


<p 20>

That is to say, habitual criminality would be represented, in
Italy, by about 40 per cent. of the total number of condemned
persons, and by somewhat less in France and Belgium.  This would
be accounted for in Belgium by the exclusion of vagrancy; but the
difference is virtually due to the greater frequency in Italy of
certain crimes, such as homicide, highway robbery with violence,
and conspiracies.

Further, it is apparent that in all these countries the types of
habitual criminality, with the exception of thefts and vagrancy,
are in greater proportion at the assizes, on account of their
serious character.

The actual totals, however, are larger at the tribunals, for as,
in the scale of animal life, the greatest fecundity belongs to the
lower and smaller forms, so in the criminal scale, the less
serious offences (such as simple theft, swindling, vagrancy, &c.)
are the more numerous.  Thus, out of the total of 38 per cent. in
Italy, 32 belong to the tribunals and 6 to the assizes; out of 35
per cent in France, 33 belong to the tribunals and 2 to the
assizes; and out of 30 per cent. in Belgium, 29 belong to the
tribunals and 1 to the assizes.  This also is partly accounted for
by legislative distinctions as to the respective jurisdictions of
these courts.

As to the particulars of the totals, it is found that thefts are
the most numerous types in Italy (20 per cent.), in France (24 per
cent.), in Belgium (23 per cent.), and in Prussia (37 per cent.,
including breaches of trust).[5]


[5] Starke, ``Verbrechen und Verbrecher in Preussen,'' Berlin,
1884, p. 92.


<p 21>

After theft, the most numerous in Italy are vagrancy (5 per
cent.), homicides (4 per cent.), swindling (3 per cent.), forgery
(.9 per cent.), rape (.4 per cent.), conspiracy (.4 per cent.),
and incendiarism (.2 per cent.).

In France and Belgium we find the same relative frequency of
vagrancy and swindling; but homicide, incendiarism, and conspiracy
are less frequent, whilst rape is more common in France (.5 per
cent.) and in Belgium (1 per cent.).

Such then are the most frequent forms of habitual criminality in
the generality of condemned persons; and it will be useful now to
contrast the more frequent forms of occasional criminality.  For
Italy the only judicial statistics which are valuable for detailed
inquiry are those of 1863, 1869-72.  For France, every volume of
the admirable series of criminal statistics may be utilised.

It will be seen that the frequency of these occasional crimes and
offences in Italy and in France is very variable, though assaults
and wounding, resistance to authorities, damage, defamation and
abuse, are the most numerous in both countries.

The proportion of each offence to the total also varies
considerably, not only through a difference of legislation between
Italy and France in regard to poaching, drunkenness, frauds on
refreshment-house keepers, and so forth, but also by reason of the
different condition of individuals and of society in the two
countries.  Thus assaults and wounding, which in Italy comprise 23
per cent. of the total of convictions, reach in France no more
than 14 per cent., whilst resistance to the authorities, &c.,
which


                                        YEARLY AVERAGE or CONDEMNED PERSONS.
                                         ITALY, 1863-72.      FRANCE 1877-81
CRIMES AND OFFENCES OF GREATEST
    FREQUENCY
(not including those of Habitual Criminals).
                                                   p.c.  p.c.  p.c.  p.c.
Wilful Assaulf and Wounding  ...
Illegally carrying Arms    ......  --   8   7   --   3   3
Resistance to Authority, Assaults and
   Violence against Public Functionaries ...   3   5   4   --2   10   10
Injury to Property  ...  ...  ...   --   2   2   --   I 1-6   1 5
Defamation and Abuse   ...   ...   ...   --   s-S   1-6   --   I-6   1 5
Written or Spoken Threats ...   ...   --   1 4   1'2   --   '2   --2
Illegal Games    ...   ...   ...   ...   --   I   --8   --   2 1   'I
Political Crimes and Offences   ......  31.7   --   --2   --   4 2   --2
Press Crimes and Offences ...   ...   4   4   --4   --   --6   --6
Embezzlement, Corruption, Malfeasance
   of Public Functionaries    --   --3   .3   --   --   --
Escape from Detention    --1   --2   2   --   --6   --6
False Witness    ..   ...   ...   ...   --7   2   --2   09   6   --6
Violation of Domicile    ...   ...   ...   --   17 .15 -- lo   --9
Calumny    ...   --.   --1   I   1   --oS   --o8
Exposure, Palming or ``Suppression''
   of Infants    --   --12   1   --2   --1   --1
Bankruptcy Offences    ...   ...   ...   I   1   --1   1'3   5 --6
Offences against Religion and Ministers
   of Religion    --   1   --1   --   --7   .o7
Duelling    ...   ..   ..   ...   ...   ...   --   .04   .03 --   --   --
Abortion    ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   --   --   --   og --   --OI
Offences against the Game Laws    --   --   --   --   13   12-7
Drunkenness   --   --   --   --   1 5   1 5
Offences against Public Decency    --   --   --   --   I-8   1.7
Adultery    ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   --   --   --   --5   5
Offences against Morality, with Incitement
   to Immorality    ...   ...   --   --   --   --   --2   --2
Involuntary Homicide   --   --   --   --   --2   --2
     ''     Wounding    --   --   --   --   --6   --6
     ''     Incendiarism    --   --   --   --   --2   --2
Illegal Practising of Medicine and
   Surgery    ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   --   --   --   --   --2   --2
Frauds on Keepers of Refreshment
   Houses    ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   --   --   --   --   I-4   1 4
Rural Offences    ...   ...   ...   ...   --   --   --   --   6   --6
   --   --   m
__________________________________________________________________________
Yeally Average of Convictions,
    Gross Totals             6,273  43,584  49,857  3,300 163,997  167,297

[1] Devastation of crops, destruction of fences.  [2] Unauthorised gaming
houses; secret lotteries.  [3] An exceptional figure, owing to 528 convictions
in 1863, whilst the average of the other years was nine convictions.
[4] Electoral offences.



<p 23>are 4 per cent. in Italy, touch 9 per cent in France.
Sexual crimes and offences (as we saw in the case of rape), such
as abortion, adultery, indecent assaults, and incitement to
immorality, which in Italy present very small and negligible
figures, are more frequent in France.  Whilst the illegal carrying
of arms, threats, false witness, escape from detention, violations
of domicile, calumny, are of greater frequency in Italy than in
France, the contrary is true of bankruptcy offences, political and
press crimes and offences, on account of a manifest difference of
the moral, economic, and social conditions of the two countries,
which are plainly discernible behind these apparently dry figures.


In addition to this demonstration, we have given anthropological
and statistical proofs of the fundamental distinction between
habitual and occasional criminals, which had been pointed out by
many observers, but which had hitherto remained a simple assertion
without manifest consequences.

This same distinction ought to be not only the basis of all
sociological theory concerning crime, but also a point of
departure for other distinctions more precise and complete, which
I set forth in my previous studies on criminals, and which were
subsequently reproduced, with more or less of assent, by all
criminal sociologists.

In the first place, it is necessary to distinguish, amongst
habitual criminals, those who present a conspicuous and clinical
form of mental aberration, which accounts for their anti-social
activity.
<p 24>

In the second place, amongst habitual criminals who are not of
unsound mind, however little the inmates of prisons may have been
observed with adequate ideas and experience, there is a clear
indication of a class of individuals, physically or mentally
abnormal, induced to crime by inborn tendencies, which are
manifest from their birth, and accompanied by symptoms of extreme
moral insensibility.  Side by side with these, another class
challenges attention, of individuals who have also been criminals
from childhood, and who continue to be so, but who are in a
special degree a product of physical and social environment, which
has persistently driven them into the criminal life, by their
abandonment before and after the first offence, and which,
especially in the great towns, is very often forced upon them by
the actual incitement of their parents.

Amongst occasional criminals, again, a special category is created
by a kind of exaggeration of the characteristics, mainly
psychological, of the type itself.  In the case of all occasional
criminals, the crime is brought about rather by the effects of
environment than by the active tendencies of the individual; but
whilst in most of these individuals the deciding cause is only a
circumstance affecting all alike, with a few it is an exceptional
constraint of passion, a sort of psychological tempest, which
drives them into crime.

Thus, then, the entire body of criminals may be classed in five
categories, which as early as 1880 I described as criminal madmen,
born criminals, <p 25>criminals by contracted habits, occasional
criminals, and criminals of passion.

As already observed, criminal anthropology will not finally
establish itself until it has been developed by biological,
psychological, and statistical monographs on each of these
categories, in such a manner as to present their anthropological
characteristics with greater precision than they have hitherto
attained.  So far, observers continue to give us the same
characteristics for a large aggregate of criminals, classifying
them according to the form of their crime rather than according to
their bio-social type.  In Lombroso's work, for instance, or in
that of Marro (and to some extent even in my work on homicide),
the characteristics are stated for a total, or for legal
categories of criminals, such as murderers, thieves, forgers, and
so on, which include born criminals, occasional and habitual
criminals, and madmen.  The result is a certain measure of
inconsistency, according to the predominance of one type or the
other in the aggregate of criminals under observation.  This also
contributes to render the conclusions of criminal anthropology
less evident.

Nevertheless, we may sum up the inquiries which have been made up
to the present time; and in particular we may now point out the
general characteristics of the five classes of criminals, in
accordance with my personal experience in the observation of
criminals.  It is to be hoped that successive observations of a
more methodical kind will gradually reinforce the accuracy of this
classification of symptoms.
<p 26>

In the first place, it is evident that in a classification not
exclusively biological, if it is to form the anthropological basis
of criminal sociology, criminals of unsound mind must in all
fairness be included.

The usual objection, recently repeated by M. Joly (``Le Crime,''
p. 62), which holds the term ``criminal madness'' to be self-
contradictory, since a madman is not morally responsible, and
therefore cannot be a criminal, is not conclusive.  We maintain
that responsibility to society, the only responsibility common to
all criminals, exists also for criminals of unsound mind.

Nor, again, is it correct to say, with M. Bianchi, that mad
criminals should be referred to psychiatry, and not to criminal
anthropology; for, though psychiatry is concerned with mad
criminals in a psycho-pathological sense, this does not prevent
criminal anthropology and sociology from also concerning
themselves with the same subjects, in order to constitute the
natural history of the criminal, and to suggest remedies in the
interest of society.

As for criminals of unsound mind, it is necessary to begin by
placing in a separate category such as cannot, after the studies
of Lombroso and the Italian school of psychiatry, be distinguished
from the born criminals properly so-called.  These are the persons
tainted with a form of insanity which is known under various
names, from the ``moral insanity'' of Pritchard to the ``reasoning
madness'' of Verga.  Moral insanity, illustrated by the works of
Mendel, Legrand du Saulle, Maudsley, Krafft-Ebing, Savage, Hugues,
<p 27>Hollander, Tamburini, Bonvecchiato, which, with the lack or
atrophy of the moral or social sense, and of _*apparent_ soundness
of mind, is properly speaking only the essential psychological
condition of the born criminal.

Beyond these morally insane people, who are very rare--for, as
Krafft-Ebing and Lombroso have pointed out, they are found more
frequently in prisons than in mad-houses--there is the unhappily
large body of persons tainted by a common and clinical form of
mental alienation, all of whom are apt to become criminal.

The whole of these criminals of unsound mind cannot be included in
a single category; and such, indeed, is the opinion expressed by
Lombroso, in the second volume of the fourth edition of his work,
after his descriptive analysis of the chief forms of mental
alienation.  As a matter of fact, not only are the organic, and
especially the psychological, characteristics of criminal madmen
sometimes identical with and sometimes opposed to those of born
and occasional criminals, but these very characteristics vary
considerably between the different forms of mental alienation, in
spite of the identity of the crime committed.

It is further to be observed, in respect of criminal madmen, that
this category also includes all the intermediary types between
complete madness and a rational condition, who remain in what
Maudsley has called the ``middle zone.''  The most frequent
varieties in the criminality of these partially insane persons, or
``matto<i:>des,'' are the perpetrators of <p 28>attacks upon
statesmen, who are generally men with a grievance, irascible men,
writers of insane documents, and the like, such as Passanante,
Guiteau, and Maclean.

In the same category are those who commit terrible crimes without
motive, and who nevertheless, according to the complacent
psychology of the classical school, would be credited with a
maximum of moral soundness.

Again, there are the necrophiles, like Sergeant Bertrand, Verzeni,
Menesclou, and very probably the undetected ``Jack the Ripper'' of
London, who are tainted with a form of sexual psychopathy.  Yet
again there are such as are tainted with hereditary madness, and
especially the epileptics and epileptoids, who may also be
assigned to the class of born criminals, according to the
plausible hypothesis of Lombroso as to the fundamental identity of
congenital criminality, moral madness, and epilepsy.  I have
always found in my own experience that outrageous murders, not to
be explained according to the ordinary psychology of criminals,
are accompanied by psychical epilepsy, or larvea.


Born or instinctive criminals are those who most frequently
present the organic and psychological characteristics established
by criminal anthropology.  These are either savage or brutal men,
or crafty and idle, who draw no distinction between homicide,
robbery or other kinds of crime, and honest industry.  ``They are
criminals just as others are good workingmen,'' says Fr<e'>gier;
and, as Romagnosi put it, actual <p 29>punishment affects them
much less than the menace of punishment, or does not affect them
at all, since they regard imprisonment as a natural risk of their
occupation, as masons regard the fall of a roof, or as miners
regard fire-damp.  ``They do not suffer in prison.  They are like
a painter in his studio, dreaming of their next masterpiece.  They
are on good terms with their gaolers, and even know how to make
themselves useful.''[5]


[5] Moreau, ``Souvenirs de la petite et grande Roquette,'' Paris,
1884, ii. 440.



The born criminals and the occasional criminals constitute the
majority of the characteristic and diverse types of homicide and
thief.  Prison governors call them ``gaol-birds.''  They pass on
from the police to the judge and to the prison, and from the
prison to the police and to the judge, with a regularity which has
not yet impaired the faith of law-makers in the efficacy of
punishment as a cure for crime.[6]


[6] Wayland, ``The Incorrigible,'' in the _Journal of Mental
Science_, 1888.  Sichart, ``Criminal Incorrigibles.''



No doubt the idea of a born criminal is a direct challenge to the
traditional belief that the conduct of every man is the outcome of
his free will, or at most of his lack of education rather than of
his original physio-psychical constitution.  But, in the first
place, even public opinion, when not prejudiced in favour of the
so-called consequences of irresponsibility, recognises in many
familiar and everyday cases that there are criminals who, without
being mad, are still not as ordinary men; and the reporters call
them ``human tigers,'' ``brutes,'' and the like.  And in the
second place, the scientific proofs of these hereditary
tenden<p 30>cies to crime, even apart from the clinical forms of
mental alienation, are now so numerous that it is useless to
insist upon them further.

The third class is that of the criminals whom, after my prison
experience, I have called criminals by contracted habit.  These
are they who, not presenting the anthropological characteristics
of the born criminals, or presenting them but slightly, commit
their first crime most commonly in youth, or even in childhood--
almost invariably a crime against property, and far more through
moral weakness, induced by circumstances and a corrupting
environment, than through inborn and active tendencies.  After
this, as M. Joly observes, either they are led on by the impunity
of their first offences, or, more decisively, prison associations
debilitate and corrupt them, morally and physically, the cell
degrades them, alcoholism renders them stupid and subject to
impulse, and they continually fall back into crime, and become
chronically prone to it.  And society, which thus abandons them,
before and after they leave their prison, to wretchedness,
idleness, and temptations, gives them no assistance in their
struggle to gain an honest livelihood, even when it does not
thrust them back into crime by harassing police regulations, which
prevent them from finding or keeping honest employment.[7]


[7] Fliche, ``Comment en devient Criminel,'' Paris, 1886.



Of those criminals who begin by being occasional criminals, and
end, after progressive degeneration, by exhibiting the features of
the born criminals, Thomas More said, ``What is this but to make
thieves for the <p 31>pleasure of hanging them?''  And it is just
this class of criminals whom measures of social prevention might
reduce to a minimum, for by abolishing the causes we abolish the
effects.

Apart from their organic and psychological characteristics, innate
or acquired, there are two bio-sociological symptoms which seem to
me to be common, though for distinct reasons, to born criminals
and habitual criminals.  I mean precocity and relapse.  The
occasional crime and the crime of passion do not, as a rule, occur
before manhood, and rarely or never lead to relapse.

Here are a few figures concerning precocity, derived from
international prison statistics:--


PRISONERS UNDER 20 YEARS OF AGE.                  Male.    Female.
__________________________________________________________________
                                                    p.c.     p.c.
Italy (1871--6)   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   8.8     6.8
France ('72-5)    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  10       7.6
Prussia ('71-7--not over 19 years)    ...  ...  ...   2.8     2.6
Austria ('72-5)   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   9.6    10.6
Hungary ('72-6)   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   4.2      9
England ('72-7 )--not over 24)   ...  ...  ...  ...  27.4    14.8
Scotland ('72-7)  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  20       7.8
Ireland ('72-7)   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   9       3.2
Belgium ('74-5)   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  20.8    ---
Holland ('72-7)   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  22.8     3.7
Sweden ('73-7)    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  19.7    17
Switzerland ('74) ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   6.6     7
Denmark ('74-5)   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   9.9     9.6
----------------------------------------------------------------


More recent figures show that the yearly average in France, for
1876-80, out of 4,374 persons brought to trial, was 1 per cent.
under sixteen years of age, and 17 per cent. between sixteen and
twenty-one; <p 32>whilst in 1886 the same percentages were .60 and
14.  Out of 146,217 accused before the tribunals there were 4 per
cent. under sixteen, and 14 per cent. between sixteen and twenty-
one.  Out of 25,135 females there were 4 per cent. under sixteen,
and 11 per cent. between sixteen and twenty-one; whilst in 1886
the percentages were 3 and 14 of males, 2.5 and 14 of females.

In Prussia, of persons accused of crimes and offences in 1860-70,
4 per cent. were under eighteen years.

In Germany, of persons condemned in 1886, 3 per cent. were between
twelve and fifteen, 6 per cent. between fifteen and eighteen, and
16 per cent. between eighteen and twenty-one years.

In Italy, out of 5,189 persons condemned at the assizes in 1887, 3
per cent. were between fourteen and eighteen, and 12 per cent.
between eighteen and twenty-one.  Out of 65,624 tried before the
tribunals, 1.2 per cent. were under fourteen, 5 per cent. were
between fourteen and eighteen, and 13 per cent. between eighteen
and twenty-one.  There is a continual increase of precocious
criminals in Italy.  Prisoners condemned at the assizes under the
age of twenty-one stood at 15 per cent. from 1880 to 1887, whilst
those of a similar age who were tried before the tribunals rose
from 17 to 20 per cent.

To these numerical data may be added others of a qualificative
character, showing that precocity is most frequent in respect of
the natural crimes and offences which are usually observed amongst
born and habitual criminals.
<p 33>

In France the younger prisoners in 1882 had been sentenced in the
following proportions:--

                                             Male.       Female.
For murder and poisoning ...  ...     0.9 per cent.   .5 per cent.
'' homicide, assaults, and wounding   1.6    ''      1.5    ''
'' incendiarism...  ...  ...  ...     1.8    ''      2      ''
'' indecent assault ...  ...  ...     3.5    ''     11.8    ''
'' specified thefts, forgery, uttering
    false coin ...  ...  ...  ...     5.2    ''       2.4   ''
'' simple theft, swindling    ...    60.8    ''      49.7   ''
'' mendicity and vagrancy     ...    23      ''      20.5   ''
'' other crimes and offences    ...   2.7    ''       8     ''
'' defiance of parents    ...   ...   1      ''      10.5   ''


These figures, showing a greater frequency amongst females of
precocious crimes against the person, and amongst males against
property, are approximately repeated in Switzerland, where young
prisoners in 1870-74 had been sentenced in these proportions:--

For crimes and offences against the person   ...  12.1 per cent.
''       ''       ''           morality      ...   5.7      ''
'' incendiarism...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   4.3      ''
'' theft    ... ... ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  65.5      ''
'' swindling    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   5.4      ''
'' forgery  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   1.9      ''
'' vagrancy    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...   4.6      ''



The judicial statistics of France and Italy give these
proportions:--

<p 34>
{FIX THIS TABLE!}

ITALY--1866.  FRANCE--1886
ASSIZE COURTS
Under 14--18.  28--21.  Under j l6--2

Homicide    ... ... ... ... p.c. p.c. p.c. p.c. p.c.
Murder(and robbery with homicide)   14  I i 10  3 7 6
Parricide   ......  ... ... ... --  5   --8 7 5 9
Infanticide ... ... ... ... --  I --4   --  6
Imprisonment    ... ... ... ... --  --  --
Wilful wounding (followed by death) --  19 24   --  3 S
Abortion    ......  ... ... ... --  --  --  1-I
Rape and indecent assault on adults}    --  1'2
     ''           ''       children}    --  lo 7 t  3 7 11
Resistance to and attacks on public
    functionaries   ... ... ... --5 --6 --  3
Incendiarism    --  --  --2 3-7 3 1
False money ..  ..  ..  .   14  --  I   3-7 2 5
Forgery in public and private docu-
    ments   ......  ... ... ...  -- 5   --2 --  2 --1
Extortion, highway robbery with
    violence    ... ... ... ...  14 9   7   --  3w 6
Specified and simple theft  ...  14 19  16  41  51
Unintentional wounding  ...  28 5   2   --  --
----------------------------------------------------------------
Total of condemned and accused  7   179 475 27  641



The French statistics for the tribunals--no complete Italian
statistics being available, are as follows:--


FRANCE--1886.  CORRECTIONAL TRIBUNALS.

 le.  Female.
Offences.   Underl6.  I6--21 Underl6.1 16--21

 per cenl.  Per cenc.  per cent. per cent.

Resistance to authorities   ... ... 2   2 2 'I  1 1
Assaults on public functionaries    --8 5   --7 4 1
Vagrancy    ... ... .-- 4 4 11 2    3 2 S'S
Mendicity   ... ... ... 4 8 4   12'-    3 6
wilful wounding ... ... ... 5 1 18-5    3@0 11
Unintentional wounding  ... 8   7   I
Offences against public decency ..  1 6 1 8 3 1 3 >
Defamation and abuse -  I   '2  1 1 1 0
Theft   ... ... ... ... ...  57 5   a--4    63  54 3
Frauds on refreshment-house keepers --I 2 I --I 6
Swindling   5   1 2 2.4 3 +2
Breach of confidence    ... ... 9   1 3 7   1 2
Injury to crops and plants  ... 5   --3 --3 5
Game-law offences   ..  ... .-- 15 1    14 2 1  l   --2
----------------------------------------------------------------
Total of accused


<p 35>

Here we have a statistical demonstration of a more frequent
precocity, amongst various forms of criminality, in respect of
inborn tendencies (murder and homicide, rape, incendiarism,
specific thefts), or in respect of tendencies contracted by habit
(simple theft, mendicity, vagrancy).

Also this characteristic of precocity is accompanied by that of
relapse, which accordingly we have seen to be more frequent in the
same forms of natural criminality, and which we can now tabulate
in respect of its persistency in these born and habitual
criminals.

It has been well said that the large number of relapsed persons
who are brought to trial year after year proves that thieves ply
their trade as a regular calling; the thief who has once tasted
prison life is sure to return to it.[8]  And again, there are very
few cases in which a man or a woman who has turned thief ceases to
be one.  Whatever the reason may be, as a matter of fact the thief
is rarely or never reformed.  When you can turn an old thief into
an honest worker, you may turn an old fox into a house dog.[9]


[8] _Quarterly Review_, 1871, ``The London Police.''
[9] Thomson, ``The Psychology of Criminals,'' _Journal of Mental
Science_, 1870.



We must, however, read these testimonies of practical men, which
could easily be multiplied, in the light of our distinction
between incorrigible criminals, who are so from their birth, and
such as are made incorrigible by the effect of their prison and
social environment.  The former could scarcely be reduced in
number, whilst the latter could be <p 36>considerably diminished
by the penal alternatives of which I will speak later.

The following statistics of relapse are quoted from Yvern<e!>s,
``La R<e'>cidive en Europe'' (Paris, 1874):--

                                           FRANCE--1826-74.    ITALY--1870.
Relapses     ENGLAND--1871.   SWEDEN--1871.   Accused             Accused
               Prisoners.       Thieves.    and brought         and brought
                                              to trial.           to trial.
Once ...   ...   38 per cent.   54 per cent.   45 per cent.   60 per cent.
Twice      ...   18  ''         28   ''        20    ''       30     ''
Three times...   44  ''         18   ''        35    ''       10     ''



In Prussia (1878-82), 17 per cent. had relapsed once, 16 per cent.
twice, 16 per cent. three times, 13 per cent. four times, 10 per
cent five times, and 28 per cent. six times or oftener.[10]


[10] Starke, ``Verbrechen und Verbrecher,'' Berlin, 1884, p. 229.



At the Prisons Congress of Stockholm the following figures were
given for Scotland.  Out of a total of forty-nine relapsed
prisoners, 16 per cent. had relapsed once, 13 per cent. twice or
three times, 6 per cent. four or five times, 6 per cent. from six
to ten times, 5 per cent. from ten to twenty times, 4 per cent.
from twenty to fifty times, and 1 per cent. more than fifty times.

At the meeting of the Social Science Congress, held at Liverpool,
in 1876, Mr. Nugent stated that upwards of 4,107 women had
relapsed four times or oftener, and that many of them were classed
as incorrigible, having been convicted twenty; forty, or fifty
times, whilst one had been convicted 130 times.

The judicial statistics of Italy for 1887 give the following
results:--

<p 37>
                                   ITALY--Convicted, per cent.
  Relapses.
                     Justices of    Tribunals.     Assizes.
                        Peace.
Once  ...  ...  ...  ...   57            42          50
Two to five times    ...   34            40          40
More than five times ...    9            18          10
--------------------------------------------------------
Actual totals of relapses  27,068      16,240       1,870



I have found from my inquiries amongst 346 condemned to penal
servitude and 353 prisoners from the correctional tribunals the
following percentages:--


Relapsed.   Convicts              Imprisoned.
Once    ... ... 83.2    ... ... 26
Twice   ... ... 12.5    ... ... 16.5
3 times ... ... 3.1 ... ... ... 14.6
4  ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... 10.8
5  ''   ... ... 6.8 ... ... ... 6.6
6  ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... 5.2
7  ''   ... ... 1.6 ... ... ... 7.1
8  ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... 2.8
9  ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... 2.8
10 ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... 2.3
11 ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... .9
12 ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... .5
13 ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... .9
14 ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... 1.4
15 ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... .9
20 ''   ... ... --  ... ... ... .5
------------------------------------------------
Actual totals of relapses   128     212



Chronic relapse is naturally less frequent in the case of those
condemned to long terms; but it is a conspicuous symptom of
individual and social pathology in the two classes of born and
habitual criminals.
<p 38>

Lombroso, in the second volume of his work on ``The Criminal,''
denies that precocity and relapse are characteristics
distinguishing born and habitual from occasional criminals.  But
it is only a question of terms.  He considers that born and
habitual criminals confine themselves almost exclusively to
serious crime, and occasional criminals to minor offences.  And as
the figures which I have given show that precocity and relapse are
even more frequent for minor offences than for crimes, he thinks
that they contradict instead of confirming my conclusions.

The mere seriousness of an act cannot by any means divide the
categories of criminals; for homicide as well as theft, assault
and battery as well as forgery, may be committed, though in
different psychological and social conditions, as easily by born
and habitual criminals as by occasional criminals and criminals of
passion.

Moreover, the figures which I have given show that precocity and
relapse are more frequent in the forms of criminality which, apart
from their gravity, are the common practices of born and habitual
criminals, such as murder, homicide, robbery, rape, &c., whilst
they are far more uncommon, even if they can be said to be
observed at all, in the case of the crimes and offences usually
committed by occasional criminals, such as infanticide, and
certain of the offences mentioned above.


It remains to say something of the occasional criminals, and the
criminals of passion.
<p 39>

The latter are but a variety of the occasional criminals, but
their characteristics are so specific that they may be very
readily distinguished.  In fact Lombroso, in his second edition,
supplementing the observations of Despine and Bittinger, separated
them from other criminals, and classified them according to their
symptoms.  I need only summarise his observations.

In the first place, the criminals who constitute the strongly
marked class of criminals by irresistible impulse are very rare,
and their crimes are almost invariably against the person.  Thus,
out of 71 criminals of passion inquired into by Lombroso, 69 were
homicides, 6 had in addition been convicted of theft, 3 of
incendiarism, and 1 of rape.

It may be shown that they number about 5 per cent. of crimes
against the person.

They are as a rule persons of previous good behaviour, sanguine or
nervous by temperament, of excessive sensibility, unlike born or
habitual criminals, and they are often of a neurotic or epileptoid
temperament, of which their crimes may be, strictly speaking, an
unrecognised consequence.

Frequently they transgress in their youth, especially in the case
of women, under stress of a passion which suddenly spurns
constraint, like anger, or outraged love, or injured honour.  They
are highly emotional before, during, or after the crime, which
they do not commit treacherously, but openly, and often by ill-
chosen methods, the first that present themselves.  Now and then,
however, one encounters criminals of passion who premeditate a
crime, and <p 40>carry it out treacherously, either by reason of
their colder and less impulsive temperament, or as the outcome of
preconceived ideas or a widespread sentiment, in cases where we
have to do with a popular form of lawlessness, such as the
vendetta.

This is why the test of premeditation has no absolute value in
criminal psychology, as a distinction between the born criminal
and the criminal of passion; for premeditation depends especially
on the temperament of the individual, and is exemplified in crimes
committed by both anthropological types.

Amongst other symptoms of the criminal of passion, there is also
the precise motive which leads to a crime complete in itself, and
never as a means of attaining another criminal purpose.

These offenders immediately acknowledge their crime, with
unassumed remorse, frequently so keen that they instantly commit,
or attempt to commit suicide.  When convicted--as they seldom are
by a jury--they are always repentant prisoners, and amend their
lives, or do not become degraded, so that in this way they
encourage superficial observers to affirm as a general fact, and
one possible in all circumstances, that ameliorative effect of
imprisonment which is really a mere illusion in the case of the
far more numerous classes of born and habitual criminals.

In these same offenders we very rarely observe, if at all, the
organic anomalies which create a criminal type.  And even the
psychological characteristics are much slighter in countries where
certain crimes of <p 41>passion are endemic, almost ranking
amongst the customs of the community, like the homicides which
occur in Corsica and Sardinia for the vindication of honour, or
the political assassinations in Russia and Ireland.


The last class is that of occasional criminals, who without any
inborn and active tendency to crime lapse into crime at an early
age through the temptation of their personal condition, and of
their physical and social environment, and who do not lapse into
it, or do not relapse, if these temptations disappear.

Thus they commit those crimes and offences which do not indicate
natural criminality, or else crimes and offences against person or
property, but under personal and social conditions altogether
different from those in which they are committed by born and
habitual criminals.

There is no doubt that, even with the occasional criminal, some of
the causes which lead him into crime belong to the anthropological
class; for external causes would not suffice without individual
predispositions.  For instance, during a scarcity or a hard
winter, not all of those who experience privation have recourse to
theft, but some prefer to endure want, however undeserved, without
ceasing to be honest, whilst others are at the utmost driven to
beg their food; and amongst those who yield to the suggestion of
crime, some stop short at simple theft, whilst others go as far as
robbery with violence.

But the true difference between the born and the occasional
criminal is that, with the former, the <p 42>external cause is
less operative than the internal tendency, because this tendency
possesses, as it were, a centrifugal force, driving the individual
to commit crime, whilst, for the occasional criminal, it is rather
a case of feeble power of resistance against external causes, to
which most of the inducement to crime is due.

The casual provocation of crime in the born criminal is generally
the outcome of an instinct or tendency already existing, and far
more of a pretext than an occasion of crime.  With the occasional
criminal, on the other hand, it is the casual provocation which
matures, no doubt in a favouring soil, the growth of criminal
tendencies not previously developed.

For this reason Lombroso calls the occasional criminals
``criminaloids,'' in order to show precisely that they have a
distinctly abnormal constitution, though in a less degree than the
born criminals, just as we have the metal and the metalloid, the
epileptic and the epileptoid.

And this, again, is the reason why Lombroso's criticisms on my
description of occasional criminals are lacking in force.  He
says, as Benedikt said at the Congress at Rome, that all criminals
are criminals by birth, so that there is no such thing as an
occasional criminal, in the sense of a _*normal_ individual
casually launched into crime.  But I have not, any more than
Garofalo, drawn such a picture of the occasional criminal, for as
a matter of fact I have said precisely the opposite, as indeed
Lombroso himself acknowledges a little further on (ii. 422),
<p 43>namely, that between the born and the occasional criminal
there is only a difference of degree and modality, as in all the
criminal classes.

To cite a few details of criminal psychology, it may be stated
that of the two physiological conditions of crime, moral
insensibility and improvidence, occasional crime is especially due
to the latter, and inborn and habitual crime to the former.  With
the born criminal it is, above all, the lack or the weakness of
moral sense which fails to withstand crime, whereas with the
occasional criminal the moral sense is almost normal, but
inability to realise beforehand the consequences of his act causes
him to yield to external influences.

Every man, however pure and honest he may be, is conscious now and
then of a transitory notion of some dishonest or criminal action.
But with the honest man, exactly because he is physically and
morally normal, this notion of crime, which simultaneously summons
up the idea of its grievous consequences, glances off the surface
of the normal conscience, and is a mere flash without the thunder.
With the man who is less normal and has less forethought, the
notion dwells, resists the weak repulsion of a not too vigorous
moral sense, and finally prevails; for, as Victor Hugo says,
``Face to face with duty, to hesitate is to be lost.''[11]


[11] For instance, I will recall a fact which Morel has related of
himself, how one day, as he was crossing a bridge in Paris, he saw
a working-man gazing into the water, and a homicidal idea flashed
across his mind, so that he had to hurry away, for fear of
yielding to the temptation to throw the man into the water.
Again, there is the case of Humboldt's nurse, who was attacked one
day by the temptation to kill her charge, and ran with him to his
mother in order to avoid a <p 44>disaster.  Brierre de Boismont
also tells us of a learned man who, at the sight of a picture in a
public gallery, was tempted to cut the canvas, and ran away from
his impulse to crime.

<p 44>

The criminal of passion is one who is strong enough to resist
ordinary temptations of no exceptional force, to which the
occasional criminal would yield, but who does not resist
psychological storms which indeed are sometimes actually
irresistible.

The forms of occasional criminality, which are determined by these
ordinary temptations, are also determined by age, sex, poverty,
worldly influences, influences of moral environment, alcoholism,
personal surroundings, and imitation.  Tarde has ably demonstrated
the persistent influence of these conditions on the actions of
men.

In this connection, Lombroso has drawn a clear distinction between
two varieties of occasional criminals: the ``pseudo-criminals,''
or normal human beings who commit involuntary offences, or
offences which do not spring from perversity, and do not hurt
society, though they are punishable by law, and ``criminaloids,''
who commit ordinary offences, but differ from true criminals for
the reasons already given.


A final observation is necessary in regard to this anthropological
classification of criminals, and it meets various objections
raised by our syllogistic critics.  The difference existing
amongst the five categories is only one of degree, and depends
upon their organic and psychological types, and upon the influence
of physical and social environment.

In every natural classification the differences <p 45>between
various groups and varieties are never anything but relative.
This deprives them of none of their theoretical and practical
importance, and so it is with this anthropological classification
of criminals.

It follows that, as in natural history we advance by degrees and
shades from the inorganic to the organic creation, life beginning
in the mineral domain with the laws of crystallisation, so in
criminal anthropology we pass by degrees and shades from the mad
to the born criminal, through the links of moral madmen and
epileptics; and from the born criminal to the occasional, through
the link of the habitual criminal, who begins by being an
occasional criminal, and ends by acquiring and transmitting to his
children the characteristics of the born criminal.  And finally,
we pass from the occasional criminal to the criminal of passion,
who is but a species of the other, and who further, with his
neurotic and epileptoid temperament, not infrequently approximates
to the criminal of unsound mind.

Thus in our everyday life, as in science, we very often find
intermediate types, for complete and unmixed types are always the
most uncommon.  And whilst legislators and judges, in their
complacent psychology, exact and establish marked lines of
cleavage between the sane and the insane criminal, experts in
psychiatry and anthropology are often constrained to place a
prisoner somewhere between the mad and the born criminal, or
between the occasional criminal and the normal man.

But it is evident that even when a criminal cannot be classed
precisely in one or the other category, and <p 46>stands between
the two, this is in itself a sufficiently definite classification,
especially from a sociological point of view.  There is
consequently no weight in the objection of those who, basing their
argument on an abstract and nebulous idea of the criminal in
general, and judging him merely according to the crime which has
been committed, without knowing his personal characteristics and
the circumstances of his environment, affirm that criminal
anthropology cannot classify all who are detained and accused.

In my experience, however, as a counsel and as an observer, I have
never had any difficulty in classifying all persons detained or
condemned for crimes and offences, by relying upon organic, and
especially upon psychological symptoms.

Thus, as Garofalo recently said, whilst the accepted criminal
science recognises only two terms, the offence and the punishment,
criminal sociology on the other hand recognises three: the crime,
the criminal, and the means best calculated for social self-
defence.  And it may be concluded that up to this time, science,
legislation, and, in a minor degree, but without any scientific
method, the administration of justice, have judged and punished
crime in the person of the criminal, but that hereafter it will be
necessary to judge the criminal as well as the crime.


After these general observations on the anthropological classes of
criminals, it might seem necessary to establish their respective
numerical proportions.  But as there is no absolute separation
between one <p 47>and another, and as the frequency of the several
criminal types varies according to the crimes or offences, natural
or otherwise, against persons or property, no precise account can
be rendered of the criminal world as a whole.

By way of approximation, however, it may be said in the first
place that the classes of mad criminals and criminals of passion
are the least numerous, and represent something like 5 or 10 per
cent. of the total.

On the other hand, we have seen that born and habitual criminals
are about 40 or 50 per cent.; so that the occasional criminals
would also be between 40 and 50 per cent.

These are figures which naturally vary according to the different
groups of crime and of criminals which come under observation, and
which cannot be more accurately determined without a series of
special studies in criminal anthropology, as I said when answering
the objections which have been raised against the methods of this
novel science.

It remains for us, before concluding our first chapter, to
establish a fact of great scientific and practical value.  This is
that, after the anthropological classification which I have
maintained for some ten years past, all who have been devoting
themselves to the subject of crime as regarded from a biological
and social standpoint have recognised the need for a
classification less simple than that of habitual and occasional
criminals, and which will be more or less complex according to the
criterion which may be adopted.
<p 48>

In the first place, the necessity is generally recognised of
abandoning the old arbitrary and algebraic type in favour of a
classification which shall correspond more accurately with the
facts of the case.  This classification, originating in
observations made within the prison walls, I have extended in the
domain of criminal sociology, wherein it is now established as a
fundamental criterion of legislative measures which must be taken
as a protection against criminals, as well as a criterion of their
responsibility.

Secondly, the classifications of criminals hitherto given are not
essentially and integrally distinct.  It has been seen, as a
matter of fact, that all the classifications which have been set
forth amount to a recognition of four types, the born, the insane,
the occasional criminals, and the criminals of passion; and this
again resolves itself into the simple and primitive distinction
between occasional and instinctive criminals.  The category of
criminals by contracted habit would not be accepted by all
observers, but it corresponds too closely to our daily experience
to stand in need of further proof.  And on the other hand I must
frankly decline to accept the authority of those who put forward
classifications more or less symmetrical without having made a
direct study of criminals; for the experimental method does not
admit systems based on mere imagination, or on vague recollections
of criminal trials, or on argumentative constructions built up
from the systems of others.

As a matter of fact, apart from the differences <p 49>of
nomenclature, it is evident that the partial discrepancies in this
anthropological classification of criminals are due in some
measure to the different points of view taken by observers.  For
instance, the classification of Lacassagne, Joly, Krauss, Badik,
and Marro rest upon a purely descriptive criterion of the organic
or psychological characteristics of criminals.  The
classifications of Liszt, Medem, and Minzloff, on the other hand,
depend solely upon the curative and defensive influence of
punishment; and those of Foehring and Starke upon certain special
points of view, such as the assistance of released prisoners, on
their tendency to relapse.

My own point of view, on the contrary, has been general and
reproductive, for my classification is based upon the natural
causes of crime, individual, physical, and social, and to this
extent it corresponds more closely with the theoretical and
practical requirements of criminal sociology.  If the curative art
of society, like that of individuals, expects from positive
knowledge an indication of remedies, it is clear that a
classification based on the fundamental causes of crime is best
fitted to indicate a social cure for this manifestation of
disease, which is the essential object of criminal sociology.
For, as in biology one is carried from purely descriptive anatomy
to genetic anatomy and physiology, so in sociology we must pass on
from purely legal descriptions of crimes to the genetic knowledge
of the criminals who commit these crimes.

For this reason all the chief classifications of criminals, as has
been seen, may be brought into <p 50>line with my own, by virtue
of the more complete and fruitful test which has established it.
And thus we have a manifest proof that this classification
actually represents the common and permanent basis of all the
chief anthropological categories of criminals, whether in regard
to their natural causality and their specific character, or in
regard to the different forms of social self-defence which spring
out of them, and which must be adapted to the natural causes of
crime, and to the principal criminal types.

But whatever classification may be accepted, we shall always have,
as the fundamental axiom of criminal anthropology, this variety in
the types of criminals, which must henceforth be indispensable to
all who are theoretically or practically concerned with crime.



CHAPTER II.

_THE DATA OF CRIMINAL STATISTICS._

FOR moral and social facts, unlike physical and biological facts,
experiment is very difficult, and frequently even impossible;
observation in this domain brings the greatest aid to scientific
research.  And statistics are amongst the most efficacious
instruments of such observation.

It is natural, therefore, that criminal sociology, after studying
the individual aspect of the natural genesis of crime, should have
recourse to criminal statistics for the study of the social
aspect.  Statistical information in the words of Krohne, ``is the
first condition of success in opposing the armies of crime, for it
discharges the same function as the Intelligence department in
war.''

From statistics, in fact, the modern idea of the close relation
between offences and the conditions of social life, in some of its
aspects, and above all in certain particular forms, has most
directly sprung.

The science of criminal statistics is to criminal sociology what
histology is to biology, for it exhibits, in the conditions of the
individual elements of the collective organism, the factors of
crime as a<p 51> <p 52>social phenomenon.  And that not only for
scientific inductions, but also for practical and legislative
purposes; for, as Lord Brougham said at the London Statistical
Congress in 1860, ``criminal statistics are for the legislator
what the chart and the compass are for the navigator.''


The experimental school, accepting the fundamental and
incontestible idea, apart from its numerical and optimistic
exaggerations, that the statistics of crime must be considered in
regard to the growth and activity of the population, has opened up
an entirely new channel of fruitful observations, in the
classification and study of the natural factors of crime.

In my ``Studies of Crime in France'' (1881) I arranged in three
natural orders the whole series of causes leading to crime, which
had previously been indicated in a fragmentary and incomplete
manner.[12]



[12] Bentham, in his ``Introduction to the Principles of Morals
and Legislation,'' enumerates the following circumstances as
necessary to be considered in legislation:--temperament, health,
strength, physical imperfections, culture, intellectual faculties,
strength of mind, dispositions, ideas of honour and religion,
feelings of sympathy and antipathy, insanity, economic conditions,
sex, age, social status, education, profession, climate, race,
government, religious profession.

Lombroso, in the second edition of his ``Criminal,'' which
embraces all the divisions of his classical work, has made but a
rapid enumeration of the principal points:--race civilisation,
poverty, heredity, age sex, civil status, profession, education,
organic anomalies, sensations imitation.  Morselli, treating of
suicide, has given a fuller classification of its contributory
causes:--worldly or natural influences, ethnical or demographical
influences, social influences, biopsychical influences.



From the consideration that human actions, whether honest or
dishonest, social or anti-social, are always the outcome of a
man's physio-psychical organism, and of the physical and social
atmosphere which surrounds him, I have drawn attention to
<p 53>the _anthropological_ or individual factors of crime, the
_physical_ factors, and the _social_ factors.

The anthropological factors, inherent in the individual criminal,
are the first condition of crime; and they may be divided into
three sub-classes, according as we regard the criminal organically
physically, or socially.

_The organic constitution of the criminal_ comprises all anomalies
of the skull, the brain, the vital organs, the sensibility, and
the reflex activity, and all the bodily characteristics taken
together, such as the physiognomy, tattooing, and so on.

_The mental constitution of the criminal_ comprises anomalies of
intelligence and feeling, especially of the moral sense, and the
specialities of criminal writing and slang.

_The personal characteristics of the criminal_ comprise his purely
biological conditions, such as race, age, sex; bio-social
conditions, such as civil status, profession, domicile, social
rank, instruction, education, which have hitherto been regarded as
almost the exclusive concern of criminal statistics.

_The physical factors_ of crime are climate, the nature of the
soil, the relative length of day and night, the seasons, the
average temperature, meteoric conditions, agricultural pursuits.

_The social factors_ comprise the density of population; public
opinion, manners and religion; family circumstances; the system of
education; industrial pursuits; alcoholism; economic and political
conditions; public administration, justice and police; and in
general, legislative, civil and penal institutions.  <p 54>We have
here a host of latent causes, commingling and combining in all
parts of the social organism, which generally escape the notice
both of theorists and of practical men, of criminologists and of
legislators.

This classification of the natural factors of crime, which has
indeed been accepted by almost all criminal anthropologists and
sociologists, seems to me more precise and complete than any other
which has been proposed.

In respect of this classification of the natural factors of crime,
it is necessary to make two final observations as to the practical
results which may be obtained in the struggle for just laws and
against the transgression of them.

In the first place, owing to ``the discovery of the unexpected
relation amongst the various forces of nature, which had
previously been thought to be independent,'' we must lay stress on
this positive deduction, that we cannot find an adequate reason
either for a single crime or for the aggregate criminality of a
nation if we do not take into account each and all of the
different natural factors, which we may isolate in the exigencies
of our studies, but which always act together in an indissoluble
union.

No crime, whoever commits it, and in whatever circumstances, can
be explained except as the outcome of individual free-will, or as
the natural effect of natural causes.  Since the former of these
explanations has no scientific value, it is impossible to give a
scientific explanation of a crime (or indeed of any <p 55>other
action of man or brute) unless it is considered as the product of
a particular organic and psychical constitution, acting in a
particular physical and social environment.

Therefore it is far from being exact to assert that the positive
criminal school reduces crime to a purely and exclusively
anthropological phenomenon.  As a matter of fact, this school has
always from the beginning maintained that crime is the effect of
anthropological, physical, and social conditions, which evolve it
by their simultaneous and inseparable operation.  And if inquiries
into biological conditions have been more abundant and more
conspicuous by their novelty, this in no way contradicts the
fundamental conclusion of criminal sociology.

That being stated, we have still to examine the relative value of
these three classes of conditions in the natural evolution of
crime.

It seems to me that this question is generally stated
inaccurately, and also that it cannot be answered absolutely, and
in a word.

It is generally stated inaccurately; because they who think, for
instance, that crime is nothing else than a purely and exclusively
social phenomenon in the evolution of which the organic and
psychical anomalies of the criminal have had no part, ignore more
or less consciously the universal correlation of natural forces,
and forget that, in regard to any phenomenon whatsoever, it is
impossible to set an absolute limit to the network of its causes,
immediate and remote, direct and indirect.

To put this question in an arbitrary sense would <p 56>be like
asking if a mammal is the product of its lungs, or its heart, or
its stomach, or of vegetable constituents, or of the atmosphere;
whereas each of these conditions, internal and external, is
necessary to the life of the animal.

In fact, if crime were the exclusive product of the social
environment, how could one explain the familiar fact that in the
same social environment, and in identical circumstances of
poverty, abandonment, lack of education, sixty per cent. do not
commit crimes, and, of the other forty, five prefer suicide, five
go mad, five simply become beggars or tramps not dangerous to
society, whilst the remaining twenty-five actually commit crimes?
And amongst the latter, whilst some go no further than theft
without violence, why do others commit theft with violence, and
even kill their victim outright, before he offers resistance, or
threatens them, or calls for help, and this with no other object
than gain?

The secondary differences of social condition, which may be
observed even amongst the members of a single family, rotting in
one of the slums of our great towns, or amongst those who are
surrounded by the temptations of money or power, or the like, are
clearly not enough in themselves to explain the vast differences
in the actions which grow out of them, varying from honesty under
the greatest discouragement to suicide and murder.

The question, therefore, must be asked in a relative sense
altogether, and we must inquire which of the three kinds of
natural causes of crime has a <p 57>greater or less influence in
determining each particular crime at any given moment in the
individual and social life.

No clear answer of general application can be given to this
question, for the relative influence of the anthropological,
physical, and social conditions varies with the psychological and
social characteristics of each offence against the law.

For instance, if we consider the three great classes of crimes
against the person, against property, and against personal purity,
it is evident that each class of determining causes, but
especially the biological and social conditions, have a distinctly
different influence in evolving homicide, theft, or indecent
assaults.  And so it is in every category of crimes.

The undeniable influence of social conditions, and still more of
economic conditions, in leading up to the commission of theft, is
far inferior in the genesis of homicides and indecent assaults.
And similarly, in each category of crimes, the influence of the
determining conditions varies greatly according to the special
forms of crime.

Certain casual homicides are plainly the result of social
conditions (gambling, drink, public opinion, &c.) in a much higher
degree than homicides which for the most part spring from
brutality, from the moral insensibility of individuals, or from
their psycho-pathological conditions, corresponding to abnormal
organic conditions.

In like manner, certain indecent assaults, incests, &c., are
largely the outcome of social environment, which, condemning a
number of persons to live in <p 58>hovels without air or light,
with a promiscuity of sex between parents and children such as
obtains amongst the brutes, effaces or deadens all normal sense of
modesty.  On the other hand, there are cases of rape and the like
which are mostly due to the biological condition of the
individual, either in manifest forms of sexual disease or, less
manifest though none the less actual, of biological anomaly.

For thefts, again, whilst occasional simple thefts are largely the
effect of social and economical conditions, this influence becomes
feebler in comparison with impulses due to the personal
constitution, organic and psychical, as, for instance, in the case
of thefts with violence, and especially of murder for the purpose
of robbery, which scoundrels of the ``swell-mob'' so frequently
commit in cold blood.

The same observation applies to the conditions of physical
environment.  For instance, if the regular increase of crimes
against property in winter (and, as I showed for the first time
from French statistics, in years when the cold is greatest) is
only an indirect result, through the social and economic
influences of temperature, the increase of crimes of passion and
indecent assaults during the months and years when the temperature
is highest is only a direct effect of temperature, even for such
as, by their biological conditions, offer the feeblest resistance
to these influences.

Meanwhile, a last objection has been raised against the
conclusions which I have maintained for many years past.

It has been said that, even if we admit that for <p 59>certain
crimes and criminals the greatest influence must be recognised as
due to the physical and psychical conditions of the individual,
extending from slightly manifested anomalies of an anthropological
character to the most accentuated pathological condition, this
does not exclude the possibility of a crime being due to social
conditions.  In fact, it is said the anomalies of the individual
are in their turn only an effect of a debasing social environment,
which condemns its victims to organic and psychical degeneration.

This objection is sound enough if it be taken in a relative sense,
but groundless if it be insisted on absolutely.

It must be considered, in the first place, that the distinctions
of cause and effect are only relative, for every effect has its
cause, and _vice vers<a^>_; so that if wretchedness, material and
moral, is a cause of degeneration, degeneration itself, like
biological anomaly, is a cause of wretchedness.  And in this sense
the question would be simply metaphysical, like the famous
Byzantine discussions as to whether there was originally an egg
before a hen or a hen before an egg.

And, in fact, when it was said, in regard to criminal geography,
that the extent and quality of crime in such and such a province,
instead of being the effect of biological conditions (race, &c.)
and physical conditions (climate, soil, &c.), were but the effect
of social and economic conditions (of rural and industrial
pursuits, and the like), I was able to make a very simple reply.
For, apart even from statistical proofs, if the <p 60>social
conditions of such and such a province, which have an
unquestionable influence, are really the absolute and exclusive
cause of crime, we may still ask whether these social conditions
of the province are not themselves the effect of the ethnical
qualities of energy, intelligence, and so forth, in its
inhabitants, and of the more or less favourable conditions of the
climate and the soil.

But it may also be observed, more precisely, that even apart from
strongly marked and conspicuous pathological conditions, which
meanwhile assert themselves amongst the biological factors of
crime, there is a very great number of these cases in which it
cannot actually be said that the bio-psychical anomalies of the
criminal are the effect of a physically and morally poisonous
environment.

In every family in which there are several children, we find (in
spite of identical surroundings and conditions of a favourable
kind, and suitable methods of training and education), individuals
who differ intellectually from the cradle; we also find in the
degree or in the kind of their talent, the same individuals also
differ from their cradle in physical and moral constitution.  And
though the phenomenon may only be manifest in the less numerous
cases of types which are markedly normal or abnormal, it is none
the less true also in the more numerous cases of ordinary types.

In this connection I may observe that physical and social
conditions have a greater or a less influence in proportion as the
physical and psychical constitution of the individual is more or
less sound and vigorous.
<p 61>

The practical conclusion, therefore, of these general observations
on the natural genesis of crime is this:  Every crime is the
result of individual physical and social conditions; and, since
these conditions have a more or less dominant influence for
various forms of crime, the most certain and profitable mode of
defence which society can employ against criminality is of a
twofold character, and both modes ought to be employed and brought
into action simultaneously--in the first place, the amelioration
of the social conditions, as a natural preventive of crime, in the
nature of a substitute for punishment; and, secondly, measures of
perpetual or temporary elimination of criminals, according as the
influence of biological conditions in the evolution of crime is
all but absolute, or more or less great, and more or less curable.

As a matter of fact, when we follow the periodic variations of
crime, with its measured growth and decrease, we cannot fail to
conclude that these constant and constantly occurring variations
depend upon a corresponding variation of anthropological and
physical factors.  For, whilst criminal statistics are far from
showing the regularity which Quetelet claimed with much
exaggeration, the proportional figures in regard to the bearings
of age, sex, calling, &c., upon criminality exhibit very
insignificant variations from year to year.  And as for the
physical factors, if marked variations are explicable at some
given period, it is nevertheless evident that neither climate, nor
the nature of the soil, nor atmospheric conditions, nor the
seasons, nor the temperature of different years could have
undergone in the last half-<p 62>century such constant and
repeated variations as to correspond to those waves of criminality
which we shall presently exhibit in almost every nation of Europe.

Thus it is to the social factors that we must chiefly attribute
the periodic variations of criminality.  For even the variations
which can be detected in certain anthropological factors, like the
influences of age and sex upon crime, and the more or less marked
outbreak of anti-social and pathological tendencies, depend in
their turn upon social factors, such as the protection accorded to
abandoned infants, the participation of women in non-domestic,
commercial and industrial life, preventive and repressive
measures, and the like.  And again, since the social factors have
special import in occasional crime, and crime by acquired habit,
and since these are the most numerous sections of crime as a
whole, it is clear that the periodic movement of crime must be
attributed in the main to the social factors.  So true is this,
that, as we shall presently see, the gravest crimes, especially
against persons, precisely because they mostly indicate congenital
criminality, follow a more steady and regular movement than these
slighter but far more frequent offences against property, public
order, and persons, of a more occasional character, and that, as
microbes of the world of crime, they are the more direct outcome
of social environment.

It is therefore another point in favour of the experimental school
that it has insisted on this sociological aspect of the problem of
criminality, by showing <p 63>legislators, outside the limits of
their punitive remedies, as easy as they are illusory, how they
might, as far as circumstances will permit, apply a genuine social
remedy to crime.


After these preliminary observations, it is time that we should
take a closer view of the general statistics of the movement of
crime in Europe, so far as they may be followed in official
figures.

Whilst we have no intention of offering a body of comparative
statistics, but only of giving a simple indication of the periodic
movement of crime, these data, which do not render it easy to
compare one country with another, though they are intimately
related so far as each particular country is concerned, suffice to
exhibit a few facts of some considerable importance.

The most conspicuous general phenomenon in the countries here
included is _the steadiness of the gravest forms of crime side by
side with the continuous increase of slighter offences_,
especially in the countries which show a long series of figures,
such as France, England, and Belgium.  This proceeds mainly from
the progressive accumulation of offences against special
enactments, which are constantly being added to the original basis
of the penal code; but it is also a symptom of an actual
transformation in the criminal activity of the century, from
whence, through the gradual substitution of crimes against
property in the great towns for crimes against the person in
earlier centuries, we have a wider extension together with a lower
degree of intensity.
<p 64>

Another characteristic common to the countries under observation
is that, whilst the graver crimes against property show a somewhat
marked diminution, crimes against persons, on the other hand, show
more steadiness, either of regularity, as in France and Belgium,
or of increase, as in England, and still more in Germany.  But
this phenomenon in the case of crimes against the person is in
actual correspondence with criminal activity arising from an
increase of population.  On the other hand--apart from the
transformation of crimes of violence into crimes of craft and
fraud, due to the increase of movable property--the decrease of
offences against property is no more than the manifest effect of
an artificial change of judicial procedure, summary proceedings
taking the place of trial by jury.

An alternation, which is not invalidated by exceptions here and
there, has been observed in the criminality of different
countries, in the periodic movement of crimes and offences against
property and those against the person, of such a kind that years
of increase in the former usually answer to a diminution in the
latter, and _vice vers<a^>_.  The principal factors in the annual
increase of theft, such as scarcity and extremes of weather, cause
a corresponding diminution of violent assaults and bodily harm, of
homicides and indecent assaults, and _vice vers<a^>_.  On the
other hand, offences against property, which are very numerous,
contribute most of all to the total of annual crime; so that the
maximum of 1880 in Italy, as well as in France, Belgium and
Austria, is especially due to the great severity of the
<p 65>winter of 1879-80, which in Italy coincided with an
agricultural crisis, attested by the very high price of corn.
Whereas from 1881 to 1885 there were very mild winters, with more
abundant harvests, and from 1886 a greater extreme of cold and a
more acute economic crisis.

The general tendency of these periodic oscillations of crime in
Italy, as in other European countries, is nevertheless far more
towards increase than towards decrease.  This is also shown by the
proportional triennial averages of crimes and offences placed on
record, and of persons condemned to imprisonment.

In the movement of crime in each country it is necessary to
distinguish special oscillations, more or less prolonged, of
increase or decrease, from its general and permanent tendency.
The latter is determined by the fundamental conditions of each
nation, physical and social, apart from the purely artificial
section of transgressions brought into existence by new laws.  The
special oscillations, on the other hand, are determined by the
annual variations in this or that factor of the more numerous
offences; that is to say, by abundance or scantiness of the
harvests, by the annual variations of temperature, by industrial
and political crises, and the like.

The oblivion of this marked distinction, coupled with the
prejudices of the scientific schools, and even of political
parties, leads to some curious disagreements, and to lively
discussions on the results of criminal statistics.  For on one
side the champions of the classical school plainly see that the
persistent <p 66>increase of crimes and offences amounts to a
proof of that breakdown of penal systems, practical and
theoretical, which have hitherto been applied--as was admitted by
Holtzendorff.  And on the other hand, the increase of crimes is
denied or affirmed for the purpose of supporting or attacking some
particular ministry.  For, in parliaments more than elsewhere,
there is always a deep-seated and vivacious prejudice, a kind of
social artificiality, which causes men to think that the condition
of States, moral and economic, is fundamentally determined far
more by the action of this or that government than by natural
factors, which are mainly superior to and outside of governments
and politicians.

And this is why in Italy there has been much discussion of late,
in scientific publications, at the sittings of the Central
Commission of Judicial Statistics, and even in Parliament, as to
whether crime was increasing or decreasing.

Beltrani-Scalia and Lombroso almost simultaneously called
attention to the growth of Italian crime, and they were succeeded
by various adherents of the positive school, such as Ferri,
Garofalo, Pavia, Pugliese, Guidi, Bournet, Barzilai, and Rossi,
who produced evidence that the general tendency of crime in Italy
was to increase, and that the diminutions observed after 1880 were
mere transitory oscillations; and after 1886 they were justified
by facts.

On the other hand, official returns of criminal statistics, and a
majority of the members of the Central Commission, when pursuing
an inquiry suggested by myself into Italian crime since 1873
<p 67>--for previously to this date there are no criminal
statistics in Italy except for 1853 and 1869-70--came to the
conclusion that there was a tendency towards a diminution of
crime.  But their decision was formed from an entirely partial
standpoint, which they had taken up in the exigency of polemical
discussion.  They compared, in fact, the years just concluded,
1881-5, with 1880, and thus it naturally followed that after a
maximum they had a relative decrease.  And it was only this
ingenious comparison which gave an appearance of actual proof to
their optimistic assertions; for when a fever is at forty degrees,
the fall of even half a degree is very important.  They paid
special attention to the so-called high criminality, which is
tried by the Assize courts, and is actually decreasing, though by
the purely artificial effect of more and more effective measures
of correction.  But I have always maintained, and I have the
support of M. Oettingen, that we cannot separate crimes and
offences tried by the Assizes from those tried by the Tribunals,
for there is only a difference of degree between them, as is clear
in regard to theft, assaults and wounding, forgery and the like.

It is a curious fact that similar illusions have existed in all
countries through the same causes and prejudices which have been
mentioned above.  In France, for instance, we often find that the
keepers of the seals, reporting on volumes of the excellent and
valuable series of criminal statistics since the year 1826,
occasionally remark on these oscillatory diminutions, and make a
point of treating them as <p 68>signs of a constant and general
tendency, which succeeding years have always contradicted.

In France also, the same controversy has been kept up since 1840,
with the same polemical artifices as were employed more recently
in Italy, on the question whether crime has increased or
decreased.  Dufau, B<e'>ranger, Berrzat de St. Prix, and Legoyt
affirmed that it had diminished since 1826, against the true
opinion of de Metz, Dupin, Chassan, Mesuard, and Fayet, the last
of whom quotes the others in one of his essays on criminal
statistics, now undeservedly forgotten, though they abound in
striking and profound observation.

But, as for France in those days, so for Italy to-day, the
statistics of succeeding years quickly proved that what official
optimism and national self-complacency spoke of as pessimism on
our part was but a conscientious inference from lamentable facts,
established in every country by the influence of civilisation on
crime, which I have described in preceding pages.

After these general statements we ought logically to watch the
periodic movement of each leading category of crimes and offences
in each division of the country; for not all crimes, nor all
districts, pursue the same course from year to year.  But as this
inquiry is impossible in the present work, we may pass on to the
general figures for other European countries.

                    FRANCE.
                                1826-8. 1895-7.
Police Contraventions   ... ... ... 100     391   |
Offences    ... ... ... ... ... ... 100     397   |
Crimes against the person   ... ... 100     98    |in 61 years
    ''        property  ... ... ... 100     41    |
<p 69>
                    BELGIUM.
                                1850-2. 1883-5.
Tried by the Correctional Tribunals,
    for crimes against the person   soO log t in 36 years
        '' property     ...  IOO 162)
                                1840-2. 1883-5.
Tried by the Tribunals for ``Offences'' loo 260l
Tried at Assizes, crimes against the person loo 65 W in 46 years

'' ''   property    loo 2I )

                        ENGLAND.
                                1857-9. 1884-6.
Tried summarily, for offences   ... Ioo 176 in 30 years.
                                1835-7. 1884-6.

Criminal cases, against the person  Ioo 143 }

'' against property, and for    Win 55 years.

circulation of false money  ... too 55 )

                        IRELAND.
                                1864-6. 1886-8.
Tried summarily ... ... ... Ioo 95 )
Crimes against the person   ... ..  Ioo 57 1 in 25 years.
    '' property, and false money    loo 52}

                        PRUSSIA.
                                1854-6. 1376-8.
Contraventions and ``vols de bois'' --.  IOO    l34 ~ in 25 years.
Crimes and offences ... ... 100 134

                        GERMANY.
                                1882-4. 1885-7.
Crimes and offences against public order 100    110
    '' '' the person 100    116 in 6 years.
    '' '' property  100 95

                        AUSTRIA.
                                1867-9. 1884-6.
Prisoners condemned for crimes  --.  100 122 1 in 20 years.
    '' '' offences  ... 100 495

                        SPAIN.
                                1883-4. 1886-7.
Tried for crimes and offences   --  100 3 t in 5 years.
    '' contraventions   ......  100 113)



The most constant general fact shown by these data is in all cases
the very remarkable increase of slighter delinquencies, side by
side with constancy or <p 70>slight diminution in crimes against
the person, and a large diminution in crime against property.
This is seen in France, England, Belgium, whilst there is an
increase both of crimes and offences in Austria.

Behind the general fact, however, we must distinguish between the
actual and the apparent.

On the one hand, the decrease of more serious crime against
property is simply due to prisoners electing to be sentenced by
the inferior court, which is at the discretion of the Tribunals in
France, but legally established in Belgium, by the laws of 1838
and 1848, and in England by the Acts of 1856 and 1878--an election
of the slighter but more certain punishment of the magistrates in
preference to going before a jury.  Indeed, crimes against the
person, in which there is less power of election, do not exhibit
so marked a decrease; and accordingly we see that in Belgium the
increase of ``correctionalised'' crimes is due far more to crimes
against property (62 per cent in 36 years) than to those against
the person (9 per cent.).

On the other hand, the growth of slighter delinquency is partly
the effect of special enactments, which are constantly creating
new infractions, offences or contraventions.  For France may be
mentioned the law of 1832 on eluding supervision, that of 1844 on
the game laws, that of 1857 on the false description of goods for
sale, of 1845 on railway offences, of 1849 on the expulsion of
refugees, of 1873 on drunkenness, and of 1874 on requisition of
horses.  I dealt with the statistical results of these laws, and
with the influence of the increasing number of police
<p 71>agents, in my ``Studies on Criminality in France'' (Rome,
1881); and I will here add only a single observation.  If it is
true, as M. Joly says, that other laws, passed since 1826, have
extinguished a few offences, or at least have diminished their
frequency under less severe regulations, yet it is also true that
the new infractions created in the past half-century show far
higher numbers than those of the infractions which have been
extinguished or rendered less easy.  So that amongst the 297 per
cent. of increase on the offences tried in France between 1826 and
1887, the element due to legal creation of new infractions must
not be ignored.

It cannot, however, be denied that for certain more frequent
offences we have a real and very noteworthy increase, apart from
any legislative or statistical cause of disturbance.

The same observation may be made in regard to England.  There also
the increase of 76 per cent, during thirty years of offences tried
summarily is due in part to new infractions, created by special
legislation, and especially by the Education Act of 1873, under
which there were more than forty thousand infractions in 1878, and
more than sixty-five thousand in 1886.

In regard to this delinquency in England (wherein are included,
over and above real offences, certain infractions corresponding to
the police contraventions of the Italian, French, Belgian and
Austrian codes) it is to be observed that the increase of 76 per
cent. in thirty years is due rather to contraventions than to
offences.  And this would establish a remarkable <p 72>difference
between the variations of delinquency in England and in France.

If we analyse the record of infractions tried summarily in
England, we find that contraventions of the law in respect of
drunkenness account for most of this increase (from 82,196 in 1861
to 183,221 in 1885 and 165,139 in 1886).  On the other hand,
offences against the person (assaults) and against property
(stealing, larceny, malicious offences) have not shown so large an
increase.

In fact, if we compare the variations in assaults and thefts in
France and England, we have the following figures:--

ENGLAND.
                                        1861-3. 1879-81.
Prisoners tried summarily for assaults  ... ... 100 102
    Ditto for stealing, larceny, and malicious
        offences    ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 110

FRANCE.
Cases tried by the Tribunals:
For assault and wounding    ... ... ... ... ... 100 134
For simple theft    ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 100 116



So that in England not only the total delinquency, but more
especially the commoner offences against the person and against
property show a slighter increase than that which has been
established for the same period in France.  Whilst we do not
overlook the greater increase of crimes against the person in
England (coinciding, of course, with the doubling of the
population in fifty-five years), this fact seems to me to prove
the salutary influence of English organisations against certain
social factors which lead up to delinquency (such as the care of
<p 73>foundlings, the guardianship of the poor, and so forth),
notwithstanding the great development of economic activity, which
is assuredly in no way inferior to that of France.  The figures
strengthen my conclusions as to the social factors of crime, and
refute the optimistic theory of Poletti.

But the actual participation of each country in the general
increase of crime in Europe is determined by other causes, outside
of the artificial influences of different codes of law.  And the
most general and constant of these causes, in all the various
physical and social environments, is the annual increase of
population, which, by adding to the density of the inhabitants of
each country, multiplies their material and legal relations to one
another, and, consequently, the objective and subjective
constituents of crime.

Taking the official Italian figures, which are also relied on by
M. Levasseur, we find, for the periods corresponding to the
variations of criminality, the following rates of increase in the
population of the different countries.  Ireland shows a decrease,
owing to emigration.

                                            Increase.
Italy   22,104,789 in 1863--30,947,306 in 1889  40 per cent.
 ''     27,165,553 in 1873--30,565,188 in 1888  12  ''
France  31,858,937 in 1826--38,218,903 in 1887  20 per cent.
Belgium  4,072,619 in 1840-- 5,583,278 in 1885  44  ''
Prussia 21,046,984 in 1852--26,614,428 in 1878  26  ''
Germany 45,717,000 in 1882--47,540,000 in 1887  4   ''
England 13,896,797 in 1831--27,870,586 in 1886  101 ''
 ''     20,066,224 in 1861--27,870,586 in 1886  39  ''
Austria 20,217,531 in 1869--23,070,688 in 1886  14  ''
Ireland  5,798,967 in 1861-- 4,777,545 in 1888 dec.  17 ''


It must, however, be observed, with regard to this increase of the
population, firstly that it tells as a factor <p 74>of criminality
only in so far as it is not neutralised, wholly or in part, by
other influences, mainly social, which prevent crime or render it
less grave.  Secondly, it is not right merely to compare the
proportional rates of increase in the population with those of
crime, as was done for instance by M. Bodio, who said that in
Italy, from 1873 to 1883, ``since the population had increased by
7.5 per cent., crime might have increased during the same time by
7.5 per cent., without its being fair to say that it had actually
increased.''  In point of fact, as M. Rossi remarked, since in
Italy, and almost all the European States, the growth of the
population is due to the excess of births over deaths (for
emigration is more numerous than immigration), it is evident that,
when we confine our attention to short periods, the addition to
the population, consisting of children under ten or twelve years,
does not increase crime in an appreciable degree.  The deaths, on
the other hand, must be subtracted from all stages of human life,
but especially from the number of those who can and do commit
crimes and offences.

Now, as we cannot in this place go into detail, I must confine
myself to the statement of a few characteristic facts, as
illustrated by European crime.  Thus we perceive the influence of
the great famine of 1846-7 on crimes against property in France
and Belgium; the rapid oscillations of crime in Ireland,
indicating the unstable political and social conditions of the
country; and the parallel movements of crime in, France and
Prussia.  We see, indeed, a constant diminution of crime for the
period between 1860 and <p 75>1870, followed (after the
statistical disturbance of the terrible year 1870-1) by a period
of serious and continued increase of crime, resulting from social
and economic conditions, as shown especially by the increase of
vagrancy and theft since 1875.

All these general facts go to prove the close and intimate
connection between crime and the aggregate of its various
constituents.  So that, without pursuing more detailed inquiries
into certain social factors of crime, which are capable of
statistical enumeration, such as the increase in the number of the
police, the abundance or scarcity of corn and wine, the spread of
drunkenness, family circumstances, increase of personal
possessions, the facility or otherwise of the settlement of
disputes, commercial and industrial crises, the rate of wages, the
variation from year to year of the general conditions of
existence, and so forth, coincident with the development of
education, encouragements to thrift and the organisation of
charity, we must now proceed to draw from these statistical data
the most important conclusions of criminal sociology.


<p 76>
I.


Criminal statistics show that crime increases in the aggregate,
with more or less notable oscillations from year to year, rising
or falling in successive waves.  Thus it is evident that the level
of criminality in any one year is determined by the different
conditions of the physical and social environment, combined with
the hereditary tendencies and occasional impulses of the
individual, in obedience to a law which I have called, in analogy
with chemical phenomena, _the law of criminal saturation_.

Just as in a given volume of water, at a given temperature, we
find a solution of a fixed quantity of any chemical substance, not
an atom more or less, so in a given social environment, in certain
defined physical conditions of the individual, we find the
commission of a fixed number of crimes.

Our ignorance of many physical and psychical laws and of
innumerable conditions of fact, will prevent us from obtaining a
precise view of this level of criminality.  But none the less is
it the necessary and inevitable result of a given physical and
social environment.  Statistics show us, indeed, that the
variations of this environment are always attended by
consequential and proportional variations of crime.  In France,
for instance (and the observation will be found to apply to every
country which possesses an extended series of criminal
statistics), the number of crimes against the person varies but
little in sixty-two years.  The same thing holds good for England
and Belgium, because their special environment is also less
variable, <p 77>by reason that hereditary dispositions and human
passions cannot vary profoundly or frequently, except under the
influence of exceptional disturbances of the weather, or of social
conditions.  In fact, the more serious variations in respect of
crimes against the person in France have taken place either during
political revolutions, or in years of excessive heat, or of
exceptional abundance of meat, grain, and wine.  This is
illustrated by the exceptional increase of crime from 1849 to
1852.  Minor offences against the person, on the contrary, which
are more occasional, assaults and wounding, for example, vary in
the main, as to their annual oscillations, with the abundance of
the wine harvest, whilst in their oscillations from month to month
they display a characteristic increase during the vintage periods,
from June to December, notwithstanding the constant diminution of
other offences and crimes against the person.

On the other hand, crimes against property, and still more
offences against property, show wide oscillations on account of
the variability of the special environment, which is almost always
in a condition of unstable equilibrium, as in periods of scarcity,
and of commercial, financial and industrial crises, and so forth,
whilst they are subject also to the influence of the physical
environment.  Crimes and offences against property display
extraordinary increases in the severest winter seasons, and
diminutions in milder winters.

And this correspondence between the more general, powerful, and
variable physical and social factors of <p 78>crime, as well as
its more characteristic manifestations such as thefts, wounding,
and indecent assaults, is so constant and so direct that, when I
was studying the annual movement of criminality in France, and
perceived some extraordinary oscillation in the crimes and
offences, I foresaw that in the annals of the year I should find
mention of an agricultural or political crisis, or an exceptional
winter or summer in the records of the weather.  So that with a
single column of a table of criminal statistics I was able to
reconstruct the historical condition of a country in its more
salient features.  In this way psychological experiment again
confirmed the truth of the law of criminal saturation.

Not only so, but it may be added that as, in chemistry, over and
above the normal saturation we find that an increased temperature
of the liquid envelopes an exceptional super-saturation, so in
criminal sociology, in addition to the ordinary saturation we are
sometimes aware of an excess of criminal saturation, due to the
exceptional conditions of the social environment.

Indeed it is to be observed not only that the main and typical
criminality has a sort of reflex criminality depending upon it,
but also that an increase of more serious or more frequent crimes
induces a crop of resistance to and assaults upon the guardians of
public order, together with false witness, insults, avoidance of
supervision, absconding, and the like.  Certain crimes and
offences also have their complementary offences, which from being
consequences become in their turn the causes of new offences.
Thus concealment and <p 79>purchase of stolen goods increase
simultaneously with theft; homicide and wounding lead to the
illegal carrying of arms; adultery and abusive language to duels,
and so forth.

Beyond this there are sundry kinds of excessive criminal
saturations which are exceptional, and therefore transitory.
Ireland and Russia present us with conspicuous examples in their
political and social crimes; and similarly America, during
election contests.  So in France before and after December 2 1851,
the harbouring of criminals, which in no other quadrennial period
from 1826 to 1887 exceeds a record of fifty, rises in 1850-53 as
high as 239.  So during the famine of 1847, theft of grain rises
in France to forty-two in a single year, whilst for half a century
it barely reaches a total of seventy-five.  It is notorious,
again, that in years of dear provisions, or severe winters, a
large number of thefts and petty offences are committed for the
sole object of securing maintenance within the prison walls.  And
in this connection I have observed in France that other offences
against property decrease during a famine, by an analogous
psychological motive, thus presenting a sort of statistical
paradox.  Thus, for example, I have found that as oidium and
phylloxera are more effective than severe punishments in
diminishing the number of assaults and cases of unlawful wounding,
so famine succeeds better than the strongest bars, or dogs kept
loose in the prison yards, in preventing the escape of prisoners,
who at such times are detained by the advantage of being supported
at the public expense.

For a parallel reason in 1847, a famine year, whilst <p 80>all
crimes and offences against property increased in an extraordinary
fashion, only the crimes of theft and breach of confidence by
household servants showed a characteristic decrease, because such
persons were deterred by the fear of being dismissed by their
employers during the time of distress.  The figures are as
follows:--

FRANCE (Assizes).           1844.   1845.   1846.   1847.
Crimes against property ... 3,767   3,396   3,581   4,235
Breach of confidence by
 household servants ... ... 136     128     168     104
Thefts by the same  ... ... 1,001   874     924     896


M. Chaussinand adds, by way of confirmation of my statement that
during economic crises, such as famine and high prices of grain,
the number of cases of escape from justice also decreases, _*for_
``thieves and tramps prefer arrest, in order to escape from the
misery which afflicts them outside the prison walls.''


Two fundamental conclusions of criminal sociology may be drawn
from this law of criminal saturation.

The first is that it is incorrect to assert a mechanical
regularity of crime, which from Quetelet's time has been much
exaggerated.  There has been a too literal insistance on his
famous declaration that ``the budget of crime is an annual
taxation paid with more preciseness than any other''; and that it
is possible to calculate beforehand how many homicides, poisoners,
and forgers we shall have, because ``crimes are generated every
year in the same number, with the same punishments, in the same
proportions.''  And one constantly meets with this echo of the
statisticians, that ``from year to year crimes against the person
vary at the <p 81>most by one in twenty-five, and those against
property by one in fifty''; or, again, that there is ``a law of
limitation in crime, which does not vary by more than one in
ten.''

This opinion, originated by Quetelet and other statisticians after
an inquiry confined to the more serious crimes, and to a very
short succession of years, has already been refuted, in part by
Maury and Rhenisch, and more plainly by Aberdare, Mayr,
Messedaglia and Minzloff.

In fact, if the level of criminality is of necessity determined by
the physical and social environment, how could it remain constant
in spite of the continual variations, sometimes very considerable,
of this same environment?  That which does remain fixed is the
proportion between a given environment and the number of crimes:
and this is precisely the law of criminal saturation.  But the
statistics of criminality will never be constant to one rule from
year to year.  There will be a dynamical but not a statical
regularity.

Thus the element of fixity in criminal sociology consists in
asserting, not the fatality or predestination of human actions,
including crimes, but only their necessary dependence upon their
natural causes, and therewith the possibility of modifying effects
by modifying the activity of these causes.  And, indeed, even
Quetelet himself recognised this when he said, ``If we change the
social order we shall see an immediate change in the facts which
have been so constantly reproduced.  Statisticians will then have
to consider whether the changes have been useful or injurious.
These studies therefore show how <p 82>important is the mission of
the legislator, and how responsible he is in his own sphere for
all the phenomena of the social order.''

The second consequence of the law of criminal saturation, one of
great theoretical importance, is that the penalties hitherto
regarded, save for a few platonic declarations, as the best
remedies for crime, are less effectual than they are supposed to
be.  For crimes and offences increase and diminish by a
combination of other causes, which are far from being identical
with the punishments lightly written out by legislators and
awarded by judges.

History affords us various impressive examples.

The Roman Empire, when society had fallen into extreme corruption,
recalling many symptoms of our own epoch, vainly promulgated laws
which visited celibacy, adultery, and incest--``venus
prodigiosa''--with ``the vengeance of the sword and punishments of
the utmost severity.''  Dio Cassius (``Hist. Rom.,'' lxxvi. 16)
says that in the city of Rome alone, after the law of Septimus
Severus, there were three thousand charges of adultery.  But the
stringent laws against these crimes continued to the days of
Justinian, which shows that the crimes had not been checked; and,
as Gibbon says (``Decline and Fall,'' ch. 44), the Scatinian law
against ``venus nefanda'' had fallen into abeyance through lapse
of time and the multitude of offenders.  Yet we see in our own
days, as in France, that there are some who would oppose celibacy
with no other remedy than a law passed for the purpose.

Since medi<ae>val times the increasing gentleness of <p 83>manners
has caused a diminution of crimes of blood, once so numerous that
there was need of sundry ``truces'' and ``peaces,''
notwithstanding the harsh penalties of previous centuries.  And Du
Boys called Cettes simple because, after giving a table of
shocking punishments in the Germany of his day (the fifteenth
century), he marvelled that all these pains and torments had not
prevented the increase of crimes.

Imperial Rome deluded herself with the idea that she could stamp
out Christianity with punishments and tortures, which, however,
only seemed to fan the flame.  In the same way Catholic Europe
hoped to extinguish Protestantism by means of vindictive
persecution, and only produced the opposite effect, as always
happens.  If the Reformed faith does not strike root in Italy,
France, and Spain, that must be explained by psychological reasons
proper to those nations, independently of the stake and of
massacres, for it did not strike root even when religious belief
was liberated from its fetters.  This does not prevent all
governments in every land from continuing to believe that, in
order to arrest the spread of certain political or social
doctrines, there is nothing better than to pass exceptional penal
laws, forgetting that, with ideas and prejudices just as with
steam, compression increases the expansive force.

Popular education has swept away the so-called crimes of magic and
witchcraft, though they had withstood the most savage punishments
of antiquity and medi<ae>val times.

Blasphemy, in spite of the slitting of the nose, <p 84>tongue, and
lips, enacted by the penal laws, and continued in France from
Louis XI. to Louis XV., was very common in the middle ages, being
(like witchcraft, trances, and self-immurement) a pathological or
abnormal manifestation of religious emotion, which in those times
had an extraordinary development.  And the habit of blasphemy
diminished under the psychological and social evolution of our own
days, precisely when it ceased to be punished.  Or, rather, it
continued to this day, as in Tuscany, where the Tuscan penal code
(Art. 136), which survived until December 31, 1889, still punished
it with five years' imprisonment.  The illusion as to the efficacy
of punishment is so deeply rooted that a proposal was made in the
Senate, in 1875, to include this penalty in the new Italian penal
code.  And at Murcia, in Spain, trials for blasphemy have lately
been re-established.

Mittermaier observed that, if in England and Scotland there were
far fewer cases of false witness, perjury, and resistance to
authority than in Ireland and on the Continent, this must be due
in great measure to national character, which is one of the
hereditary elements of normal as well as of abnormal and criminal
life.

Thus even apart from statistics we can satisfy ourselves that
crimes and punishments belong to two different spheres; but when
statistics support the teaching of history, no doubt can remain as
to the very slight (I had almost said the absence of any)
deterrent effect of punishments upon crime.

We may indeed derive a telling proof from statis<p 85>tical
records, by referring to the progress of repression in France,
over a period of sixty years, as I have already done in my
``Studies'' previously quoted.

When we speak of the repression of crime, we must first of all
distinguish between that which is due to the general character of
penal legislation, more or less severe, and that which is secured
by the administration by the judges of the law as it is.  Now, so
far as legislation is concerned, the growth of crime in France
certainly cannot be attributed to the relaxation of punishment.
The legislative reforms which have taken place, especially in 1832
and 1863, on the general revision of the penal code, modified
punishments to some extent, but with the definite purpose and
result, as shown by the same official records of criminal
statistics, of strengthening the repressive power of the law by
providing for the application of less aggravated punishments.  The
repugnance of juries and judges against excessive punishments, and
their preference for acquittal, is, indeed, a psychological law.
Moreover, it is well known that if there is in Europe a penal code
less mild than any of the rest, it is that of France, which is the
oldest of those now in force, and still retains much of the
military rigour of its origin.  And it must be added that for
certain crimes, as for rapes and indecent assaults, which are
nevertheless constantly increasing in France, the punishments have
been increased by several successive enactments.  The same is true
of extortion by threats of exposure, which occurs more and more
frequently, as M. Joly also observes, in spite of the severe
punishments of the law of 1863.
<p 86>

The question, therefore, is reduced to judicial repression, the
progress whereof must be observed in the past half-century, for it
has evidently the greatest influence upon crime.  Laws, in fact,
have no real operation if they are not applied more or less
rigorously; for in the social strata which contribute most to
criminality the laws are known only by their practical
application, which is also the only truly defensive function,
carrying with it a special preventive of the repetition of the
crime by the person condemned.

Thus the arguments of jurists and legislators have not much value
for the criminal sociologist when they are based solely on the
psychological illusion that the dangerous classes trouble
themselves about the shaping of a penal code, as the more
instructed and less numerous classes might well do.  The dangerous
classes attend to the sentences of the judges, and still more to
the execution of those sentences, than to the articles of a code.
In this connection I cannot agree with the forecast of Garofalo as
to the perilous effect of the abolition of capital punishment in
Italy on the imagination of the people; for he was well aware
that, though it is defined in various articles of the old code,
and in about sixty sentences every year, the punishment of death
has not been carried out, which is the essential point, for the
last fifteen years.

The elements which determine the greater or less severity of
judicial repression are of two kinds:--

1.  The ratio of persons acquitted to the total number of
prisoners put on their trial.

2.  The ratio of the severest punishments to the total number of
prisoners condemned.
<p 87>

Certainly the proportion of acquittals ought not to indicate a
difference in the severity of repression as such, for condemnation
or acquittal ought to point merely to the certainty or otherwise
of guilt, the sufficiency or insufficiency of the evidence.  But,
as a matter of fact, the proportional increase of convictions does
partly represent greater severity on the part of the judges, and
still more of the juries, who display it by attaching weight to
somewhat unconvincing evidence, or in too readily admitting
circumstances which tend to aggravate the offence.  This is
confirmed also by the rarity of acquittals in cases of contumacy.

Of these two factors the former is certainly the more important,
for it is a psychological law that man, in regard to punishment as
to any other kind of suffering, is more affected by the certainty
than by the gravity of the infliction.  And it is to the credit of
criminal theorists of the classical school that they have steadily
maintained that a mild yet certain punishment is more effectual
than one which, being severe in itself, holds out a stronger hope
of escaping it.  Nevertheless it is a fact that they have carried
the theory too far, by seeking to obtain excessive mitigations and
abbreviations of punishment, without exerting themselves to secure
certainty by reforms of procedure and police administration.

The diminution of the rate of acquittal is evident and continuous,
both at the Assizes and in the Tribunals, except for the last
quadrennial period.  This may of course indicate a more careful
management of the trials by the judges; but it certainly shows
<p 88>an undoubted tendency towards increased judicial severity,
which, meanwhile, has not arrested the growth of crime.

PERCENTAGE OF ACQUITTALS IN FRANCE.
                Tried in
                    Assize Courts.  Tribunals.  Total
    1826-30 ... ... 39  ..  ... 31  ... ... 32
    1831-5  ... ...  42 ... ... 28  ... ... 30
    1836-40 ... ... 35  ... ... 22  ... ... 23
    1841-5  ... ... 32  ... ... 18  ... ... 19
    1846-50 ... ... 36  ... ... 16  ... ... 17
    1851-5  ... ... 28  ... ... 12  ... ... 13
    1856-60 ... ... 24  ... ... 10  ... ...  7
    1861-5  ... ...  24 ... ...  9  ... ...  6
    1866 9  ... ...  23 ... ...  17 ... ...  8
    1872-6  ... ... 20  ... ...  6  ... ...  6
    1877 81 ... ... 23  ... ...  5  ... ...  6
    1882-6  ... ... 27  ... ...  6  ... ...  6

PERCENTAGE OF ACQUITTALS IN ENGLAND.
                Criminal Proceedings.   Summary Proceedings.
    1858 62 ... ... ... 25  ... ... ... 34
    1863-7  ... ... ... 24  ... ... ... 31
    1868-72 ... ... ... 26  ... ... ... 24
    1873-7  ... ... ... 25  ... ... ... 21
    1878-82 ... ... ... 24  ... ... ... 21
    1883-7  ... ... ... 22  ... ... ... 20


Here also it appears that the growth of crime in England, though
less than in France, is not due to the weakening of judicial
severity through the greater number of acquittals.  The number
has, in fact, constantly diminished, especially in summary
proceedings, which is just where the greatest increase of crime is
manifest.

Passing now to the other factor of judicial repression, that is to
the percentage of persons sentenced to graver kinds of punishment,
we have to take into account, amongst assize cases in France, the
prisoners <p 89>sentenced to death, penal servitude, and solitary
imprisonment, excluding such as are sentenced to correctional
punishment (simple imprisonment and fines) as well as young
prisoners sent to reformatories; and in regard to the Tribunals,
we must take the percentages of those who are condemned to
imprisonment, which is the most serious punishment, the remainder
being fined, or handed over to their parents, or sent to
reformatories.

                 Condemned at Assizes               Condemned

FRANCE.     ----------------------------      by Tribunals
                 To death.   To penal servitude.  to imprisonment.

1826-30 ... ... 2.5 ... ... 58  ... ... ... 61

1831-5  ... ... 1.5 ... ... 42  ... ... ... 65

1836-40 ... ... .7  ... ... 37  ... ... ... 65

1841-5  ... ... 1   ... ... 40  ... ... ... 61

1845-50 ... ... 1   ... ... 39  ... ... ... 62

1851-5  ... ... 1.1 ... ... 48  ... ... ... 61

1856-60 ... ... 1   ... ... 49  ... ... ... 61

1861-5  ... ... .6  ... ... 48  ... ... ... 64

1866-9  ... ... .5  ... ... 47  ... ... ... 68

1872-6  ... ... .7  ... ... 49  ... ... ... 66

1877-81 ... ... .7  ... ... 50  ... ... ... 66

1882-6  ... ... 1   ... ... 49  ... ... ... 65

These figures, if they do not show (as might have been foreseen)
so large an increase of severity as in the percentages of
acquittals, yet prove that repression has not diminished even in
the serious character of the punishments.  On the other hand, we
can see that, in the assize cases, excluding the first period,
before the revision of 1832, whilst capital punishment shows a
certain diminution (especially due to the laws of 1832, 1848, &c.,
which reduced the number of cases involving the death penalty),
though continuing at a certain level since 1861, sentences of
penal servitude and solitary confinement show a con<p 90>tinued
increase from the second period, and especially since 1851.

So also at the Tribunals, except for a few oscillations, as in the
ninth period, there is a sustained increase of repression.

And the fact that this increased ratio of the more serious
punishments actually indicates a greater severity on the part of
the judges can only be contested on the ground of a simultaneous
increase of the more serious crimes and offences.  On the other
hand, we note in France a general decrease of crimes against the
person (except for assaults on children), and still more of crimes
against property.

There is also a striking confirmation in the corresponding
acquittals and condemnations of a more serious character.  We see,
in fact, that the more serious condemnations increase precisely
when the acquittals decrease (as in the 4th, 6th, 7th, and 10th
periods at the Assizes, and the 2nd, 5th, and 8th periods at the
Tribunals); whilst in the years of more frequent acquittals there
is also a diminution of more serious punishments, as in the 5th
and 8th periods at the Assizes.  That is to say, the two sets of
statistics actually indicate a greater or less severity on the
part of juries and judges.

This firmer repression is demonstrated in spite of the continued
increase of attenuating circumstances, which rose at the Assizes
from 50 per cent. in 1833 to 73 per cent. in 1806, and at the
Tribunals from 54 per cent. in 1851 to 65 per cent. in 1886.
Nevertheless it is a fact that the number of cases tried by
default at the Assizes has continuously decreased <p 91>from a
yearly average of 647 in 1826-30 to one of 266 in 1882-6.

For Italy we have the following figures:

     PRETORS.       TRIBUNALS.          ASSIZES.
                                  -------------------------------------------
     Condemned to   Imprisonment.  Condemned     Penal Servitude      Slighter
     imprisonment.                 to death.  for life.  temporary.   punishts
1874    21          79          1.2     5.6     65      28
5       22          80          1.3     6.5     63      29
6       23          81          1.3     6.1     66      27
7       24          82          1.5     7.2     66      25
8       25          85          1       7.6     67      25
9       25          --          1.2     6.3     67      25
1880    26          --          1.3     5.5     68      25
1       24          81          1.7     6.1     65      27
2       23          81          1.5     6       66      27
3       23          81          1.7     5.4     64      29
4       23          81          1.3     5.3     64      30
5       23          81          1.6     5.4     63      30
6       21          81          1.6     5.7     62      30
7       21          83          1.1     5.8     63      30
8       21          82          1.2     4.7     65      29


Thus, once more, there has been no relaxation of repression,
except in late years for those condemned by the Pretors to penal
servitude for life.


The conclusion, therefore, is still the same, namely that judicial
repression, in France and Italy, has grown stronger and stronger,
whilst criminality has increased more and more.

In this fact, again, which confutes the common opinion that the
sovereign remedy of crime is the greater rigour of punishment, we
may fairly find a positive proof that the penal, legislative, and
administrative systems hitherto adopted have missed their aim,
which can be nothing else than the defence of society against
criminals.

Henceforth we must seek, through the study of <p 92>facts, a
better direction for penal legislation as a function of society,
so that, by the observation of psychological and sociological
laws, it may tend, not to a violent and always tardy reaction
against crime already evolved, but to the elimination or diversion
of its natural factors.


This fundamental conclusion of criminal statistics is so important
that we must confirm it by adding to the statistical data the
general laws of biology and sociology.  This is the more necessary
because my position as first stated has met with some criticism.

In the first place, it is easily seen, when we compare the total
result of crime with the varied character of its anthropological,
physical, and social factors, that punishment can exert but a
slight influence upon it.  Punishment, in fact, by its special
effect as a legal deterrent, acting as a psychological motive,
will clearly be unable to neutralise the constant and hereditary
action of climate, customs, increase of population, agricultural
production, economic and political crises, which statistics
invariably exhibit as the most potent factors of the growth or
diminution of criminality.

It is a natural law that forces cannot conflict or neutralise each
other unless they are of the same kind.  The fall of a body cannot
be retarded, changed in direction or accelerated, save by a force
homogeneous with that of gravity.  So punishment, as a
psychological motive, can only oppose the psychological factors of
crime, and indeed only the occasional and moderately energetic
factors; for it is <p 93>evident that it cannot, as a preliminary
to its application, eliminate the organic hereditary factors which
are revealed to us by criminal anthropology.

Punishment, which has professed to be such a simple and powerful
remedy against all the factors of crime, is therefore a panacea
whose potency is far beneath its reputation.

We must bear in mind a fact which is familiar enough, though it
has been too often forgotten by legislators and criminalists.
Society is not a homogeneous aggregate, but on the contrary an
organism, like every animal organism, composed of tissues of
varying structure and sensibility.  Every society, in fact, with
its progressive and increasingly distinctive needs and
occupations, is a product of the union of social classes which
differ greatly in their organic and psychical characteristics.
The physical constitution, the habits, sentiments, ideas, and
tendencies of one social stratum are far from being the same as
those of other strata.  Here again we have, as Spencer would say,
the law of evolution through a departure from the homogeneous to
the heterogeneous, from the simple to the complex, or, in the
words of Ardigo, a natural formation by successive distinctions.
Amongst savage tribes this distinction of the social strata does
not exist, or it is far less marked than in barbarian societies,
and still less than in civilised societies.

Every schoolmaster with a bent for psychological observation
separates his pupils into three classes.  There is the class of
industrious pupils of good disposition, who work of their own
accord, without <p 94>calling for strict discipline; that of the
ignorant and idle (degenerate and of weak nervous force) from whom
neither mildness nor severity can obtain anything worth having;
and that of the pupils who are neither wholly industrious nor
wholly idle, and for whom a discipline based on psychological laws
may be genuinely useful.

This is the case with large bodies of soldiers or of prisoners,
for all associations of men, and for society as a whole.  These
partial organisms, due to the constant relationships of a life
more or less in common, are in this respect reproductions of
society as a whole, just as a fragment of crystal reproduces the
characteristics of the unbroken crystal.[13]



[13] There is, however, some difference between the manifestation
of the activity of a group of men and that of the aggregate
society.  Between psychology which studies the individual, and
sociology which studies the society, I think there is room for a
_collective psychology_, to study more or less defined groups.
The phenomena of these groups are analogous, but not identical
with those of the sociological body properly so called, according
as the union is more or less definite.  Collective psychology has
its field of observation in all unions, however occasional, such
as the public street, the markets, workshops, theatres meetings,
assemblies, colleges, schools, barracks, prisons, and so forth.
Many practical applications of the data of collective psychology
might be given.  An example will be found in a future chapter,
when I come to consider the psychology of the jury.



In the same way, from the standpoint of criminal sociology, we may
divide the social strata into three analogous categories--the
highest, which commits no crimes, organically upright, restrained
only by the authority of the moral sense, of religious sentiments
and public opinion, together with the hereditary transmission of
moral habits.  This class, for which no penal code would be
necessary, is unfortunately very small; and it is far smaller if,
in <p 95>addition to legal and apparent criminality, we also take
into account that social and latent criminality through which many
men, who are upright so far as the penal code is concerned, are
not upright by the standard of morality.

Another class, the lowest, is made up of individuals opposed to
all sense of uprightness, who, being without education,
perpetually dragged back by their material and moral destitution
into the primitive forms of the brute struggle for existence,
inherit from their parents and transmit to their children an
abnormal organisation, adding degeneration and disease, an
atavistic return to savage humanity.  This is the nursery of the
born criminals, for whom punishments, so far as they are legal
deterrents, are useless, because they encounter no moral sense
which could distinguish punishment by law from the risk which also
attends upon every honest industry.

Lastly we have the other class of individuals who are not born to
crime, but are not firmly upright, alternating between vice and
virtue, with imperfect moral sense, education and training, for
whom punishment may be genuinely useful as a psychological motive.
It is just this class which yields the large contingent of
occasional criminals, for whom punishments are efficacious if they
are directed in their execution by the axioms of scientific
psychology, and especially if they are aided by the social
prevention which reduces the number of opportunities of committing
crimes and offences.

Once again I must express my agreement with M. Garofalo, who, in
dealing with this subject, <p 96>insists on the necessity of
distinguishing between the different classes of criminals before
deciding as to the efficacy of punishments.

Yet this conclusion as to the very limited efficiency of
punishments, which is forced upon us by facts, and which, as
Bentham said, is confirmed by the application of each punitive
act, precisely because its previous application did not succeed in
preventing crime, is directly opposed to general public opinion,
and even to the opinion of jurists and legislators.

On the inception or the growth of a criminal manifestation,
legislators, jurists, and public think only of the remedies, which
are as easy as they are illusory, of the penal code, or of some
new Act of repression.  Even if this were useful, which is very
problematical, it has the inevitable disadvantage of making men
ignore other remedies, far more profitable, albeit more difficult,
of a preventive and social kind.  And this tendency is so common
that many of those who have dwelt upon or accepted the positive
movement of the new school, not long after they had admitted that
I was in the right, declared impulsively that ``the constant
commission of crime arises from the lack of timely repression,''
and that ``one of the chief causes of the growth of crime in Italy
is the mildness of our punishments.''  Or else they forgot to ask
themselves the elementary question of criminal sociology, whether
and how far punishments have a genuinely defensive force.  This is
just what happens with pedagogues who enter upon long discussions
on the various methods and means of <p 97>education, without
asking themselves beforehand whether and how far education has the
actual power of modifying the temperament and character which
heredity stamps upon every individual.

These conclusions take us far beyond the limit of penal severity,
and at the same time they suffice to combat the objection commonly
raised against those who think, like ourselves, that repressive
justice ought to concern itself not with the punishment of past
crime, but with the prevention of future crime.  For whilst the
advocates of severity, and those whom I will call the
``laxativists,'' virtually think (apart from a few platonic
statements) only of punishments as remedies of offences, we on the
other hand believe that punishments are merely secondary
instruments of social self-defence, and remedies ought to be
adapted to the actual factors of the offence.  And since the
social factors are most capable of modification, so we say with
Prins that ``for social evils we require social cures.''

M. Tarde, then, was not quite accurate in his remark that my
conviction as to the very slight efficacy of punishments is a mere
consequence of my ideas on the anthropological and physical
character of crime, and that, ``on the contrary, the
preponderating importance which he has assigned to the social
causes logically debars him from accepting this conclusion.''  As
a matter of fact, punishment regarded as a psychological motive so
far as it is a legal deterrent, and as a physical motive so far as
it implies the confinement of the person condemned, would more
naturally belong, in abstract <p 98>logic, to the biological and
physical theory of crime.  Whereas it is precisely because I
recognise the influence of social environment, in addition, that
experimental logic convinces me that punishment is not an
efficacious remedy of crime, unless forces are applied beforehand
to neutralise, or at any rate to counteract, the social factors of
crime.

And if this is not a new conclusion, as one of our critics
observes by way of reproach--as though it were not one of the
characteristics of truth to repeat itself persistently, however
much it may be forgotten or even opposed--we must nevertheless
remark that it is now repeated with a mass of new observations and
definite applications, which give it a force unknown to mere
logical deductions.

The classical school has concerned itself simply with mitigation
of punishment as compared with medi<ae>val excess; and for this
reason, because every age has its own mission, it could not also
concern itself with the prevention of crimes, which is far more
useful and efficacious.  A few isolated thinkers, it is true,
wrote a few bold and far-reaching pages on preventive methods in
opposition to the numerous volumes on punishment; but their words
had no effect upon criminalists and legislators, because science
had not yet undertaken the positive and methodical observation of
the natural factors of crime.

I will confine myself to a few examples, in order to show that
amongst practical men, as amongst public officials and
legislators, the illusion that punishments are the true panacea of
crime is always predominant.
<p 99>

Practical men declare that ``the prohibitive penal law ought to be
regarded as the first and most important of preventive laws.''
The pr<e'>fets in their circulars, being concerned about the
increase of crime, put forward the most vigilant and severe
repression as a sovereign remedy.  A counsellor of the French Cour
de Cassation writes that ``in a worthy system of social police
there is no better guarantee for order and safety than
intimidation.''  The Keeper of the Seals, in his report on French
penal statistics for 1876, speaking of the continued increase of
indecent assaults, comes to the conclusion that ``in any case,
only firm and energetic repression can avail against a lamentable
increase of crimes against morality.''  And more recently another
Keeper of the Seals ended his report on the statistics of 1826 to
1880 by observing that ``the growth of crime can only be opposed
by an incessantly vigorous repression.''  M. Tarde agreed with
this conclusion, saying that ``if crimes are only, as has been
said, railway accidents of a society travelling at full speed, it
must not be forgotten that, the faster the train, the stronger
must be the brake . . . and it is certain that such a state of
affairs demands an increase or a new departure of repression and
punishment.''

It may be admitted that our conclusion is not a novelty; but, as
Stuart Mill said, there are two ways of effecting useful
innovations, to discover what was not known before, or else to
repeat with new demonstrations the truths which had been
forgotten.

And this illusion as to the influence of punishments <p 100>is so
widespread that it is well to inquire into its historic and
psychological arguments; for, as Spencer says, in order to decide
as to the value of an idea, it is useful to examine its genealogy.

We may pass by the foundation of primitive vengeance, which from
the age of private combats passed into the spirit and form of the
earliest penal laws, and still subsists as a more or less
unconscious and enfeebled residuum in modern society.  We may also
pass by the hereditary effect of the traditions of medi<ae>val
severity, which excite an instinctive sympathy for stern
punishment in connection with every crime.

But one of the main reasons of this tendency is an error of
psychological perspective, whereby men have forgotten the profound
differences of the ideas, habits, and sentiments of the various
social strata, concerning which I have spoken above.  Through this
forgetfulness the honest and instructed classes confound their own
idea of the penal law, and the impression it makes upon them, with
the idea and the impression of the social classes from which the
majority of criminals are recruited.  This has been remarked upon
by Beccaria, Carmignani, and Holtzendorff amongst the classical
criminalists, and by Lombroso and others of the new school who
have studied the slang and literature of criminals, which are
their psychological mirror.  Again, it is forgotten that for the
higher classes, apart from their physical and moral repugnance
against crime, which is the most powerful repelling force, there
is the fear of public opinion, almost unknown amongst the classes
which <p 101>have stopped short at a lower stage of human
evolution.

For the higher classes one example may suffice.  It is the fact
observed upon by Mr. Spencer, that gambling debts and Stock
Exchange bargains are scrupulously discharged, though for them
there is neither penal obligation nor evidence in writing.  And it
may be added that imprisonment for debt never promoted the
fulfilment of contracts, nor has its abolition discouraged it.

As for the lower classes, one visit to a prison suffices.  There,
if you ask a prisoner why the punishment did not deter him from
the crime, you generally get no answer, because he has never
thought about it.  Or else he replies, as I have often found, that
``if you were afraid of hurting yourself when you went to work,
you would give up working.''  These indeed are what one would
expect to be the feelings prevailing amongst the lower social
strata, to whom honest sentiments and ideas, which for us are
traditional and organic, come very late--just as Mr. Stanley
observed that the people in Central Africa are only now beginning
to employ stone guns, which in past ages were used in Europe.

Another fallacy which helps to strengthen confidence in
punishments is that the effect of exceptional and summary laws is
treated on the same basis as that of the ordinary codes, slow and
uncertain in their procedure, which saps all their force by the
chance of immunity, and the interval between the unlawful act and
its legal consequence.

Lombroso and Tarde, indeed, have confronted me <p 102>with
historic examples of vigorous and even savage repressions, whereby
it was possible to stamp out some epidemic crime.  But these
examples are not conclusive, for I have shown that, as soon as
these exceptional repressions were at an end, as, for instance,
after the death of Pope Sixtus V., brigandage and other crimes
were persistently renewed.  But my main rejoinder is this, that
these exceptional repressions depend upon the _jus belli_; and
therefore cannot enter into the ordinary and constant methods of
penal administration.  This may not have the effect of an
extraordinary repression, secured by a somewhat unscrupulous
promptitude, which strikes innocent and guilty alike; and thus it
is impossible to treat as equal, or even to compare, the influence
of methods which are essentially different.

Another false comparison is drawn between the effective force of
various punishments, and their potentiality is confounded, whereas
it is necessary to distinguish the punishment of the written code
from that of the judge, and still more from that carried into
execution.  In fact it is only natural that punishment should more
or less terrify the criminal who has been judged and is about to
be condemned; but this in no way proves its efficacy, which should
have been displayed by the menace of the law in guarding the
prisoner against the crime.  Even with the death penalty, there
are many instances of condemned persons who, through congenital
insensibility, submit to it cynically.  Moreover, for such as have
been overwhelmed with terror when the moment of execution arrived,
the utmost that this fact can prove is that <p 103>they are so
constituted as to give themselves up completely to the impression
of the moment, without the energy to resist it.  In other words,
so long as the punishment is distant and uncertain, they were not
terrified, but having always yielded to the impression of the
moment, they yielded to the criminal impulse.

For other punishments, also, it is known that punitive methods,
even when not contrary to the law, as they sometimes are in Italy,
are always less stern than simple folk imagine when they read the
codes and the sentences.  And criminals naturally judge of
punishments by their own experience, that is to say, in accordance
with their practical application, and not with the more or less
candid threats of the lawmaker.

If we add to vindictive feeling, historic traditions, oblivion of
bio-psychic differences of the social strata, the confounding of
exceptional laws and ordinary punishments, and of the varying
effective force of punishment, the attitude of the public mind and
the natural tendency of criminalists to think only of their two
syllogistic symbols of crime and punishment--if we further add the
easy-going idea of the multitude, that the inscribing of a law in
the statute-book is a sufficient remedy for social diseases, we
can readily understand how this exaggerated and illusory
confidence in punishment is so persistent, and crops up in every
theoretical or practical discussion, in spite of the strong
refutation which is daily afforded by facts and psychological
observation.

All human actions, like the actions of animals, are developed
between the two opposite poles of <p 104>pleasure and pain, by the
attraction of the former and the repulsion of the latter.  And
punishment, which is one of the social forms of pain, is always a
direct motive in human conduct, as it is also an indirect guide,
by virtue of its being a sanction of justice, unconsciously
strengthening respect for the law.  But still this psychological
truth, whilst it demonstrates the natural character of punishment,
and the consequent absurdity of abolishing it as absolutely void
of efficacy, does not destroy our conclusion as to the slight
efficacy of punishment as a counteraction of crime.

We have only to distinguish between punishment as a natural
sanction and punishment as a social sanction in order to see how
the really great power of natural punishment almost entirely
disappears in social punishment, which in all our systems is but a
sorry caricature.

The mute but inexorable reaction of nature against every action
which infringes her laws, and the grievous consequences which
inevitably follow for the man who has infringed them, constitute a
repression of the most efficacious kind, wherein every man,
especially in the earlier years of his life, receives daily and
never to be forgotten lessons.  This is the discipline of natural
consequence, which is a genuine educational method, long since
pointed out by Rousseau, and developed by Spencer and Bain.

But in this natural and spontaneous form, the punishment derives
its whole force from the inevitable character of the consequences.
And it is one of the few observations of practical psychology
which have <p 105>been made and repeated by the classical students
of crime, that in punishment, and especially the punishment of
death, the certainty is more effectual than the severity.  And I
will add that even a small uncertainty takes away from a pain
which we fear, much of its repelling force, whereas even a great
uncertainty does not destroy the attraction of a pleasure which we
are hoping for.

Here, then, we have a primary and potent cause of the slight
efficacy of legal punishments, in the picturing of the many
chances of escape.  First there is the chance of not being
detected, which is the most powerful spring of all contemplated
crime: then the chance, in case of detection, that the evidence
will not be strong enough, that the judges will be merciful, or
will be deceived, that judgment may be averted amidst the
intricacies of the trial, that clemency may either reverse or
mitigate the sentence.  These are so many psychological causes
which, conflicting with the natural fear of unpleasant
consequences, weaken the repellent force of legal punishment,
whilst they are unknown to natural punishment.

There is also another psychological condition which, undermining
even the force of natural punishment, almost entirely destroys the
power of social punishment; and that is improvidence.  We see, in
fact, that even the most certain natural consequences are defied,
and lose most of their power to guard an improvident man from
anti-natural and dangerous actions.  Now in regard to legal
punishment, even apart from passionate impulse, it is known that
criminals, occasional and other, are specially improvident, in
common <p 106>with savages and children.  This weakness is
conspicuous enough in the lower and less instructed classes, but
amongst criminals it is a genuine characteristic of psychological
infirmity.

Now, whilst a very slight force is sufficient to produce very
great and constant effects, when it acts in harmony with natural
tendency and environment, every process, on the other hand, which
is opposed to the natural tendencies of man, or which does not
follow them closely, encounters a resistance which triumphs in the
last resort.

Everyday life gives us many examples.  The university student,
when he gambles, risks on a single card the last remnant of his
allowance, and prepares for himself a thousand privations.  Miners
and workmen at dangerous trades refuse to take warning by the
sight of comrades whom they have seen dying or repeatedly attacked
by disease.  M. Despine related that, during the cholera of 1866,
at Bilbao, there were some who set up an imitation of the disease
in order to obtain charitable relief, though in several cases
death ensued.  M. Fayet, in an essay on the statistics of accused
persons in France, extending over twenty years, remarked that
specific and proportionately greater criminality was displayed by
notaries and bailiffs, who knew better than any one else the
punishments fixed by law.  And in the statistics of capital
punishment at Ferrara, during nine centuries, I discovered the
significant fact that there is a succession of notaries executed
for forgery, frequently at very short intervals, in the same town.
This attests the truth of the observation made by Montesquieu and
Beccaria, <p 107>as against the deterrent power of the death
penalty, for men grow accustomed to the sight; and this again is
confirmed by the fact mentioned by Mr. Roberts, a gaol chaplain,
and M. B<e'>renger, a magistrate, that several condemned men had
previously been present at executions, and by another fact
mentioned by Despine and Angelucci, that in the same town, and
often in the same place, in which executions had been carried out,
murders are often committed on the same day.

A man does not change his identity; and no penal code, whether
mild or severe, can change his natural and invincible tendencies,
such as inclination to pleasure and persistent hope of impunity.

Let us also observe that, as Mill said, the permanent efficacy of
any measure in the spheres of politics, economy, and
administration, is always inversely proportional to its force and
suddenness.  Now punishment does not stand the test even of this
sociological law, for in its essence it is only the primitive
reaction of force against force.  It is true that, as Beccaria
said, the classical school has always aimed at rendering social
reaction against crime less violent; but that is not enough.
Henceforward, if we are to adapt ourselves to psychological and
sociological laws, the development of our defensive administration
must tend to render this social reaction less direct.  If the
struggle for existence is always to remain the supreme law of
living creatures, yet it is not necessary that it should always be
developed in the violent forms of primitive humanity.  On the
contrary, one of the results of social progress is to make the
struggle for existence less violent and less direct.
<p 108>

In the same way, the continuous struggle between society and
criminals, instead of being a physical and social force, directly
opposed to a physical individual force, should rather become an
indirect system of psychical forces.  Penal law in society has the
same qualities as education in the family and pedagogy in schools.
All the three were once dominated by the idea of taming human
passions by force; the rod was supreme.  In course of time it was
perceived that this produced unexpected results, such as violence
and hypocrisy, and then men thought fit to modify their
punishments.  But in our own days schoolmasters see the advantage
of relying solely on the free play of tendencies and bio-
psychological laws.  Similarly the defensive function of society,
as Romagnosi said, in place of being a physical and repressive
system, ought to be a moral and preventive system, based on the
natural laws of biology, psychology, and sociology.

Force is always a bad remedy for force.  In the Middle Ages, when
punishments were brutal, crimes were equally savage; and society,
in demoralising rivalry with the atrocity of criminals, laboured
in a vicious circle.  Now, in the lower social grades, the brutal
man, who often resorts to violence, is in his turn frequently the
victim of violence; so that, amongst criminals, a scar is somewhat
of a professional distinction.


To sum up, our doctrine as to the efficacy of punishments does not
consist, as some critics too sparing of their arguments have
maintained, in an absolute negation, but rather and especially in
objecting to the <p 109>traditional prejudice that punishments are
the best and most effectual remedies of crime.

What we say is this.  Punishment by itself, as a means of
repression, possesses a negative rather than a positive value; not
only because it has not the same influence on all anthropological
types of criminals, but also because its use is rather to preclude
the serious mischief which would result from impunity than to
convert, as some imagine that it can, an anti-social into a social
being.  But impunity would lead to a demoralisation of the popular
conscience in regard to crimes and offences, to an increase of the
profound lack of foresight in criminals, and to the removal of the
present impediment to fresh crimes during the term of
incarceration.

It is the same with education, the modifying power of which is
commonly exaggerated.  Education, though it has an enduring
influence on children, and is therefore more effectual than
punishment, is far more serviceable in eliminating anti-social
tendencies, whereof we all possess the germs, than in any supposed
creation of social tendencies and forces which were not present
from birth.

Thus, whilst the consequences of impunity and lack of education
are serious and mischievous, still this does not prove conversely
that punishment and education have in reality so positive an
influence as is commonly attributed to them.

It is precisely on the ground of this negative, yet real efficacy
of punishments, especially whilst they are being carried out,
that, whilst we appreciate the mitigation of punitive discipline
which has been <p 110>achieved by the classical school, we
believe, on the other hand, that their abbreviation of the term of
punishments is altogether mistaken and dangerous.  We admit that
punishment ought not to be an arbitrary and inhuman torture, and
for this reason we have no sympathy with the system of solitary
confinement, now so much in fashion with the classical jurists and
prison authorities, precisely because it is inhuman, as well as
unwise and needlessly expensive.

It is a psychological absurdity and a social danger, which
nevertheless underlies the new Italian penal code, that punishment
ought to consist more and more in a short isolation of the
prisoner.  For, setting aside the well-known results of short
punishments, such as corruption and recidivism, it is evident that
in this way punishment is deprived of its main element of negative
efficiency against crime, as well as of its effect in preventing
crime during the incarceration of the criminal.


II.


Since punishments, instead of being the simple panacea of crime
which popular opinion, encouraged by the opinions of classical
writers on crime and of legislators, imagine them, are very
limited in their deterrent influence, it is natural that the
criminal sociologist should look for other means of social defence
in the actual study of crimes and of their natural origin.

We are taught by the everyday experience of the <p 111>family, the
school, associations of men and women, and the history of social
life, that in order to lessen the danger of outbreaks of passion
it is more useful to take them in their origin, and in flank, than
to meet them when they have gathered force.

Bentham relates that in England the delays caused by hard-drinking
couriers, who used to be heavily fined without any good result,
were obviated by combining passenger traffic with the postal
service.  Employers of labour secure industry and the most
productive work far more easily by offering a share of the
realised profits than by a system of fines.  In the German
universities, academic jealousies and intolerance have been in
great measure overcome by paying the professors in proportion to
the number of their pupils, so that the Faculties find it to their
interest to engage and encourage the best professors, in order to
attract as many students as possible.  Thus the activity and zeal
of professors, magistrates, and officials would be stimulated if
their remuneration depended not only on the automatic test of
seniority, but also on the progress displayed by publications,
sentences not reversed, settlements not cancelled, and the like.
It is better to regulate the disturbing restlessness of children
by timely diversions rather than by attempting to repress them in
a manner injurious to their physical and moral health.  So in
lunatic asylums and prisons, work is a better means of order and
discipline than chains and castigation.  In brief, we obtain more
from men by consulting their self-respect and interests than by
threats and restraint <p 112>

If the counteraction of punishment must inevitably be opposed to
criminal activity, still it is more conducive to social order to
prevent or diminish this activity by means of an indirect and more
effective force.

In the economic sphere, it has been observed that when a staple
product fails, recourse is had to less esteemed substitutes, in
order to supply the natural wants of mankind.  So in the criminal
sphere, as we are convinced by experience that punishments are
almost devoid of deterrent effect, we must have recourse to the
best available substitutes for the purpose of social defence.

These methods of indirect defence I have called _penal
substitutes_.  But whereas the food substitutes are as a rule only
secondary products, brought into temporary use, penal substitutes
should become the main instruments of the function of social
defence, for which punishments will come to be secondary means,
albeit permanent.  For in this connection we must not forget the
law of criminal saturation, which in every social environment
makes a minimum of crime inevitable, on account of the natural
factors inseparable from individual and social imperfection.
Punishments in one form or another will always be, for this
minimum, the ultimate though not very profitable remedy against
outbreaks of criminal activity.

These penal substitutes, when they have once been established in
the conscience and methods of legislators, through the teaching of
criminal sociology, will be the recognised form of treatment for
the social factors of crime.  And they will also be <p 113>more
possible and practical than that universal social metamorphosis,
direct and uncompromising, insisted on by generous but impatient
reformers, who scorn these substitutes as palliatives because
humanitarian enthusiasm causes them to forget that social
organisms, like animal organisms, can be only partially and
gradually transformed.

The idea of these penal substitutes amounts, in short, to this.
The legislator, observing the origins, conditions, and effects of
individual and collective activity, comes to recognise their
psychological and sociological laws, whereby he will be able to
obtain a mastery over many of the factors of crime, and especially
over the social factors, and thus secure an indirect but more
certain influence over the development of crime.  That is to say,
in all legislative, political, economic, administrative, and penal
arrangements, from the greatest institutions to the smallest
details, the social organism will be so adjusted that human
activity, instead of being continually and unprofitably menaced
with repression, will be insensibly directed into non-criminal
channels, leaving free scope for energy and the satisfaction of
individual needs, under conditions least exposed to violent
disturbance or occasions of law-breaking.

It is just this fundamental idea of penal substitutes which shows
how necessary it is that the sociologist and legislator should
have such a preparation in biology and psychology as Mr. Spencer
justly insisted on in his ``Introduction to Social Science.''  And
it is the fundamental idea rather than the substitutes themselves
that we should bear in mind if we <p 114>would realise their
theoretical and practical value as part of a system of criminal
sociology.

As for the efficacy of any particular penal substitute, I readily
admit, in some sense at least, the partial criticisms which have
been passed upon them.  Apart from such as simply say that they do
not believe in the use of alternatives to punishment, and such as
confine themselves to the futile question whether this theory
belongs to criminal science or to police administration, a
majority of criminal sociologists have now definitely accepted the
doctrine of penal substitutes.  This theory is accepted, not as an
absolute panacea of crime, but, as I have always stated it, in the
sense of a combination of measures analogous to penal repression;
in place of trusting solely to repression for the defence of
society against crime.

Let us take note of a few examples.

I.  _In the Economic Sphere_.--Free Trade (apart from the
temporary necessity of protecting a particular manufacturing or
agricultural industry), by preventing famines and exceptional high
prices of and taxes on food, eliminates many crimes and offences,
especially against property.--Unrestricted emigration is a safety-
valve, especially for a country in which this phenomenon, assuming
large proportions, carries off many persons who are easily driven
to crime by wretchedness, or by their unbalanced energy.  Thus the
number of recidivists has diminished in Ireland, not by virtue of
her prison systems, but by emigration, which reached forty-six per
cent. of released prisoners.  In Italy, also, there has been a
decrease <p 115>of crime since 1880, owing to other causes, such
as mild winters and plentiful harvests, but also through a vast
increase of emigration.--Smuggling, which for centuries resisted
extremely harsh punishments, such as amputation of the hand, and
even death, and which still resists prison and the fire-arms of
the revenue officers, is suppressed by the lowering of the import
tariff, as M. Villerm<e'> has shown in the case of France.  So
that everyday facts justify the system of Adam Smith, who said
that the law which punished smuggling, after creating the
temptation, and which increased the punishment when it increased
the temptation, was opposed to all justice; whilst Bentham, on the
contrary, departing from his maxim that the punishment ought to be
dreaded more strongly than the offence attracted, called for the
stern repression of smuggling.--The system of taxation which
touches wealth and visible resources instead of the prime
necessaries of life, and which is proportional to the taxpayer's
income, diminishes the systematic frauds which no punishment
availed to stop, and it will also abolish the arbitrary and
exaggerated fiscal traditions which have been the cause of
rebellions and outrages.  In fact, Fr<e'>gier describes the
criminal industries which are called into existence by _octrois_,
and which will disappear with the abolition of these absurd and
unjust duties.  And whilst M. Allard demonstrated that a decrease
of taxes on necessaries would have beneficial effects, not only in
economic affairs but also in respect of commercial frauds, the
Report on French Criminal Statistics for 1872 calmly continued to
call for more severe repression of such frauds.  To <p 116>this M.
Mercier replied that if the cause--that is to say,
disproportionate taxes--were not removed, it would be impossible
to prevent the effects.--Immunity from taxation for the minimum
necessary to existence, by preventing distraint, and the
consequent diminution of small properties, which means the
increase of the very poor, will obviate many crimes, as we see
from the agrarian conditions in Ireland.  Thus there is a demand
in Italy for the inalienability of small properties, as in America
under the Homestead Exemption Law.--Public works, during famine
and hard winters, check the increase of crimes against property,
the person, and public order.  For instance, during the scarcity
of 1853-5 in France, there was no such enormous increase of theft
as during the famine of 1847, simply because the Government set up
vast relief works in the winter months.

The taxes and other indirect restrictions on the production and
sale of alcohol are far more efficacious than our more or less
enormous gaols.  The question of pronounced and chronic
drunkenness has increased in gravity, owing to its effect upon the
physical and moral health of the people.

In France the average consumption of wine, estimated at 62 litres
(13.64 gallons) per head in 1829, exceeded 100 litres in 1869; and
in Paris the average of 120 litres in 1819-30, reached 227 litres
in 1881.  The average yearly consumption of alcohol in France rose
from .93 in 1829 to 3.24 in 1872, and 3.9 in 1885, the rates in a
few towns being still higher.  The total manufacture of alcohol in
France (95 per cent. of <p 117>which is consumed in the form of
drink) rose from 479,680 hectolitres in 1843 to 1,309,565 in 1879,
and 2,004,000 in 1887.  Simultaneously, we have seen that there
was an increase of crimes and offences in France, suicides in
particular having increased from 1,542 in 1829 to 8,202 in 1887.

Moreover I have shown by a special table (_Archivio di
Psichiatria_) that in France, despite a certain inevitable
variation from year to year, there is a manifest correspondence of
increase and decrease between the number of homicides, assaults,
and malicious wounding, and the more or less abundant vintage,
especially in the years of extraordinary variations, whether of
failure of the vintage (1853-5, 1859, 1867, 1873, 1878-80),
attended by a remarkable diminution of crime (assaults and
wounding), or of abundant vintages (1850, 1856-8, 1862-3, 1865,
1868, 1874-5) attended by an increase of crime.

I was also the first to show that in the vintage months there is
an increase of occasional crimes and offences against the person,
owing to that connection between drink and crime which had already
been remarked upon by M. Pierquin amongst others, and illustrated
by the newspaper reporters on the days which follow Sundays and
holidays.

But apart from their natural variation, the connection between
drink and crime is definitely established.  Every day we have the
confirmation of Morel's statement, that ``alcoholism has produced
a demoralised and brutalised class of wretched beings,
characterised by an early depravation of instincts, and by
indulgence in the most immoral and dangerous actions.''  It is
<p 118>useless to quote again in this place the data of psycho-
pathology and legal medicine, or those of prison statistics
relating to imprisoned drunkards, or to tavern brawls as the
proved causes of crime.

Nevertheless it is a fact that the relation of cause and effect
between drink and crime has recently been denied, with the aid of
arguments based upon statistics.  M. Tammeo opened the discussion
by observing that the countries of Europe and the provinces of
Italy distinguished by the largest consumption of alcohol, show
lower ratios under the worst crimes of violence.  He gave to his
remark a relative and limited value, for he only denied that the
abuse of liquor was the most active cause of crime.  After him M.
Fournier de Flaix, maintaining the same proposition with the same
statistical arguments, and admitting that ``alcohol is a special
scourge for the individual who indulges in it,'' yet concluded
that ``alcoholism is not a scourge which menaces the European
race.''  And he repeated that the nations which consumed the
greatest quantity of alcohol show a slighter frequency of crime,
especially against the person.  Lastly M. Colajanni enlarged upon
the same proposition, using the statistical data so fully set out
by M. Kummer, and drew a still more positive conclusion, that
``there is a lack of constancy, regularity, and universality in
the relations, coincidence, and sequence, as between alcoholism
and crime and suicide; so that it is impossible to establish any
statistical relation of cause and effect between these
phenomena.''

Passing over the grave errors of fact in M. Colajanni's brochure,
I will only observe that this pro<p 119>position is a pure
misapprehension of statistical logic.

If we once admit (and unfortunately it cannot be denied) the bad
influence of alcohol on bodily and mental health, in the form of
spirits as well as of wine--as to which it is not correct to say
that the southern departments are not consumers of alcohol--it
cannot be maintained that alcohol, which is physically and morally
injurious to individuals, is not hurtful to nations, which are but
aggregates of individuals.

There is an easy answer to the statistical arguments.  (1) A
symmetrical and continuous agreement of figures is never found in
any collection of statistics, for in all that concerns a society
the intervention of individual, physical, and social causes is
inevitable.  (2) A negative conclusion from these partial and
natural disagreements (for it is especially true in biology and
sociology that every rule has its exceptions, due to intervening
causes) would only be justified if it had been maintained that
alcoholism is the sole and exclusive cause of crime.  But as this
has never been asserted by anybody, all the statistical arguments
of Fournier and Colajanni are based on a misapprehension.  And
unfortunately they do not destroy the link of causality between
drink and crime.  This connection is occasional, in assaults,
wounding, and homicide in acute alcoholism.  It is habitual, in
the case of chronic alcoholism, as in crimes against property, the
person, morality, and public officers.  And this in spite of the
relatively low figures, though lower than the facts warrant,
con<p 120>tained in the general statements, apart from special and
scientific inquiries into alcoholism as a direct and manifest
cause of crime and suicide.

I wrote as early as 1881 that alcoholism, prior to its becoming a
cause, is the effect of wretched social conditions in the poorer
classes; and that to the one-sided simplicity of economic causes
it is necessary to add certain bio-psychical conditions and
conditions of physical environment, which go far to determine the
geographical distribution of spirit-alcoholism (chronic and more
serious, in northern countries and provinces) and wine-alcoholism
(acute and less deep-seated, in the countries and provinces of the
south).

It was therefore natural that indirect measures against alcoholism
should have been resorted to long ago, such as the raising of the
tax on alcoholic drinks, and the lowering of that on wholesome
beverages, such as coffee, tea, and beer; strict limitation of the
number of licenses; increased responsibility of license-holders
before the law, as in America; the expulsion of tipsy members from
workmen's societies; the provision of cheap and wholesome
amusements; the testing of wines and spirits for adulteration;
better organised and combined temperance societies; the
circulation of tracts on the injurious effects of alcohol; the
abolition of certain festivals which tended rather to
demoralisation than to health; discouragement of the custom of
paying wages on Saturday; the establishment of voluntary
temperance homes, as in America, England, and Switzerland.

North America, England, Sweden and Norway, <p 121>France, Belgium,
Holland, and Switzerland have applied remedies against drunkenness
(to the length of a State monopoly of drink in Switzerland); but
with too much zeal for public revenue, and, under the pretext of
public health, almost exclusively framed with a view to duties on
manufacture, distribution, and consumption.  Yet these duties are
quite inadequate by themselves, and may even tend to the injury of
the physical and moral health of the nation, the increase of
price, leading to frauds and adulteration.

Penal laws against drunkenness, naturally resorted to in all
countries, are far from being effectual.  There is so far no
system of direct and indirect measures against alcoholism, duly
co-ordinated, beyond taxation and punishment.  And we perceive, as
for instance in France, in spite of the repressive law introduced
by my distinguished friend Senator Roussel (January, 1873), and in
spite of the extremely high duties, which were doubled in 1872 and
1880, that alcoholism persists with a terrible and fatal increase.
So it is, more or less, in every country still, in spite of duties
and punishments.

The irregularity of wages, and the deceitful vigour imparted by
the first recourse to alcohol, the poverty and excessive toil of
the working classes, insufficiency of food, inherited habits, and
the lack of efficacious preventive measures, are influences which
prevent the working man from resisting this scourge; and no fiscal
or repressive law, acting solely by direct compulsion, will ever
be able to paralyse these natural tendencies, which can only be
weakened by indirect <p 122>measures.  On the other hand, when we
remember that habitual intoxication, so common in medi<ae>val days
amongst the nobles and townsfolk, has grown less and less frequent
in those classes (aided by the introduction and rapid diffusion of
coffee since the time of Louis XIV.), it is possible to hope that
the improvement of economic, intellectual, and moral conditions
amongst the populace will gradually succeed in modifying this
terrible plague of drink, which cannot be cured all at once.

To continue our illustrations of penal substitutes, we see that
the substitution of metallic money for a paper medium decreases
the number of forgers, who on the contrary had defied penal
servitude for life.  False money is more easily detected than a
spurious note.[14]--Money dealers and dealers in precious stones
have done more than any punishment to check the crime of usury, as
was shown in the case of Spain, after her American conquests;
whereas medi<ae>val punishments never prevented the recrudescence
of usury in one form or another.  Popular and Agricultural Credit
Banks, which are practically within the reach of all, are more
efficacious against usury in our own days than the special
repressive laws enacted once more in Germany and Austria, under
the influence of the old illusion.--With the diminution of
interest on the public funds the stream of capital has been
diverted into commerce, manufactures, and agriculture, thus
warding off stagnation, with the <p 123>bankruptcies, forgeries,
frauds, &c., which result therefrom.--The adjustment of salaries
to the needs of public officials, and to general economic
conditions, stems the tide of corruption and embezzlement, which
were partly due to their concealed poverty.--Limited hours of duty
for the responsible services on which the safety of the public
depends, as for instance in railway stations, are far more
serviceable in preventing accidents than the useless punishment of
those who are guilty of manslaughter.--High-roads, railways, and
tramways disperse predatory bands in rural districts, just as wide
streets and large and airy dwellings, with public lighting and the
destruction of slums, prevent robbery with violence, concealment
of stolen goods, and indecent assaults.--Inspection of workshops
and shorter hours for children's labour, with their
superintendence of married women, may be a check on indecent
assaults, which penal servitude does not prevent.--Cheap workmen's
dwellings, and general sanitary measures for houses both in urban
and rural districts, care being taken not to crowd them with poor
families, tend to physical health, as well as to prevent many
forms of immorality.--Co-operative and mutual societies, provident
societies and insurance against old age, funds for sick and infirm
workmen, employers' liability for accidents during work, from
machinery or otherwise; popular savings' banks, charity
organisation societies and the like, obviate a large number of
offences against property and the person much better than a penal
code.--I have maintained in the Italian Parliament that the reform
of religious <p 124>charities, which in Italy represent funds to
the amount of two milliards, might lead to the prevention of
crime.--Measures for the discouragement of mendicity and vagrancy,
above all agricultural colonies, as in Holland, Belgium, Germany,
and Austria, would be the best penal substitute for the very
frequent offences committed by vagabonds.  Thus it may be
concluded that a prudent social legislation, not stopping short at
mere superficial and perfunctory reforms, might constitute a
genuine code of penal substitutes, which could be set against the
mass of criminal impulses engendered by the wretched conditions of
the most numerous classes of society.


[14] Coiners and forgers of notes constitute .09 per cent. of the
total of condemned persons in France, and .04 per cent. in
Belgium; but they reach .4 per cent. in Italy, on account of the
greater circulation of banknotes.



II.  _In the Political Sphere_.--For the prevention of political
crime, such as assassination, rebellion, conspiracies, civil war,
arbitrary repression and prevention by the police are powerless;
there is no other means than harmony between the Government and
the national aspirations.  Italy has been a conspicuous example of
this, for under the rule of the foreigner, neither the scaffold
nor the galleys could hinder political outrages, which have
disappeared with national independence.  So with Ireland and
Russia.  Germany, which believed that it could stamp out socialism
by exceptional penal laws, discovered its mistake.--For so-called
press offences (which are either ordinary offences committed by
the aid of the press, or are not offences at all), nothing but
freedom of opinion can render attacks and provocations of a
political type less frequent.--Respect for the law spreads through
a nation by the example on the part of the governing classes and
authorities of constant <p 125>respect for the rights of
individuals and associations, far better than by policemen and
prisons.--Electoral reform adapted to the condition of a country
is the only remedy against electoral offences.--Similarly, in
addition to the economic reforms already indicated, political and
parliamentary reforms are much more serviceable than the penal
code in preventing many offences of a social and political type,
provided that a more real harmony has been established between a
country and its lawful representation, and that the latter is
freed from the occasions and the forms which lead to its abuse, by
removing technical questions from injurious political influences,
and giving the people a more direct authority over public affairs,
including the _referendum_.--Finally, that great mass of crimes,
isolated or epidemic, evolved by unsatisfied needs and the neglect
of separate divisions of a country, which differ in climate, race,
traditions, language, customs, and interests, would be largely
eliminated if we were to dispense with the vague folly of
political symmetry and bureaucratic centralisation, and in their
place to adapt the laws to the special features of the respective
localities.  National unity in no way depends upon legislative and
administrative uniformity, which is merely its unhealthy
exaggeration.  It is indeed inevitable that laws, which in our day
merely represent a mode of contact between the most varied moral,
social and economic conditions of different localities, should
always be inadequate to social needs--too restricted and slow in
action for one part of the country, too sweeping and premature for
another part, just as the <p 126>average convict's garb is too
long for those who are short, and too short for those who are
tall.  Administrative federation with political unity (_e pluribus
unum_) would furnish us with an aggregate of penal substitutes,
restoring to each part of the social organism that freedom of
movement and development which is a universal law of biology and
sociology--for an organism is but a federation too lightly
appreciated by the advocates of an artificial uniformity, such as
ends by conflicting with unity itself.

III.  _In the Scientific Sphere_.--The development of science,
which creates fresh instruments of crime, such as fire-arms, the
press, photography, lithography, new poisons, dynamite,
electricity, hypnotism, and so forth, sooner or later provides the
antidote also, which is more efficacious than penal repression.--
The press, anthropometric photography of prisoners, telegraphy,
railways, are powerful auxiliaries against crime.--Dissection and
the progress of toxicology have decreased the number of poisoning
cases; and experience has already proved that ``Marsh's
preparation'' has rendered poisoning by arsenic, once so common,
comparatively rare.--A similar process has recently been suggested
as a means of detection in cases of forgery, for when documents
are exposed to iodine vapour, effaced or altered writing is
restored.--Women doctors will diminish the opportunities of
immorality.--The free expression of opinion will do more to
prevent its possible dangers than trials of a more or less
scandalous kind.--Piracy, which <p 127>was not extirpated by
punishments which are now obsolete, is disappearing under the
effects of steam navigation.--The spread of Malthusian ideas
prevents abortion and infanticides.[15]--Systematic bookkeeping,
by its clearness and simplicity, obviates many frauds and
embezzlements, which were encouraged by the old complicated
methods.--Cheques, by avoiding the necessity of frequent
conveyance of money, do more to prevent theft than punishments can
do.--The credentials given by some banks to their clerks, whose
duty it is to witness the signature of the actual debtor, prevent
the falsification of bills.--Certain bankers have adopted the
practice of taking an instantaneous photograph of every one
presenting cheques for large amounts.--Safes, bolts, and alarm-
bells, are a great security against thieves.  <p 128>--As a
preventive of murder in railway carriages, it has been found that
alarm signals and methods of securing the carriage-doors from the
inside, are more effectual than penal codes.


[15] No doubt there may be a difference of opinion on this subject
in France, where public opinion is too much exercised over the
problem of depopulation.  I agree with M. Varigny (``La Th<e'>orie
du Nombre,'' _Revue des Deux Mondes_, Dec. 15, 1890) that the
population of a country is not the sole, or even the principal
consideration.  Apart from physical characteristics (race),
intellectual and moral qualities, and the productiveness of the
soil on which M. Varigny dwells, we must take into account, as it
seems to me, the unquestionable law by virtue of which the
struggle for existence, amongst individuals as amongst nations,
becomes gradually less vehement and direct.  War, which is an
everyday matter with savages, grows constantly more rare and
difficult.  The varying social and international conscience of
civilised humanity is not to be neglected, and it must be reckoned
with as a positive factor in considering the destiny of nations.
Men continue to speak of the perils of war (in which numbers stand
for a great deal, but are not the exclusive element) as though the
social conscience of our own day were still the same as that of
the Middle Ages.  In several respects, on the other hand, the
thinner population of France is one cause of its wealth, and
therefore of its power.  Germany has a more numerous, but also a
poorer population.  And I do not believe that the actual power of
nations, on which their future depends, consists in loading a
people with arms after enfeebling it by military expenditure,
which from the year 1880 has indicated a distinct epidemic mania
on the continent of Europe.

IV.  _In the Legislative and Administrative Sphere_.--Wise
testamentary legislation prevents murders through the impatient
greed of next-of-kin, as in France during a former age, with what
was known as ``succession powder.''--A law to facilitate the
securing of paternal assent for the marriage of children (as
suggested by Herschel in his ``Theory of Probabilities'') in
countries which require the assent of both parents, and for
affiliation and breach of promise of marriage, with provision for
children born out of wedlock, are excellent as against
concubinage, infanticide, abortion, exposure of infants, indecent
assaults, and murders by women abandoned after seduction.  On this
head Bentham said that concubinage regulated by civil laws would
be less mischievous than that which the law does not recognise but
cannot prevent.--Cheap and easy law is a preventive of crimes and
offences against public order, the person and property, as I have
already said.--The ancient Italian institution of Advocate of the
Poor, if substituted for the present illusory assistance by the
courts, would prevent many acts of revenge.  So also would a
strict and speedy indemnity for the victims of other men's crimes,
intrusted to a public minister when the injured person is not able
to resort to the law; for as I have maintained, with the approval
of sundry criminal sociologists, civil responsibility for crime
ought to be <p 129>as much a social obligation as penal
responsibility, and not a mere private concern.--Simplification of
the law would prevent a large number of frauds, contraventions,
&c., for, apart from the metaphysical and ironical assertion that
ignorance of the law excuses no man, it is certain that our forest
of codes, laws, decrees, regulations and so forth, leads to
endless misapprehensions and mistakes, and therefore to
contraventions and offences.--Commercial laws on the civil
responsibility of directors, on bankruptcy proceedings and the
registration of shareholders, on bankrupts' discharges, on
industrial and other exchanges, would do more than penal servitude
to prevent fraudulent bankruptcy.--Courts of honour, recognised
and regulated by law, would obviate duels without having recourse
to more or less serious punishments.--A well organised system of
conveyancing checks forgery and fraud, just as registration
offices have almost abolished the palming and repudiation of
children, which were so common in medi<ae>val times.  Deputy
Michelin, in order to discourage bigamy, proposed in 1886 to
institute in the registers of births for every commune a special
column for the civil standing of each individual, so that any one
who contemplated marriage would have to produce a certificate from
this register, and thus would be unable to conceal a previous
marriage which had not been dissolved by death or divorce.--The
form of indictment by word of mouth in penal procedure has
prevented many calumnies and false charges.--Foundling and orphan
homes, or, still better, some less old-fashioned substitute, such
as <p 130>lying-in hospitals and home attendance for young
mothers, might do much to prevent infanticide and abortion, which
are not checked by the severest punishment.--Prisoners' aid
societies, especially for the young, might be useful as penal
substitutes, although much less so than is generally alleged, with
plenty of eloquence and little practical work.  There is always
this strong objection to them, that we ought to succour workmen
who continue honest in spite of their wretchedness before those
who have been in prison; and again, in place of bestowing
patronage on released prisoners without distinction, many of whom
are incorrigible, we ought to select the occasional criminals and
criminals of passion, who alone are capable of amendment; and
assisting them we should avoid anything like police formalities.
As a matter of fact it appears that, even in England, where these
societies are most active, their intervention, like all direct
charity, is too far below the needs of those for whom provision is
necessary.

V.  _In the Sphere of Education_.--It has been proved that mere
book education, whilst it is useful in rendering certain gross
frauds more difficult, in extending a knowledge of the laws, and
above all in diminishing improvidence, so characteristic of the
occasional criminal, is far from being the panacea of crime which
people imagined when they found in the criminal statistics a large
proportion of illiterate prisoners.  It must also be said that
schools which are not closely inspected are frequently hotbeds of
immorality.  It is necessary, therefore, to rely on the influence
of a wider education, limited <p 131>though this may be in its
turn.  I do not mean a mechanical instruction in moral maxims,
appealing to the intelligence without reaching the feelings, but
rather of the examples afforded by every kind of social
institution, by the government and the press, by the school of the
stage and of public entertainments.--It would be well, however, to
abolish certain vulgar and sensual entertainments, and to
substitute for them wholesome amusements and exercises, public
baths, properly superintended, and so built as to render private
meetings impossible, cheap theatres, and so forth.  Thus the
prohibition of cruel spectacles, and the suppression of gambling
houses, are excellent penal substitutes.--The experimental method
in the teaching of children, which applies the laws of physio-
psychology, according to the physical and moral type of each
pupil, and by giving him less of archaology, and more knowledge
serviceable in actual life, by the mental discipline of the
natural sciences, which alone can develop in him a sense of the
actual, such as our classical schools only enfeeble, would adapt
men better for the struggle of existence, whilst diminishing the
number of those left without occupation, who are the candidates of
crime.--Many of the causes of crime would be nipped in the bud by
checking degeneration through physical education of the young, as
well as by preventing demoralisation by means of the education of
abandoned children, at such institutions as the workhouse, ragged
and industrial schools, so well developed in England--or, still
better, by the boarding out of children, so as to avoid over-
crowding.--One class of inducements to crime <p 132>would be
eliminated by restrictions imposed on scandalous publications
which concern themselves exclusively with crime, having no other
object than to trade upon the most brutal passions, and which are
allowed to exist under an abstract conception of liberty, save
that the responsible conductors are punished when the evil has
been done.--Similarly there ought to be some restriction upon the
right of admission to police-courts and assizes, where our women
hustle each other as the Roman women of the decline scrambled to
be present at the imperial circus-shows, and where our young men
and our hardened criminals receive lessons in the art of
committing crimes with greater smartness and precaution.


The instances which I have given, and which might be multiplied
into a preventive code as long as the penal code, prove to
demonstration how large a part is played by social factors in the
genesis of crime, and especially of occasional crime.  But they
prove still more clearly that the legislator, by modifying these
causes, can influence the development of crime within limits
imposed by the competition of other anthropological and physical
factors.  Quetelet was right, therefore, when he said in this
connection, ``Since the crimes committed every year seem to be the
necessity of our social organisation, and their number cannot be
diminished if the causes to which they are due cannot be modified
in a preventive sense, it behoves legislators to recognise these
causes, and to eliminate them as far as possible.  They must frame
<p 133>the budget of crime as they frame that of the national
revenue and expenditure.''

It must nevertheless be borne in mind that all this will have to
be done apart from the penal code; for it is true, however
strange, that history, statistics, and direct observation of
criminal phenomena prove that penal laws are the least effectual
in preventing crime, whilst the strongest influence is exercised
by laws of the economic, political, and administrative order.

In conclusion, the legislator should be convinced by the teaching
of scientific observation that social reforms are much more
serviceable than the penal code in preventing an inundation of
crime.  The legislator, on whom it devolves to preserve the health
of the social organism, ought to imitate the physician, who
preserves the health of the individual by the aid of experimental
science, resorts as little as possible, and only in extreme cases,
to the more forcible methods of surgery, has a limited confidence
in the problematic efficiency of medicines, and relies rather on
the trustworthy processes of hygienic science.  Only then will he
be able to avoid the dangerous fallacy, ever popular and full of
life, which Signor Vacca, Keeper of the Seals, expressed in these
words:  ``The less we have recourse to preventive measures, the
more severe ought our repression to be.''  Which is like saying
that when a convalescent has no soup to pick up his strength, we
ought to administer a drastic drug.

It is precisely on this point that the practical, rather than the
merely theoretical, differences between the positive and the
classical schools of penal law become evident.  Whilst we believe
that social reforms <p 134>and other measures suggested by a study
of the natural factors of crime are most effective in preventing
crime, legislators, employing the _a{sic} priori_ method of the
classical school, have for many years past been discussing
proposed penal codes, whilst they permit criminality to make
steady progress.  It is another case of _Dum Rom<ae> consulitur,
Saguntum expugnatur_.

And when the legislators find their Byzantine discussions on the
``juridical entities'' of crime and punishment broken in upon by a
recrudescence of crime, or by a serious manifestation of some
phenomenon of social pathology, then all they can do in their
perplexity and astonishment is to pass some new repressive law,
which for a moment stills the outcry of public opinion, and remits
the matter once more from the acute to the chronic phase.

The positive theory of penal substitutes, apart from any
particular example, aims precisely at furnishing a mental
discipline for legislators, and bringing home to them the duty of
constant reinforcements of social prevention, no matter how
difficult it may be, before the evil comes to a head, and forces
them too late to a course of repression which is as easy as it is
fallacious.  No doubt it is vexatious and difficult, even in
private life, to be perpetually living up to rules of health; and
it is easier, if more dangerous, to forget them, and to fly, when
the mischief declares itself, to drugs which are too frequently
deceptive; but it is just the want of forethought, both public and
private, which it is so important to overcome.  And as hygienic
science was not possible as a theory or as a practice until after
<p 135>the experimental observations and physio-pathology on the
causes of disease, especially of epidemic and infectious diseases,
together with the discoveries of M. Pasteur, who created
bacteriology; so social hygiene as against crime was only possible
as a theory, and will not be so as a practice, till the diffusion
of the facts of biology and criminal sociology relating to the
natural causes of crime, especially of occasional crime.

The great thing is to be convinced that, for social defence
against crime, as for the moral elevation of the masses of men,
the least measure of progress with reforms which prevent crime is
a hundred times more useful and profitable than the publication of
an entire penal code.

When a minister introduces a law, for instance, on railways,
customs duties, wages, taxation, companies, civil or commercial
institutions, there are few who think of the effect which these
laws will have on the criminality of the nation, for it is
imagined that sufficient has been done in this respect by means of
reforms in the penal code.  In the social organism, on the other
hand, as in individuals, there is an inevitable solidarity, though
frequently concealed, between the most distant and different
parts.

It is just from these laws of social physiology and pathology that
we derive the notion of penal substitutes, which at the same time
we must not dissociate from the law of criminal saturation.  For
if it is true that by modifying the social factors we can produce
an effect on the development of crime, and especially of
occasional crime, it is also true, unfortunately, that in every
social environment there is always a minimum <p 136>of inevitable
criminality, due to the influence of the other factors, biological
and physical.  Otherwise we might easily fall into the opposite
and equally fallacious illusion of thinking that we could
absolutely suppress all crimes and offences.  For it is easy to
reach on one side the empiric idea of penal terrorism, and on the
other side the hasty and one-sided conclusion that to abolish some
particular institution would get rid of its abuses.  The fact is
that we must consider before all things whether it is not a less
evil to put up with institutions, however inconvenient, and to
reform them, than to forfeit all the advantages which they afford.
And it must above all be borne in mind that as society cannot
exist without law, so law cannot exist without offences against
the law.  The struggle for existence may be fought by honest or
economic activity, or by dishonest and criminal activity.  The
whole problem is to reduce to a minimum the more or less criminal
rufflings and shocks, yet without disturbing ``social order,''
amidst the indifference or servility of a spiritless people, or
resorting to policemen and prisons on every slight occasion.

These general observations on penal substitutes in connection with
the law of criminal saturation are a sufficient answer to the two
chief objections raised even by such as agree with me in theory.

It has been urged, in effect, that some of the penal substitutes
which I have enumerated have already been applied, without
preventing crime; and again, that there were some institutions
which it would be absurd to abolish because the removal of a
prohibition would also remove the contravention.
<p 137>

The aim of penal substitutes is not to render all crimes and
offences impossible, but only to reduce them to the least possible
number in any particular physical and social environment.  There
are crimes of piracy to this day, but the use of steam in
navigation has, none the less, been more effectual than all the
penal codes.  Murders still occur, though very rarely, on the
railways; but it is none the less true that the substitution of
the railways and tramways for the old diligences and stage coaches
has decimated highway robberies, with or without murder.  Divorce
does not eliminate wife-murder as a consequence of adultery, but
it diminishes its frequency.  Similarly, after the protection
which is afforded to abandoned children, we shall not be able to
close the tribunals through the absence of crimes and offences,
but it is certain that the supply of these will be notably
diminished.

As for the second objection, I was careful to say, in regard to
existing institutions, that we must naturally consider whether the
evil arising from violating them or that which would be due to
their suppression is the greater.  But my main contention is that
by reforming these institutions we can do more to prevent crime
than by leaving them as they happen to be, or at most granting
them the fallacious protection of one or two articles in the penal
code.

I will myself add a criticism of the theory of penal substitutes,
and it is that they are difficult of application.  We have only to
think of the immense force of inertia in the habits, traditions
and interests which have to be overcome before we can secure the
appli<p 138>cation, not of all, but of any one of the penal
substitutes which I have enumerated.  And some of these are not
simple, or based on a single principle, but comprise an assemblage
of co-ordinated reforms, like the prevention of drunkenness, the
protection of abandoned children, the accessibility of justice,
and so forth.

But if legislators must take into account the actual conditions of
the people, and adapt themselves to conditions of time and place,
it is the business of science to indicate the goal, however
distant and difficult to reach.  The first condition of attaining
legislative and social reforms is that they should impress
themselves beforehand on the public conscience; and this is not
possible if science, in spite of transitory difficulties, does not
resolutely open up the road which has to be travelled, without any
compromise with eclecticism, which means for science what
hybridism means for organic life.


Two other objections may be made on the ground of principle to
what has been said.  The first is that this system of penal
substitutes is only the familiar process of prevention of crime.
The second is that the criminal expert need not concern himself
with it, since prevention is only a question of good government,
which has nothing to do with the study of crimes and punishments.

My answer to the second objection is that the importance of taking
measures to prevent crime has certainly been dwelt upon,
especially from the time of Montesquieu and Beccaria, but it has
been only by <p 139>way of platonic and isolated declaration, with
no such systematic development as might have given them practical
application, based on experimental observations.  Moreover, this
prevention has always been held as subsidiary to repression,
whereas we have arrived at the positive conclusion that
prevention, instead of being a mere secondary aid, should
henceforth become the primary defensive function of society, since
repression has but an infinitesimal influence upon criminality.

Furthermore, it is important to observe the profound distinction
between ordinary prevention and penal substitutes; or in other
words, between prevention by police and prevention by society.
The former merely seeks to prevent crime when its germ is already
developed and active, and it nearly always employs methods of
direct coercion, which, being themselves repressive in their
character, are often inefficacious, even if they do not provoke
additional offences.  Social prevention, on the other hand, begins
with the original sources of crime, attacking its biological,
physical, and social factors, by methods which are wholly
indirect, and which rest upon the free play of psychological and
sociological laws.

Science, as well as the making of laws, has hitherto been too much
influenced by a preference for repression, or at least for
administrative police prevention.  ``There have been authoritative
works and learned folios,'' says Ellero, ``which dealt not only
with punishment, but also with torture; there has been none
dealing with the provision of means for providing an alternative
to punishment.''
<p 140>

After the general observations of Montesquieu, Filangieri,
Beccaria, and more recently Tissot, on the influence of religion,
climate, soil, and the form of government, upon the penal system
rather than the prevention of crime, the authors who studied
prevention with wider and more systematic views (excluding the
criminal sociologists who have more or less taken the positive
point of view), are Bentham, Romagnosi, Barbacovi, Carmignani,
Ellero, Lombroso, and a few Englishmen, who, without making much
of the theory, have made many practical suggestions of preventive
reform.  But even these writers either confine themselves to
general synthetic considerations, like Romagnosi and Carmignani,
or else, entering the domain of facts, and even accepting the idea
of social prevention, have made too little of those physio-
psychological laws as the natural factors of crime, which alone
can furnish a method of regulating human activity.  And, when all
is said and done, they have clung to punishment as the chief
method of prevention.

Hence their teaching and their propositions have had no weight
with legislators, for these latter had not been convinced, as only
the criminal sociologist could convince them, that punishments are
far from having the deterrent force commonly attributed to them,
and that crime is not the outcome of free will, but rather a
natural phenomenon which can only disappear or diminish when its
natural factors are eliminated.

The legislators for their part have not only neglected the
definite teaching of these authors with more than ordinary
insight, but they have also enacted what are <p 141>really penal
substitutes in a clumsy and unscientific manner.

We have thus studied the data of criminal statistics in their
theoretical and practical relations with criminal sociology, and
come to the conclusion that, since crime is a natural phenomenon,
determined by factors of three kinds, it answers on that account
to a law of criminal saturation, whereby the physical and social
environment, aided by individual tendencies, hereditary or
acquired, and by occasional impulses, necessarily determine the
extent of crime in every age and country, both in quantity and
quality.  That is to say, the criminality of a nation is
influenced in the natural sphere by the bio-psychical conditions
of individuals and their physical environment, and, in the social
sphere, by economic, political, administrative and civil
conditions of laws, far more than by the penal code.

Nevertheless the execution of punishment, though it is the less
important part of the function of social defence, which should be
carried out in harmony with the other functions of society, is
always the last and inevitable auxiliary.

And this entirely agrees with the universal law of evolution, in
virtue of which, amidst the variation of animal and social
organisms, antecedent forms are not wholly eliminated, but
continue as the basis of the forms which succeed them.  So that if
the future evolution of the social administration of defence
against crime is to consist in the development of the primitive
forms of direct physical coercion into the higher forms of
indirect psychical discipline of human activity, this <p 142>will
not imply that the primitive forms must entirely disappear,
especially for the gravest crimes, which, in the biological and
psychological conditions of those who commit them, take us back to
the primitive epochs and forms of individual and social violence.

I end with a modification of an old comparison which has been much
abused.  Crime has been compared to an impetuous torrent which
ought to be enclosed between the dykes of punishment, lest
civilised society should be submerged.  I do not deny that
punishments are the dykes of crime, but I assert that they are
dykes of no great strength or utility.  All nations know by sad
and chronic experience that their dykes cannot save them from
inundations; and so our statistics teach us that punishments have
but an infinitesimal power against the force of criminality, when
its germs are fully developed.

But as we can best protect ourselves against inundations by
obeying the laws of hydrostatics and hydrodynamics, by timbering
the banks near the source of the stream, and by due rectilineation
or excavation along its course and near its mouth, so, in order to
defend ourselves against crimes, it is best to observe the laws of
psychology and sociology, and to avail ourselves of social
substitutes, which are far more efficacious than whole arsenals of
repressive measures.



CHAPTER III.

_PRACTICAL REFORMS_.

THE data of criminal anthropology and statistics, and the positive
theory of responsibility which flows from them, although they have
been systematised only by the positive school, are nevertheless
too constantly in evidence not to have made their way into courts
and parliaments.

I have already spoken of penal jurisprudence in its relations with
criminal sociology, and may now cite a few examples of the more or
less direct and avowed influence of the new data on penal
legislation.

The legislators of to-day, vaguely impressed by statistical and
biological, ethnographical and anthropological data, and still
imbued with the old prejudice of social and political
artificiality, were at first hurried into a regular mania for
legislation, under which every newly observed social phenomenon
seemed to demand a special law, regulation, or article in the
penal code.  Then, as Spencer has said in one of his most
brilliant essays, the citizen finds himself in an inextricable
network of laws, decrees, regulations and codes, which surround
him, support him, fetter and bind him, even before his birth and
after his death.  For<p 143> <p 144>those whom M. Bordier calls
the gardeners and trussmakers of society, forgetting the natural
character of social phenomena, picture society as so much paste,
to which the cook may give any form he pleases, whether pie-crust,
dumpling, or tart.

Hence we see on all sides, side by side with dogma in the
classical sciences of law, economy, and politics, empiricism in
the laws themselves.  And that is why the practical defects and
constant impotence of repression in penal justice are the most
eloquent arguments of the experimental school, which extends and
strengthens its own theoretical inductions by the practical
reforms which it suggests.

A first example of the influence more directly exercised by the
new ideas in penal legislation is furnished by the proposal
already realised in the penal laws of Holland, Italy, &c., of two
parallel systems of punishment by detention--one for the graver
and more dangerous crimes, and the other, ``simple detention,'' or
_custodia honesta_ (``as a first-class misdemeanant''), for
contraventions, involuntary offences, and crimes not inspired by
the baser passions.

Similarly, the enumeration contained in certain codes, as in
Spain, and in the old Mancini draft of a penal code in Italy, of
the main aggravating and extenuating circumstances common to all
crimes and offences, such as the antecedents of the accused,
venial or inexcusable passion, repentance and confession of a
crime, extent of injury or the like, is only an elementary and
empiric form of the biological and psychological classification of
criminals.
<p 145>

Thus also the foundation of asylums for the detention of lunatic
criminals, in spite of their being acquitted of moral
responsibility; the more and more vigorous, but often too
empirical measures against the progressive increase of recidivism;
the proposed repressive measures as alternatives to short terms of
detention; the reaction against the exaggerations of cellular
confinement, which I regard as one of the aberrations of the
nineteenth century, are all manifest proofs of the more or less
avowed and logical influence of the data of criminal biology and
sociology on contemporary penal legislation.

These practical reforms, which, when grafted on the old trunk of
the classical theories of crime and punishment, are mere arbitrary
and misplaced expedients, really represent, when they are
logically co-ordinated and completed, the new system of social
defence againt{sic} crime, which is based on the scientific data
and inductions of the positive school, and which it is therefore
necessary for us to trace out from its foundations.


I.


In the first place, whilst the positive theories largely reduce
the practical importance of the penal code, yet they do more to
increase the importance of the rules of penal procedure, which are
intended to give practical and daily effect to penal measures, for
the defence of society against criminals.  For, as I maintained in
the Italian Parliament, if the penal code is a code for evil-
doers, that of penal procedure is a code <p 146>for honest people,
who are placed on their trial but not yet found guilty.

This is all the more true because, if it is possible to have penal
codes whose machinery of psychological coercion is planted on a
platonic platform of penitentiary systems written out fair in
their symmetrical clauses, but still non-existent, as is the case
in Italy, this is not possible in regard to penal procedure.  The
regulations of the code of ``instruction'' must of necessity be
carried out by a judicial routine.  The penal code may remain a
dead letter, as, for instance, when it says that punishment by
detention is to be inflicted in prisons constructed with cells;
for, happily, the cells necessary in Italy for fifty or sixty
thousand prisoners (or in France for thirty or forty thousand) are
too expensive to admit of the observance of these articles of the
penal code--which nevertheless have cost so many academic
discussions as to the best penitentiary system:  ``Auburn,''
``Philadelphian,'' ``Irish,'' or ``progressive.''  In the
organisation of justice, on the other hand, every legal regulation
has its immediate application, and therefore reforms of procedure
produce immediate and visible results.

It may be added that, if the slight deterrent influence which it
is possible for punishment to exercise depends, with its
adaptation to various types of criminals, on the certitude and
promptitude of its application, the others depend precisely and
solely on the organisation of the police, and of penal procedure.

Passing over special and technical reforms which <p 147>even the
classical experts in crime demand in the systems of procedure, and
often rather on behalf of the criminals than on behalf of society,
we may connect the positive innovations in judicial procedure with
these two general principles:--(1) the equal recognition of the
rights and guarantees of the prisoner to be tried and of the
society which tries him; and (2) the legal sentence, whereof the
object is not to define the indeterminable moral culpability of
the prisoner, nor the impersonal applicability of an article in
the penal code to the crime under consideration; but the
application of the law which is most appropriate to the
perpetrator of the crime, according to his more or less anti-
social characteristics, both physiological and psychological.

From Beccaria onward, penal law developed by reaction against the
excessive and arbitrary severity of the Middle Ages--a reaction
which led to a progressive decrease of punishments.  Similarly
official penal procedure in the nineteenth century has been, and
continues to be, a reaction against the medi<ae>val abuses of the
inquisitorial system, in the sense of a progressive increase of
individual guarantees against the domination of society.

As we considered it necessary in the interests of social self-
defence, in the case of criminal law, to combat the individualist
excesses of the classical school, so in regard to penal procedure,
whilst admitting the irrevocable guarantees of individual liberty,
secured under the old system, we think it necessary to restore the
equilibrium between individual and social rights, which has been
disturbed <p 148>by the many exaggerations of the classical
theories, as we will now proceed to show by a few examples.

The presumption of innocence, and therewith the more general rule,
``in dubio pro reo,'' is certainly based on an actual truth, and
is doubtless obligatory during the progress of the trial.
Undetected criminals are fortunately a very small minority as
compared with honest people; and we must consequently regard every
man who is placed on his trial as innocent until the contrary has
been proved.

But when proof to the contrary is evident, as, for instance, in
the case of a flagrant crime, or of confession confirmed by other
elements in the trial, it seems fit that the presumption should
cease in view of absolute fact; and especially when we have to do
with habitual criminals.

Even the criminals of this class whom I have questioned recognise
a presumption of the opposite kind.  ``They have convicted me,''
said an habitual thief, ``because they knew I might have done it,
without any proof; and they were in the right.  You will never be
convicted, because you never stole; and if we happen to be
innocent once in a way, that must be set against the other times
when we are not discovered.''  And the ironical smile of several
of these prisoners, condemned on circumstantial evidence, reminded
me of a provision which was once proposed in the Italian penal
code, under which a person surprised in the attempt to commit a
crime, if it was not known what precise form his crime would have
taken, was to be found guilty of a less serious offence.  This
might be good for an occasional criminal, <p 149>or a criminal of
passion, but would be absurd and dangerous for habitual criminals
and old offenders.

The exaggerations of the presumption ``in dubio pro reo'' are due
to a sort of mummification and degeneracy of the legal maxims,
whereby propositions based upon observation and generalisation
from existing facts continue in force and are mechanically applied
after the facts have changed or ceased to exist.

What reason can there be for extending provisional freedom,
pending an appeal, to one who has already been found guilty and
liable to punishment for a crime or offence, under sentence of a
court of first instance?  To presume the innocence of every one
during the first trial is reasonable; but to persist in a
presumption which has been destroyed by facts, after a first
condemnation, would be incomprehensible if it were not a
manifestly exaggerated outcome of classical and individualist
theories, which can only see a ``victim of authority'' in every
accused person, and in every condemned person also.

Another point is that of acquittal in case of an equality of
votes, especially where born and habitual criminals are concerned.
I think it would be much more reasonable to restore the verdict of
``not proven,'' which the Romans admitted under the form of ``non
liquet,'' as an alternative to ``absolvo'' and ``condemno,'' and
which may be delivered by juries in Scotland.  Every one who has
been put on his trial is entitled to have his innocence declared,
it it has been actually proved.  But if the proofs remain
incomplete, his only right is not to be condemned, <p 150>since
his culpability has not been proved.  But it is not the duty of
society to declare him absolutely innocent, when suspicious
circumstances remain.  In this case the only logical and just
verdict is one of ``not proven.''  Such a verdict would obliterate
the shadow of doubt which rests on persons who have been
acquitted, by reason of the identical verdicts in cases of proved
innocence and inadequacy of proof, and on the other hand it would
avoid the tendency to compromise, under which judges and juries,
in place of acquitting when the proof is insufficient, sometimes
prefer to convict, but make the punishment lighter.

Another case of exaggeration in the presumption of innocence is
afforded by the regulations as to contradictory or irregular
verdicts, which may be corrected only when there has been a
conviction; whilst if the error has led to the acquittal of an
accused person, it cannot be put right.  The influence of the
individualist and classical school is here manifest, for, as M.
Majno says, ``the justice of sentences rests as much on just
condemnations as upon just acquittals.''  If the individual has a
right to claim that he shall not be condemned through the mistake
or ignorance of his judges, society also has the right to demand
that those whose acquittal is equally the result of mistake or
ignorance shall not be allowed to go free.

On the same ground of equilibrium between the rights of the
individual and the rights of society, which the positive school
aims at restoring, something must be said as to the regulation by
which, if the <p 151>appeal is brought by a condemned person, the
punishment cannot be increased.  One classical expert in an
official position would not even give the right to appeal at all.

Now if appeal is allowed for the purpose of correcting possible
mistakes on the part of the original judges, why must we allow
this correction in mitigation, and not in increase of punishment?
And to this practical assurance of the condemned person that he
has nothing to fear from a second trial, which seems to have been
given to him for the sole purpose of encouraging him to abuse his
power, since appeals are too often a mere dilatory pretext, there
is a pendant in the right of the public prosecutor to demand a re-
hearing, but only ``in the interest of the law, and without
prejudice to the person acquitted.''

A last instance of the same kind of protective regulation for the
protection of evil-doers is to be found in the new trials which
are permitted only in cases where there has been a condemnation,
and that on arbitrary and superficial grounds.  Most of the
classical commentators on procedure do not dream of the
possibility of revision in the case of acquittals, and yet, as
Majno justly says, ``even if he has profited by false witness,
forged documents, intimidation or corruption of a judge, or any
other offence, the acquitted person calmly enjoys his boast, and
can even plume himself on his own share in the business without
fear of being put on his trial again.''  The Austrian and German
codes of procedure admit revision in cases of acquittal; and the
positive rule in this connection ought to be that a case should be
<p 152>re-heard when the sentence of condemnation or acquittal is
evidently erroneous.

From the same principle of equality between the guarantees of the
individual criminal and of honest society we infer the necessity
of greater strictness in the idemnification of the victims of
crime.  For the platonic damages now added to all sorts of
sentences, but nearly always ineffectual, we believe that a strict
obligation ought to be substituted, the operation of which should
be superintended by the State, in the same way as the other
consequence of the crime, which is called the punishment.  I will
return to this when I trace the outline of the positive system of
social defence against criminals.

The positive school, precisely because it aims at an equilibrium
between individual and social rights, is not content with taking
the part of society against the individual.  It also takes the
part of the individual against society.

In the first place, the very reforms which we propose for the
indemnification of the victims of crime, regarded as a social
function, as well as the operation of the punishment, have an
individualist character.  The individualism of the classical
school was not even complete as a matter of fact; for the
guarantees which it proposed took account of the individual
criminal only, and did not touch his victims, who are also
individuals, and far more worthy of sympathy and protection.

But, beyond this, we may point to three reforms as an instance of
the positive and reasonable guarantees of the individual against
the abuse or the defects of <p 153>social authority.  Of these
reforms two have been put forward by the classical school also,
but, like criminal lunatic asylums, alternatives for short terms
of imprisonment, and so on, they have generally remained
inoperative, for they are not in harmony with the bulk of
traditional theory, and only in a positive system have they any
organic and efficacious connection with the data of criminal
sociology.  I refer to the exercise of popular opinion, the
correction of judicial mistakes, and the transfer of sundry
punishable offences to the category of civil contraventions.

The institution of a Ministry of Justice corresponds to the
demands of general sociology, which exacts division of labour even
in collective organisms, and to those of criminal sociology, which
requires a special and distinct organ for the social function of
defence against crime.  Indeed it has become indispensable as a
necessary judicial organ, even in nations like England which have
not yet formally established it.  So that, far from confounding
the Public Prosecutor with the judicial body, we see the necessity
of giving to this office a more elevated character and a distinct
personality, with ampler guarantees of independence of the
executive power.

Nevertheless the action of the Ministry of Justice, as now
commonly organised, may be inadequate for the protection of the
victims of crime, either indirectly through the insufficient
number of its functionaries, or directly, through the functional
defect insisted on by M. Gneist, ``party spirit or prejudice in
favour of the governing powers.''  The latter, indeed,
notwith<p 154>standing M. Glaser's objection that government
pressure is impossible, have no need to give special instructions,
of a more or less compromising character, in order to exercise a
special influence in any particular case.  There is no necessity
for anything beyond the conservative spirit natural to every
institution of the State, or the principle of authority which is a
special form of it, apart from the less respectable motives of
interested subservience to such as are in office and dispense
promotion.

Hence it will be useful, in initiating criminal proceedings, to
add to the action of a Public Prosecutor (but not to substitute
for him) the action of private persons.

Criminal proceedings by citizens may take two forms, according as
they are put in operation only by the injured person or by any
individual.

The first mode, already allowed in every civilised nation, needs
amendment in various ways, especially in regard to the
subordination of the penal action to the plaint of the injured
person, which ought to be restrained, and even abolished.  In
fact, whereas this right has hitherto been regulated by law only
in view of the legal and material gravity of the offence, it
should in future be made to depend on the perversity of the
offender; for society has a much greater interest in defending
itself against the author of a slight offence if he is a born
criminal or a criminal lunatic, than in defending itself against
the author of a more serious crime, if he is an occasional
criminal or a criminal of passion.  And the necessity of bringing
a private action in regard to certain offences <p 155>is only a
source of abuses, and of demoralising bargains between offenders
and injured persons.

On the other hand, this prosecution by a citizen who has been
injured by a crime or an offence ought to have more efficacious
guarantees, either for the exercise of the rights of the injured
person, or against the possible neglect or abuse of the Public
Prosecutor.  If, indeed, he is obliged to take up every charge and
action, he is also (in Italy and France, but not in Austria or
Germany, for instance) the only authority as to penal actions, and
consequently as to penal judgments.

In Italy, out of 264,038 cases which came before the Public
Prosecutor in 1880, six per cent., or 16,058, were ``entered on
the records,'' or, in other words, they were not followed up; and
in 1889, out of a total of 271,279, the number of unprosecuted
cases was 27,086, or ten per cent. That is, the number had almost
doubled in ten years.

In France the annual average of plaints, charges, and trials with
which the Public Prosecutor was concerned stood at 114,181 in the
years 1831-5; at 371,910 in 1876-80; and at 459,319 in 1887.  And
the cases not proceeded with were 34,643, or thirty per cent., in
1831-5; 181,511, or forty-eight per cent., in 1876-80; and
239,061, or fifty-two per cent., in 1887.  That is to say, their
actual and relative numbers mere nearly doubled in fifty years.

Is it possible that in ten, or even in fifty years, the moral
conditions of a nation, and its inclination to bring criminal
charges, should be so modified that the number of cases devoid of
foundation should have <p 156>been almost doubled?  It is certain
that in different nations and different provinces there are
varying degrees of readiness to bring charges against lawbreakers
rather than to take personal vengeance.  But in one and the same
nation this vindictive spirit and this readiness to bring charges
cannot vary so greatly and rapidly, especially within ten years,
as in Italy; for the persistence of popular sentiment is a well-
known fact.  It is rather in the disposition of the functionaries
of the Ministry of Justice, which is far more variable, that we
must look for an explanation of this fact, which is also accounted
for by the tendency to diminish the statistical records of crime.

Now, why must the citizen who lodges a complaint of what he
considers a crime or offence submit to the decision of the Public
Prosecutor, who has allowed his action to drop?  This
consideration has led to the subsidiary penal action, already
allowed in Germany and Austria, and introduced in the draft codes
of procedure in Hungary, Belgium, and France, which is a genuine
guarantee of the individual as against the social authority.  We
must not, however, deceive ourselves as to the efficacy or
frequency of its operation, especially in the Latin nations, which
have none too much individual initiative.

The second form of private prosecution is that of the ``popular
punitive action,'' which existed in the Roman penal law--which, it
may be said in passing, is not so insignificant as the classical
school has supposed.  The statement of M. Carrara, too often
repeated, that ``The Romans, who were giants in civil law, are
pigmies in penal law,'' is not in my <p 157>opinion correct.  It
is true that the Roman penal law was not organised in a
philosophical system; but it exhibits throughout the wonderfully
practical judgment of the Roman jurisconsults; and indeed one
cannot see why they should have lost this sense when dealing with
crimes and punishments.  On the other hand, I am inclined to think
that the importance of the Roman civil law has been exaggerated,
and that the spirit of the _corpus juris_ springs from social and
economic conditions so different from our own that we can no
longer feel bound to submit to its tyranny.  The penal law of the
Romans, however, contains several maxims based on unquestionable
common sense, which deserve to be rescued from the oblivion to
which they have been condemned by the dogmatism of the classical
school.  Examples of these are the popular punitive action; the
distinction between _dolus bonus_ and _dolus malus_, which belongs
to the theory of motives; the stress laid upon intentions rather
than upon their actual outcome; the law of _exceptio veritatis_ in
cases of slander, which under the pharisaism of the classical
theory serves only to give immunity to knaves; the penalty of
twofold or threefold restitution for theft, in place of a few days
or weeks in prison; the condemnation of the most hardened
criminals to the mines, instead of providing them with cells, as
comfortable as they are ineffectual--apart from the consideration
that the firedamp in mines and the unhealthiness of penal
settlements would be less mischievous if their victims were the
most dangerous criminals rather than honest miners and husbandmen.

To return to the popular penal action, it is so com<p 158>monly
advocated, even by the classical school, that it is necessary to
say another word on the subject.

Gneist, from his special point of view, proposed that this action
should be introduced into penal procedure, as against electoral
and press offences, offences against the law of public meetings
and associations, and the abuse of public authority.  But I
consider that this action would be a necessary guarantee, in the
case of all crimes and offences, for a reasonable and definite
adjustment of the rights of the individual and of society.

Another reform, tending to a more effective guarantee of
individual rights, is the revision of judicial errors in the
interests of all who are unjustly condemned or prosecuted.  Such a
reform has been advocated also by several members of the classical
school; but it seemed only too likely to remain with them a mere
benevolent expression of opinion; for it can only be carried into
effect by curtailing imprisonment, and by a more frequent and
stringent infliction of fines, as advocated by the positive
school.

Sanctioned in some special cases, as an exceptional measure--as,
for instance, in the last century by the Parliament of Toulouse,
and in our age by the English Parliament--compensation for
judicial errors was rendered necessary in France at the end of the
eighteenth century, after a series of unjust condemnations, even
death sentences, which led Voltaire and Beccaria to demand the
abolition of capital punishment.  In 1781 the Society of Art and
Literature at Ch<a^>lonssur-Marne offered a prize for an essay on
the subject, and awarded it to Brissot de Warville, for his work,
<p 159>``Le Sang Innocent Veng<e'>.''  In the records of the
<E'>tats G<e'>n<e'>raux there were many votes in favour of this
reform, which Louis XVI. caused to be introduced on May 8, 1788.
In 1790 Duport brought in a measure in the Constituent Assembly;
but it was rejected after a short discussion in February, 1791,
during which the same practical objections were urged as have been
repeated up to the present time.  Nevertheless, the Convention
decreed special indemnities, as, for instance.  a thousand francs
in 1793 for one Busset, ``for arbitrary imprisonment and
prosecution.''  In 1823 the above-named Society at Ch<a^>lonssur-
Marne proposed the same subject for an essay; and it has been the
object of sundry proposals, all rejected, as in 1867 during the
discussion on criminal appeals, on amendments moved by Jules
Favre, Richard, and Ollivier; and again in 1883 by D<e'>put<e'>
Pieyre, and in 1890 by D<e'>put<e'> Reinach.

This reform has been advocated by Necker, amongst other writers,
in his memoir on ``Financial Administration in France,'' and by
Pastoret, Voltaire, Bentham, Merlin, Legraverend, H<e'>lie,
Tissot, and more comprehensively by Marsangy in his ``Reform of
the Criminal Law'' (1864).  Marsangy advocated many other
practical reforms which have since been adopted, in substitution
for the objectionable short terms of imprisonment.  More recently
the subject has been treated in France by the magistrates Bernard,
Pascaud, Nicolas, Giacobbi, and by the Attorney-Generals Molines,
Jourdan, Houssard, Dupry, Bujard, in their inaugural addresses.

In Italy there was a notable precedent for this <p 160>reform in
the Treasury of Fines, established for Tuscany in 1786, and for
the kingdom of the Two Sicilies in the penal code of 1819, for the
purpose of creating a fund for compensation in cases of judicial
error.  In 1886 Deputy Pavesi brought in a measure which was not
discussed; and this indemnification, which had already been
proposed in 1873 by De Falco, keeper of the seals, in his draft of
an Italian penal code, was not included in subsequent Bills,
mainly on account of the financial difficulties.  Amongst writers
on criminology, it was advocated in Italy by Carrara, Pessina, and
Brusa; in Germany by Geyer and Schwarze; in Belgium by Prins and
others, and more recently by M. Garofalo, in his report to the
third National Congress on Law, at Florence, in September, 1891.

Amongst existing laws, indemnification for judicial errors,
whether limited to cases in which the innocence of condemned
persons can be proved, or extended to persons wrongfully
prosecuted, is included in the penal codes of Hungary and Mexico,
and by special laws in Portugal (1884), Sweden (1886), Denmark
(1888), and especially in Switzerland, in the cantons of Fribourg,
Vaud, Neuch<a^>tel, Geneva, B<a^>le, and Berne.

The legal principle that the State ought to indemnify material and
moral injury inflicted by its functionaries, through malice or
negligence, on a citizen who has done nothing to subject himself
to prosecution or condemnation, cannot be seriously contested.
But the whole difficulty is reduced to deciding in what cases the
right to indemnification ought to be <p 161>recognised, and then
to providing a fund out of which the State can discharge this
duty.

For the latter purpose it would be necessary to include an
adequate sum in the Budget.  This was done in Bavaria, in 1888, by
setting apart 5,000 marks annually; and the first who profited by
this provision received a pension of 300 marks per annum, after
being rendered incapable of work by seven years' imprisonment for
a crime which he had not committed.  But if the policy of
retrenchment imposed on the European States by their insane
military expenditure and their chronic wars prevents the carrying
out of this proposal, there is the Italian precedent of the
Treasury of Fines, which, with the fines inflicted, or which ought
to be inflicted on convicted persons, and the product of prison
labour, would provide the necessary amount for the indemnities
which the State ought to pay to innocent persons who have been
condemned or prosecuted, as well as to the victims of offences.

As for the cases in which a right to indemnification for judicial
errors ought to be acknowledged, it seems to me evident in the
first place that we must include those of convicted persons found
to be innocent on a revision of the sentence.  Amongst persons
wrongfully prosecuted, I think an indemnity is due to those who
have been acquitted because their action was neither a crime nor
an offence, or because they had no part in the action (whence also
follows the necessity of verdicts of Not Proven, so as to
distinguish cases of acquittal on the ground of proved
innocence)--always provided that the prosecuted persons have not
given a reasonable pretext for their trial by their <p 162>own
conduct, or their previous relapse, or their habitual criminality.
    The third proposition of the positive school in regard to
individual guarantees, which was also advanced by M. Puglia, is
connected with reform of the penal code, and especially with the
more effectual indemnification of the victims of crime.  The
object is to prune the long and constantly increasing list of
crimes, offences, and contraventions of all acts which result in
slight injury, committed by occasional offenders, or ``pseudo-
criminals''--that is, by normal persons acting merely with
negligence or imprudence.
    In these cases the personal and social injury is not caused
maliciously, and the agent is not dangerous, so that imprisonment
is more than ever inappropriate, unjust, and even dangerous in its
consequences.  Deeds of this kind ought to be eliminated from the
penal code, and to be regarded merely as civil offences, as
__*simple__ theft was by the Romans; for a strict indemnification
will be for the authors of these deeds a more effectual and at the
same time a less demoralising and dangerous vindication of the law
than the grotesque condemnation to a few days or weeks in prison.
    It will be understood that the classical theory of absolute
and eternal justice cannot concern itself with these trifles,
which, nevertheless, constitute two-thirds of our daily social and
judicial existence; for, according to this theory, there is always
an offence to be visited with a proportionate punishment, just as
with a murder, or a highway robbery, or a slanderous word.
<p 163>But for the positive school, which realises the actual and
practical conditions of social and punitive justice, there is on
the other hand an evident need of relieving the codes, tribunals,
and prisons from these microbes of the criminal world, by
excluding all punishments by imprisonment for what Venturi and
Turati happily describe as the atomic particles of crime, and by
relaxing in some degree that monstrous network of prohibitions and
punishments which is so inflexible for petty transgressors and
offenders, but so elastic for serious evil-doers.


II.

    The reforms which we propose in punitive law are based on the
fundamental principle already established on the data of
anthropology and criminal statistics.
    If the ethical idea of punishment as a retribution for crime
be excluded from the repressive function of society, and if we
regard this function simply as a defensive power acting through
law, penal justice can no longer be squared with a minute
computation of the moral responsibility or culpability of the
criminal.  It can have no other end than to prove, first, that the
person under trial is the author of the crime, and, then, to which
type of criminals he belongs, and, as a consequence, what degree
of anti-social depravity and re-adaptability is indicated by his
physical and mental qualities.

The first and fundamental inquiry in every criminal <p 164>trial
will always be the verification of the crime and the
identification of the criminal.

But when the connection of the accused and the crime is once
established, either the accused produces evidence of his honesty,
or of the uprightness of his motives--the only case in which his
acquittal can be demanded or taken into consideration--or else it
is proved that his motives were anti-social and unlawful, and then
there is no place for those grotesque and often insincere contests
between the prosecution and the defence to prevent or to secure an
acquittal, which will be impossible whatever may be the
psychological conditions of the criminal.  The one and only
possible issue between the prosecution and the defence will be to
determine, by the character--of the accused and of his action, to
what anthropological class he belongs, whether he is a born
criminal, or mad, or an habitual or occasional criminal, or a
criminal of passion.

In this case we shall have no more of those combats of craft,
manipulations, declamations, and legal devices, which make every
criminal trial a game of chance, destroying public confidence in
the administration of justice, a sort of spider's web which
catches flies and lets the wasps escape.

The crime will always be the object of punitive law, even under
the positive system of procedure; but, instead of being the
exclusive concern of the judge it will only be the ground of
procedure, and one symptom amongst others of the depravation and
re-adaptability of the criminal, who will himself be the true and
living subject of the trial.  As it is, the whole <p 165>trial is
developed from the material fact; and the whole concern of the
judge is to give it a legal definition, so that the criminal is
always in the background, regarded merely as the ultimate billet
for a legal decision, in accordance with some particular article
in the penal code--except that the actual observance of this
article is at the mercy of a thousand accidents of which the judge
knows nothing, and which are all foreign to the crime, and to the
criminal.

If we rid ourselves of the assumption that we can measure the
moral culpability of the accused, the whole process of a criminal
trial consists in the assemblage of facts, the discussion, and the
decision upon the evidence.  For the classical school, on the
other hand, such a trial has been regarded as a succession of
guarantees for the individual against society, and, by a sort of
reaction against the methods of legal proof, has been made to turn
upon the private conviction, not to say the intuition, of the
judge and counsel.

A criminal trial ought to retrace the path of the crime itself,
passing backward from the criminal action (a violation of the
law), in order to discover the criminal, and, in the psychological
domain, to establish the determining motives and the
anthropological type.  Hence arises the necessity for the positive
school of reconsidering the testimony in a criminal case, so as to
give it its full importance, and to reinforce it with the data and
inferences not only of ordinary psychology, as the classical
school has always done (Pagano for instance, and Bentham,
Mitter<p 166>maier, Ellero, and others), but also, and above all,
with the data and inferences of criminal anthropology and
psychology.

In the evolution of the theory of evidence we may distinguish four
characteristic stages, as M. Tarde observed--the religious stage,
with its ordeals and combats; the legal stage, accompanied by
torture; the political stage, with private conviction and the
jury; and the scientific stage, with expert knowledge of
experimental results, systematically collected and studied, which
is the new task of positive procedure.

We must glance at each of the three elements of the criminal
trial: collection of evidence (police and preliminary inquiry);
discussion of evidence (prosecution and defence), and decision
upon evidence (judges and juries).

It is evident in the first place, as I remarked in the first
edition of this work, and as Righini, Garofalo, Lombroso, Alongi,
and Rossi have confirmed, that a study of the anthropological
factors of crime provides the guardians and administrators of the
law with new and more certain methods in the detection of the
guilty.  Tattooing, anthropometry, physiognomy, physical and
mental conditions, records of sensibility, reflex activity, vaso-
motor reactions, the range of sight, the data of criminal
statistics, facilitate and complete the amassing of evidence,
personal identification, and hints as to the capacity to commit
any particular crime; and they will frequently suffice to give
police agents and examining magistrates a scientific guidance in
their inquiries, which now depend entirely on their individual
acuteness and mental sagacity.
<p 167>

And when we remember the enormous number of crimes and offences
which are not punished, for lack or inadequacy of evidence, and
the frequency of trials which are based solely on circumstantial
hints, it is easy to see the practical utility of the primary
connection between criminal sociology and penal procedure.

The practical application of anthropometry to the identification
of criminals, and to the question of recidivism, which was begun
in Paris by M. Bertillon, and subsequently adopted by almost all
the states of Europe and America, is too familiar to need
description.  It will be sufficient to recall the modifications of
Bertillon's system by Anfosso, with the actual collection of
anthropometric data, and their inclusion in the ordinary records
of justice.

Thus the sphygmographic data on the circulation of the blood,
which reveal the inner emotions, in spite of an outward appearance
of calm or indifference, have already served to show that a person
accused of theft was not guilty of it, but that he was on the
contrary guilty of another theft, of which he had not been so much
as suspected.  On another occasion they established the innocence
of a man condemned to death.  We shall have more speaking and
frequent illustrations when these inquiries have been placed
regularly at the service of criminal justice.

The sphygmograph may also be useful in the diagnosis of simulated
disease, after the example set M. Voisin in the case of a sham
epileptic in Paris, ``whose sphygmographic lines have no
resemblance to those of true epileptics before and after a fit,
and <168>only resemble those produced by normal persons after a
violent gesticulation.''

As for the possible utilisation of hypnotism, we must be cautious
before we draw any legal conclusions from it; but it cannot be
questioned that this is a valuable source of scientific aid in the
systematic collection of criminal evidence.

But, for the present, the most certain and profitable aids in the
collection of evidence are those afforded by the organic and
psychical characteristics of criminals.  In my study on homicide I
reckoned up many psychological and psycho-pathological symptoms
which characterise the murderer, the homicidal madman, and the
homicide through passion.  And in my professional practice I have
often found by experience that there is a great suggestive
efficacy in these psychological symptoms in regard to the conduct
of a criminal, before, during, and after a crime; and it is
important to bring this knowledge scientifically before detectives
and judges.

These data are not applicable to accused persons exclusively.
When we remember the enormous importance of oral evidence in the
chain of criminal proof, and the rough traditional empiricism of
the criteria of credibility, which are daily applied in all trials
to all kinds of witnesses, by men who regard them, like the
prisoners, as an average abstract type--excluding only the
definite cases of inability to give evidence, which are defined
beforehand with as much method as the cases of irresponsibility--
the necessity of calling in the aid of scientific psychology and
psycho-pathology is manifest.
<p 169>

For instance, not to dwell on the absurd violation of these
traditional criteria of credibility, when police officers are
admitted as witnesses (often the only witnesses) of resistance to
authority or violence, wherein they are doubly interested parties,
how often in our courts do we give a thought to the casual
imaginations or credulity of children, women, weak-nerved or
hysterical persons, and so on?  Counsel for defence or prosecution
who desired to know if any particular witness is or is not
hysterical would bring a smile to the face of the judge, very
learned, no doubt, in Roman law or legal precedents, but certainly
ignorant in physiology, psychology, and psycho-pathology.  Yet the
tendency to slander in hysterical cases, which M. Ceneri urged so
eloquently in a celebrated trial or the tendency to untruth in
children, which M. Motet has ably illustrated, are but manifest
and simple examples of this applicability of normal, criminal, and
pathological psychology to the credibility of witnesses.  And,
under its influence, how much of the clear atmosphere of humanity
will stimulate our courts of justice, which are still too much
isolated from the world and from human life, where, nevertheless,
prisoners and witnesses come, and too often come again, living
phantoms whom the judges know not, and only see confusedly through
the thick mist of legal maxims, and articles of the code, and
criminal procedure.

Apart from these examples, which prove the importance of what M.
Sarraute justly called ``judicial applications of criminal
sociology,'' the fundamental reform needed in the scientific
preparation of criminal <p 170>evidence is the creation of
magisterial experts in every court of preliminary inquiry.  In a
question of forgery, poisoning, or abortion, the judge has
recourse to experts in handwriting, chemistry, or obstetrics; but
beyond these technical, special, and less frequent cases, in every
criminal trial the basis of inquiry is or ought to be formed by
the data of criminal biology, psychology, and psycho-pathology.
So that, over and above the knowledge of these sciences which is
necessary to judges, magistrates, and police officers, it is most
important that an expert, or several experts in criminal
anthropology should be attached to every court of criminal
inquiry.

This would provide us with an anthropological classification,
certain and speedy, of every convicted person, as well as a legal
classification of the material fact, and we should avoid the
scandal of what are known as experts for the prosecution and
experts for the defence.  There should be but one finding of
experts, either by agreement between them or by a scientific
reference to arbitration, as in the German, Austrian, and Russian
system; and over this finding the judges and the litigants should
have no other power than to call for explanations from the chief
of the experts.

In this way we should further avoid the scandal of judges entirely
ignorant of the elementary ideas of criminal biology, psychology,
and psycho-pathology, like the president of an assize court whom I
heard telling a jury that he was unable to say why an expert
``wanted to examine the feet of a prisoner in order to come to a
decision about his head.''  This president, <p 171>who was an
excellent magistrate and a learned jurist was wholly unacquainted
with the elements of the theory of degeneracy, like one of his
colleagues whom I heard saying, when the expert spoke of the
abnormal shape of the ears of a prisoner (in accord with the
inquiries of Morel and Lombroso), ``That depends on how the hat is
worn.''

For in consequence of the assumption, made by Kant amongst others,
that questions of mental disease belong to the philosopher rather
than to the physician, and of the absurd and shallow idea which
superficial persons entertain of those who are insane, picturing
them as constantly raving, the judge or juryman who pins his faith
to an expert in handwriting thinks himself above the necessity of
taking the opinion of an expert in insanity.

It must be recognised, however, that this foolish assumption is
partly due to a reasonable anxiety for the public safety, under
the sway of the classical theories, which allow the acquittal and
discharge of criminals who are found to be of unsound mind.  It
will eventually disappear, either by the wider diffusion of
elementary ideas of psycho-pathology or by the application of
positive theories, which are far from carrying the proved insanity
of a prisoner to the dangerous and absurd conclusion of his
acquittal.

After the first stage of the collection of evidence, during which
we can admit the legal representation of the accused, especially
for the sake of eliciting both sides of the question, without,
however, going so far as the individual exaggerations of complete
publicity for the preliminary inquiry, we come to the second
<p 172>stage of procedure, that of the public discussion of the
evidence.

The principals in this discussion represent the prosecution
(public or private) and the defence; and for these, as I cannot go
into great detail, I will only mention one necessary reform.  That
is the institution of a sort of public defence, by a legal officer
such as used to be found in certain of the Italian provinces,
under the title of ``advocate of the poor,'' who ought to be on a
par with the public prosecutor, and to be substituted for the
present institution of the official defence, which is a complete
failure.

As for the actual discussion of evidence, when we have established
the scientific rules of evidence, based upon expert acquaintance
with criminal anthropology, and when we have eliminated all verbal
contention over the precise measure of moral responsibility in the
prisoner, the whole debate will be a criticism of the personal and
material indications, of the determining motives, and the
anthropological category to which the accused belongs, and of the
consequent form of social defence best adapted to his physical and
psychical character.

The practical conclusion of the criminal trial is arrived at in
the third stage, that of the decision on the evidence.

So far as we are concerned, the criminal adjudication has the
simple quality of a scientific inquiry, subjective and objective,
in regard to the accused as a possible criminal, and in relation
to the deed of which he is alleged to be the author.  We naturally
therefore require in the judge certain scientific
<p 173>knowledge, and not merely the intuition of common sense.

But as the consultation of the jury, by reason of its inseparable
political aspect, must take place in private, we can only insist
on the fundamental reform of the judicial organisation, which
alone can realise the scientific principle of criminal
adjudication.  It was Garofalo who, in the earlier days of the
positive school, urged that civil and criminal judges ought to be
wholly distinct, and that the latter ought to be versed in
anthropology, statistics, and criminal sociology, rather than in
Roman law, legal history, and the like, which throw no light on
the judgment of the criminal.

Learned jurists, proficient in the civil law, are least fit to
make a criminal judge, accustomed as they are by their studies to
abstractions of humanity, looking solely to the juridical
bearings, inasmuch as civil law is mostly ignorant of all that
concerns the physical and moral nature of individuals.  The
demoralisation or uprightness of a creditor, for instance, has no
influence for or against the validity of his credit.

The jurist, therefore, in a matter of criminal adjudication,
entirely loses sight of the personal conditions of the accused,
and the social conditions of the community, and confines his
attention to the deed, and to the maxims of a so-called
retributive justice.  They who are called upon to try criminals
ought to possess the ideas necessary to the natural study of a
criminal man, and should therefore constitute an order of
magistrates wholly distinct from that of civil judges.
<p 174>

The practical means of securing this fundamental reform of the
judicial bench ought to begin with the organisation of the
university, for in the courses of the faculty of law it will be
necessary to introduce a more vigorous and modern stream of social
and anthropological studies, which must also eventually put new
life into the ancient maxims of the civil law.

In the second place, law students at the university ought to be
admitted to what Ellero called a science of clinical criminology,
that is to interviews with and systematic observations of
prisoners.  The first Congress of Criminal Anthropology approved
the proposal of M. Tarde, upon the following motion of Moleschot-
Ferri:--``The Congress, in agreement with the scientific tendency
of criminal anthropology, is of opinion that prison authorities,
whilst taking necessary precautions for internal discipline, and
for the individual rights of condemned prisoners, should admit to
the clinical study of criminals all professors and students of
penal law and legal medicine, under the direction and
responsibility of their own professors, and if possible in the
character of societies for the aid of actual and discharged
prisoners.''

Lastly, a special school should be founded for policemen and
prison warders, with the object of securing detectives
distinguished not only for their personal ability, but also for
their knowledge of criminal biology and psychology.

To these reforms, which guarantee the scientific capacity of the
criminal judge, we must add reforms which would secure his
complete independence of <p 175>the executive authority, which is
now the only authority responsible for the advancement and
allocation of judges.  But this independence would not be exempt
from every kind of control, such as public opinion, and
disciplinary authority to some extent distinct from the
_personnel_ of the bench; for otherwise the judicial authority
would soon become another form of insupportable tyranny.

The most effectual mode of securing the independence of the judges
is to improve their position in life.  For admitting that a fixed
stipend, payable every month, makes a man content with a somewhat
lower figure, still it is certain that in these days, with a few
honourable exceptions, the selection of judges is not
satisfactory, because low salaries only attract such as could not
earn more by the practice of their profession.

The personal character of the bench vitally affects the quality of
the government as a whole.  The most academic and exalted codes
are of little avail if there are not good judges to administer
them; but with good judges it matters little if the codes or
statutes are imperfect.

In criminal law the application of the statute to the particular
case is not, or should not be, a mere question of legal and
abstract logic, as it is in civil law.  It involves the adaptation
of an abstract rule, in a psychological sense, to a living and
breathing man; for the criminal judge cannot separate himself from
the environment and social life, so as to become a more or less
mechanical _lex loquens_.  The living and human tests of every
criminal sentence reside in <p 176>the conditions of the act, the
author, and reacting society, far more than in the written law.

Herein we have an opportunity of solving the old question of the
authority of the judge, wherein we have gone from one excess to
another, from the unbounded authority of the Middle Ages to the
Baconian aphorism respecting the law and the judge, according to
which the law is excellent when it leaves least to the judge, and
the judge is excellent when he leaves himself the least
independent judgment.

If the function of the criminal judge were always to be, as it is
now, an illusory and quantitative inquiry into the moral
culpability of the accused, with the equally quantitative and
Byzantine rules on attempt, complicity, competing crimes, and so
forth--that is to say, if the law were to be applied to the crime
and not to the criminal, then it is necessary that the authority
of the judge should be restrained within the numerical barriers of
articles of the code, of so many years, months, and days of
imprisonment to be dosed out, just as the Chinese law decides with
much exactitude the length and diameter of the bamboo rods, which
in the penal system of the Celestial Empire have the same
prominence as penitentiary cells have with us.

But if a criminal trial ought to be, on the other hand, a physio-
psychological examination of the accused, the crime being
relegated to the second line, as far as punishment is concerned,
the criminal being kept in the front, then it is clear that the
penal code should be limited to a few general rules on the modes
of defence and social sanction, and on the constituent
<p 177>elements of every crime and offence, whilst the judge
should have greater liberty, controlled by the scientific and
positive data of the trial, so that he may judge the man before
him with a knowledge of humanity.

The unfettered authority of the judge is inadmissible in regard to
the forms of procedure, which for the prosecuted citizen are an
actual guarantee against judicial errors and surprises, but which
should be carefully distinguished from that hollow and
superstitious formalism which generates the most grotesque
inanities, such as an error of a word in the oath taken by
witnesses or experts, or a blot of ink on the signature of a
clerk.


III.


Scientific knowledge of criminals and of crime, not only as the
deed which preceded the trial, but also as a natural and social
phenomenon--this, then, is the fundamental principle of every
reform in the judicial order; and this, too, is a condemnation of
the jury.  Whilst Brusa, one of the most doctrinaire of the
Italian classical school, foretold a steady decline of the
``technical element'' in the magistracy, and consequently a
persistent intervention of the popular influence in the
administration of justice, the positive school, on the other hand,
has always predicted the inevitable decline of the jury in the
trial of crimes and ordinary offences.[16]


    [16] It is interesting to observe that Carrara, in spite of
his public advocacy of the jury, wrote in a private letter in 1870
(published on <p 178>the unveiling of his monument at Lucca):--``I
expressed my opinion as to the jury in 1841, in an article
published in the _Annals of Tuscan Jurisprudence_--namely, that
criminal justice was becoming a lottery.  Justice is being
deprived of her scales and provided with a dice-box.  This seems
to me to be the capital defect of the jury.  All other defects
might be eliminated by a good law, but this one is inseparable
from the jury. . . .  Even amongst magistrates we may find the
harsh and the clement; but in the main they judge according to
legal argument, and one can always more or less foresee the issue
of a trial{.??}  But with juries all forecast is rash and
deceptive.  They decide by sentiment; and what is there more vague
and fickle than sentiment{. .??} . . With juries, craft is more
serviceable to an advocate than knowledge.  I once had to defend a
husband who had killed his wife's lover in a caf<e'>.  I
challenged the bachelors on the jury, and accepted the married
men.  After that, I was sure of success, and I succeeded. . . .
This is the real essential vice of the jury, which no legislative
measure could overcome.''



Theodore Jouffroy, after listening at the University of Pisa to a
lecture by Carmignani against the jury, said, ``You are defending
logic, but slaying liberty.''

Apart from the question whether liberty is possible without logic,
it is nevertheless a fact that there is always a prominent
political character in the jury.  This accounts for the more or
less declamatory defences of this judicial institution, which is
no favourite with the criminal sociologist.

At the end of the eighteenth century, when there was a scientific
and legislative tendency towards the creation of an independent
order of magistrates, the French Revolution, mistrusting the whole
aristocracy and social caste, opposed this tendency, believing
enthusiastically in the omnipotence and omniscience of the people,
and instituted the jury.  And whilst in the political order it was
inspired by classical antiquity, in the order of justice it
adopted this institution from England.  The jury was not
un<p 179>known to the Republic of Athens and Rome, but it was
developed in the Middle Ages by the ``barbarians,'' as an
instrument which helped the people to escape from tyranny in the
administration of the law.  It used to be said that the jury made
a reality of popular sovereignty, and substituted the common sense
and good will of the people for the cold dogmatism of the lawyers,
penetrated as they were by class prejudices.  From this point of
view the jury was too much in accord with the general tendency of
the ideas of the day not to be greedily adopted.  It was another
example of the close connection between philosophic ideas,
political institutions, and the judicial organisation.

The jury, transported to the Continent, in spite of the
improvements recorded by Bergasse in his report to the Constituent
Assembly, on August 14, 1789, was a mere counterfeit of that which
it was, and is, in England.  But its political character is still
so attractive that it has many supporters to this day, though the
results of its employment in various countries are not very happy.

Yet, as the jury is a legal institution, we must consider its
advantages and defects, both from the political and from the legal
point of view, and accept the conclusion forced upon us by the
predominance of one or the other.

From the political standpoint, it is unquestionable that the jury
is a concession to popular sovereignty; for it is admitted that
the power of the law not only originates with the people, but is
also directly exercised by them.
<p 180>

The jury may also be a guarantee of civic and political liberties
as against the abuses of government, which are far more easy with
a small number of judges, more or less subordinate to the
government.

Again, the jury may be a means of affirming the sentiment of
equality amongst citizens, each of whom may to-morrow become a
judge of his equals, and of spreading political education, with a
practical knowledge of the law.  It is true that, with this
knowledge of the law, juries also learn the details of every kind
of crime, without the equally constant evidence of virtuous
actions; and there is here a danger of moral contagion from crime.
But, from the political point of view, it is certain that the jury
may awaken, with a knowledge of the law, a consciousness of civic
duties, which are too frequently undertaken as a forced and
troublesome burden.

On these political advantages of the jury, however, a few remarks
may be made.

In the first place, the concession to popular sovereignty is
reduced to very small proportions by the limitations of the jury
list, and of the functions of the jury, which legislation in every
country is compelled to impose.

The essential characteristic distinguishing the jury from the
judge is especially marked by the origin of their authority; for
the jury is a judge simply because he is a citizen, whilst the
magistrate is a judge only by popular election or appointment by
the head of the State.  So that any one who has entered on his
civil and political rights, and is of the necessary age,
<p 181>ought, according to the spirit of the institution, to
administer justice on every civil or criminal question, whatever
its importance, and not only in giving the final verdict, but also
in conducting the trial.  Yet not only is the ancient trial by
popular assemblies impossible in the great States of our day, but
also faith in the omniscience of the people has not availed to
prevent all kinds of limitations in the principle of the jury.
Thus the political principle of the jury is such that it cannot be
realised without misapprehension, limitation, and depreciation.

In fact, even in England, where the jury can of its own motion
declare in the verdict its opinions, strictures, and suggestions
of reform, as arising out of the trial, it is always subject to
the guidance of the judge, and it is not employed in the less
serious and most numerous cases, on which the whole decision is
left to magistrates, who apparently are not to be trusted to
decide upon crimes of a graver kind.

And as for the other political advantages of the jury, experience
shows us that the jury is often more injurious than serviceable to
liberty.

In the first place, in continental States the jury is but an
institution artificially grafted, by a stroke of the pen, on the
organism of the law, and has no vital connection or common roots
with this and other social organisms, as it has in England.  Also
the example of classical antiquity is opposed to the institution
of the jury, which has been imposed upon us by eager imitation and
political symmetry; for if the jury had disappeared amongst
continental nations, this simply means that it did not find in the
ethnic <p 182>types, the manners and customs, the physical and
social environments of these nations, an adequate supply of
vitality, such as it has retained, for instance through so many
historical changes, amongst the Anglo-Saxons.

And if sometimes the jury can withstand the abuses of government,
still too frequently it does not withstand its own passions, or
the influence of the social class (the _bourgeoisie_ in our own
day), to which nearly all juries belong.  It is notorious, in
fact, that the jury is more rigorous in regard to prisoners
accused of crimes against property than in regard to those accused
of crimes against the person, especially crimes instigated by
personal motives such as hate, vengeance, or the like; for every
juryman thinks that he himself might be a victim of the exploits
of a thief, or the attacks of a murderer for the sake of gain;
whereas there is less reason to fear a murder provoked by
vengeance, an outrage, an embezzlement of public money, or the
like.  And Macchiavelli said that men would rather have blood
drawn from their veins than money from their pockets.

Besides, the same jury which will resist pressure from the
Government does not resist popular pressure, direct or indirect,
especially in view of the secrecy of their individual votes.  No
doubt there are noble exceptions; but society is made up of
average virtues, and only upon them can it count.[17]


 [17] In Dublin, for the trial of the murderers of Burke and Lord
Frederick Cavendish, in 1883, the empanelling of the jury was very
difficult, for nobody was willing to expose himself to the
vengeance of the fanatics.



And when it is continually asserted, in the words <p 183>of
Jouffroy, that the jury is an outpost of liberty, or in those of
Carrara, that it is its necessary complement, we have to remark
that this would be true if the jury were instituted by a despotic
government; but when popular liberties have far more effectual
guarantees in the political organisation of the State, then this
quality of the jury is more apparent than real.

In fine, either the government is despotic, and then juries are
not strong enough to preserve liberty, as in England from the time
of Henry VIII. to that of James II.; or, as Mittermaier said,
``when authority is corrupt, and the judge is cowardly or
terrorised, a jury cannot assist in the defence of liberty.''  Or
else the government is liberal, and then the judges also are
independent, so that there is no need of juries, especially with
the guarantees of their independence which I have already
indicated.

Now history reminds us that the jury is never instituted by
despotic governments.  It was refused, for instance, in upper
Italy by Napoleon in 1815, in Naples by the Bourbons in 1820, in
Lombardy by Austria in 1849, and in our own day in Russia, for
political crimes, though it is allowed for ordinary crimes.

Thus the jury, as a political and liberal institution, is oddly
destined to be excluded when it would be serviceable, and to be
useless when it is admitted.  It reminds us of the destiny of the
National Guard.

But, even in England, the jury is regarded as especially a legal
institution; and the main qualities attributed to it in this
connection are moral judgment and private conviction.
<p 184>

The law, we are told, has always a certain harshness and
insufficiency, for it ought to provide for the future whilst
grounding itself on the past, whereas it cannot foresee all
possible cases.  Progress is so rapid and manifold, in modern
society, that penal laws cannot keep pace with it, even though
they are frequently recast--as for instance in Bavaria, which in
one century has had three penal codes, and in France, where an
almost daily accumulation of special laws is piled upon the
original text of the most ancient code in Europe.

The jury, by its moral judgment, corresponding in some degree to
the equity of the ancients, is able to correct the _summum jus_
with verdicts superior to the written law.  And, in addition, the
jury always follows its private conviction, the inspiration of
sentiment, the voice of the conscience, pure instinct, in place of
the stern and artificial maxims of the trained lawyer.

I do not deny these qualities of the jury; but I very much suspect
that they are serious and dangerous vices rather than useful
qualities in a legal institution.

In the first place, I believe that the distinction of powers or
social functions, corresponding to the natural law of division of
labour, ought not to be destroyed by the jury.  The duty of the
judicial power, before everything else, is to observe and apply
the written law; for if we once admit the possibility that the
judge (popular or trained) has to amend the law, all guarantee of
liberty is lost, and the authority of the individual is unlimited.
As I have said above, <p 185>we allow the authority of the judge
only when we have actual guarantees of his capacity and
independence, and always within the limits of the general precepts
of the law, and under the control of a superior disciplinary
power.

But the omnipotence of the jury, liberated from all reasonable
regulation, with no directing motives for its verdict, and no
possibility of control, is a two-edged blade, which may sometimes
improve upon the law, or at least usefully indicate to the
legislator the tendencies of public opinion in regard to a
particular crime.  But it may also violate the law, and the
liberty of the individual, and then we pay too dear for the slight
advantage which the jury can confer, and which might be replaced
by other manifestations of public opinion.  In any case, as
Bentham said, it is better to have our remedy in the law than in
the subversion of the law.

As for private conviction, we willingly admit that no system of
legal proof is acceptable.  But it is one thing to substitute for
the legal and artificial assurance of the law the assurance of the
judge who tries the case, and quite another thing to substitute
for conviction founded on argument, and for a critical examination
of the evidence collected during the trial, the blind and simple
promptings of instinct or sentiment.

Even apart from technical notions, which we consider necessary to
the physio-psychological trial of any accused person, social
justice certainly cannot be dispensed through the momentary and
unconsidered impressions of a casual juryman.  If a criminal trial
<p 186>consisted of the simple declaration that a particular
action was good or bad, no doubt the moral consciousness of the
individual would be sufficient; but since it is a question of the
value of evidence and the examination of objective and subjective
facts, moral consciousness does not suffice, and everything should
be submitted to the critical exercise of the intellect.

To the instinctive blindness of the judgment of juries we must add
their irresponsibility.

No doubt if the legislator required from all judges a simple Yes
or No, then perhaps the jury would be as good as the magistrate.
But instead of the unexplained verdict which Carmignani called
``the method of the cadi,'' we are of opinion that there should
always be substituted a sentence based on reasons and capable of
control, especially in the positive system of criminal procedure,
which demands from the judge an acquaintance with anthropology and
criminal sociology, and from his sentence the elements necessary
to the subsequent treatment of the convict, in agreement with the
characteristics of his individuality and of his crime.

But not only is the jury devoid of the qualities attributed to it;
it has a fatal defect, which alone is sufficient to condemn this
institution of the law.

In the first place, it is not easy to understand how a dozen
jurymen, selected at hazard, can actually represent the popular
conscience, which indeed frequently protests against their
decisions.  In any case, the fundamental conception of the jury is
that the mere fact of its belonging to the people gives it the
right to judge; and as the ancient assemblies are no <p 187>longer
possible, the essence of the jury is that chance alone must decide
the practical exercise of this popular prerogative.

Now these two conceptions of the jury are in manifest
contradiction with the universal rule of public end private life,
that social functions should be exercised by persons selected as
most capable.

Thus in everyday life we all require of every labourer the work of
which he is more particularly capable.  No one would dream, for
instance, of having his watch mended by a cobbler.  The
administration of criminal justice, on the contrary, is demanded
of any one we chance to come across, be he grocer or man of
independent means, painter or pensioner, who may never in his life
have witnessed a criminal trial!

The irregularity of our statutes corresponds to the incapacity of
individual jurymen; for it is evident that we cannot impose the
rigorous process of a special mode of procedure on the first-
comer.  And the law heightens the absurdity by plainly declaring
that juries must give their decision without regard to the
consequences of their verdict!  ``Jurymen fail in their highest
duty when they have regard to the penal law, and consider the
consequences which their verdict may have upon the accused''
(Article 342 of the French code of criminal procedure).

That is to say, criminal justice should be based on the neglect of
the elementary rule of justice, according to which every man ought
always to consider the possible consequences of his actions.  And
the criminal law demands from juries this proof of <p 188>their
blindness (which is fortunately impossible) that they should judge
blindfold, with no regard for the prisoner, or for the
consequences which their verdict may have upon him.

It was impossible that the advocates of the jury should fail to
see the absurdity of these principles; and they have been
compelled to slur them over, at any rate in ordinary practice.

In respect of the composition of juries, restrictions have been
introduced, by means of lists of eligible persons, selection by
lot, the optional exclusion of a certain number of jurymen by the
public prosecutor and the defence, &c.  All these expedients,
however, some of which are imposed by necessity, can only insure a
general and presumptive capacity, for they have the merely
negative effect of contributing to exclude the most manifest moral
or intellectual incapacity.  But the only capacity which is
necessary in a judge, which is a special and positive capacity, is
not guaranteed by these restrictions, which, after all, are a
negation of the very principle of the jury.

And even if the jury were always composed of persons of adequate
capacity, it would still be condemned by two inevitable arguments
of human psychology.

First, the assembling of several individuals of typical capacity
never affords a guarantee of collective capacity, for in
psychology a meeting of individuals is far from being equivalent
to the aggregate of their qualities.  As in chemistry the
combination of two gases may give us a liquid <p 189>so in
psychology the assembling of individuals of good sense may give us
a body void of good sense.  This is a phenomenon of psychological
fermentation, by which individual dispositions, the least good and
wise, that is the most numerous and effective, dominate the better
ones, as the rule dominates the exceptions.  This explains the
ancient saying, ``The senators are good men, but the Senate is a
mischievous animal.''

And this fact of collective inferiority, not to say degeneracy, is
observed in casual assemblies, such as juries, meetings, and the
like, far more than in organised and permanent councils of judges,
experts, &c.

Secondly, the jury, even when composed of persons of average
capacity, will never be able in its judicial function to follow
the best rules of intellectual evolution.

Human intelligence, in fact, both individual and collective,
displays these three phases of progressive development: common
sense, reason, and science, which are not essentially different,
but which differ greatly in the degree of their complexity.  Now
it is evident that a gathering of individuals of average capacity,
but not technical capacity, will in its decisions only be able to
follow the rules of common sense, or at most, by way of exception,
the rules of reason--that is, of their common mental habits, more
or less directed by a certain natural capacity.  But the higher
rules of science, which are still indispensable for a judgment so
difficult as that which bears on crimes and criminals, will always
be unknown to it.
<p 190>

As for the irregularity of the action of a jury, it has been
deemed that this can be provided against by the formal distinction
between a decision of fact and a decision of law, in obedience to
the advice of Montesquieu, that ``to the popular judgment we
should submit a single object, a fact, a single fact.''

But without dwelling on the remark of Hye-Glunek, that in this way
the legal problem, which ought to be as indivisible as the
syllogism which creates it, is cut into two parts, it is evident
that Cambac<e'>r<e!>s was amply justified in saying, in the
Council of State, that the separation of fact from law is a
fallacy.

In fine, not only under the positive system of criminal procedure,
which demands of the judge, in addition to legal conceptions of
crime, some anthropological and sociological knowledge of
criminals, but even at the present day it is more correct to say
that the jury is concerned with the crime--that is, in the words
of Binding, with a legal fact, and not merely a material fact;
whilst the judge is concerned with the punishment.  Thus, in the
Assize Court, the separation of the judgments is not between fact
and law, but only between the crime and the punishment

Even admitting the possibility of this separation of fact and law,
logic and experience have already belied the assertion of those
who say with Beccaria that, ``for the appreciation of facts,
ordinary intelligence is better than science, common sense better
than the highest mental faculties, and ordinary training better
than scientific.''
<p 191>

On the contrary, a criminal trial is not only concerned with the
direct perception of facts, but also and especially with their
critical reconstruction and psychological appreciation.  In civil
law the fact is really accessory, and both sides may be agreed in
its exposition, whilst disputing about the application of the law
to this fact.  But in criminal justice the fact is the principal
element, and it is not merely necessary to admit or to decide upon
this or that detail, but we have also to regard its causes and
effects, from the individual and the social point of view, without
speaking of the common difficulty of a critical and evidential
appreciation of a mass of significant circumstances.  So that, as
Ellero said, in a criminal trial the decision as to fact is far
more difficult than that as to law.  And by this time daily
practice has accumulated so many proofs, more or less scandalous,
of the incapacity of the jury even to appreciate facts, that it is
useless to dwell upon them.

To conclude this question of the jury, it remains to speak of its
defects, which are not the more or less avoidable consequences of
a more or less fortunate application of the principle, which might
be the case with any social institution, but, on the contrary, are
an inevitable consequence of the laws of psychology and sociology.

So far as science is concerned, a fact exists in connection with a
general law.  For common sense, on the other hand, the actuality
of the particular fact is the only matter of concern.  Hence the
inevitable tendency of the jury to be dominated by isolated
<p 192>facts, with no other guide than sentiment, which,
especially in southern races, confines all pity to the criminals,
whilst the crime and its victims are all but forgotten.  The very
keenness of sentiment which would urge the people to administer
``summary justice'' on the criminal, when surprised in the fact,
turns entirely in his favour when he is brought up at the assizes,
with downcast mien, several months after the crime.  Hence we
obtain an impassioned and purblind justice.

And the predominance of sentiment over the intelligence of the
jury is revealed in the now incurable aspect of judicial
discussions.  There is no need and no use for legal and
sociological studies and for technical knowledge; the only need is
for oratorical persuasiveness and sentimental declamations.  Thus
we have heard an advocate telling a jury that, ``in trials into
which passion enters, we must decide with passion.''  Hence, also,
the deterioration of science in the Assize Courts, and its faulty
application, and its completely erroneous consequences.

Moreover, the verdict of the jury cannot represent the sum of
spontaneous and individual convictions--not only in countries
where juries are exposed to all kinds of influences during the
adjournments of the discussion, but even in England, where
unanimity is required, and where all communication of the jury
with the outer world is forbidden until the end of the trial.  For
in every case the influence of the most intriguing or most
respected jurymen in the jury's room is always inevitable.  So
that we have even <p 193>had irresponsible suggestions of public
deliberation on the part of the jury.

Against these defects of the jury its advocates have set an
objection in regard to the trained judge, namely that the habit of
judging crimes and offences irresistibly inclines the judge to
look upon every prisoner as guilty, and to extinguish the
presumption of innocence even in cases where it would be most
justified.

This objection has really a psychological basis; for the
conversion of the conscious into the unconscious, and the
polarisation of the intellectual faculties and dispositions, are
facts of daily observation, determined by the biological law of
the economy of force.  But it is not sufficient to make us prefer
juries to judges.

In addition to the fact that this mental habit of judges may be
counteracted by a better selection of magistrates under the
reforms which I have indicated, it is to be observed that this
presumption of innocence, as we have seen, is not so absolute as
some would have us believe, especially in case of a trial which
follows upon a series of inquiries and proofs in; the preliminary
hearing.

Again, this tendency of judges is restrained and corrected by the
publicity of the discussions.  And all, or nearly all, the famous
and oft-repeated instances of judicial errors go back to the time
of the inquisitorial and secret trial--in regard to which an
interesting historical problem presents itself; that is to say the
co-existence of the inquisitorial trial, which impairs every
individual guarantee, with the political liberties of the
medi<ae>val Italian republics.
<p 194>

This is why the number of acquittals, and of the admission of
extenuating circumstances, is always very remarkable, even in the
Correctional Tribunals, which in Italy show proportions not
greatly differing from those of the Assize Courts.

We must remember that, under our modern penal procedure, it is not
the individual guarantees that are lacking, such as the assigning
of reasons for the sentence, the almost total abolition of
punishments which cannot be reconsidered, appeals, reversals,
revision, which would be still more efficacious under the positive
system which we propose.

One logical consequence of the psychological objection raised
against judges would be the granting of a jury even in the
Correctional Tribunals, though the experience which we have of it
in the Assize Courts is not so encouraging as to leave many
advocates of a jury in the minor courts.

But a decisive objection, founded on the most positive data of
sociology, can be raised against the jury.

The law of natural evolution proves that no variation in the
vegetable or animal organism is useful or durable which is not the
outcome of a slow and gradual preparation by organic forces and
external conditions.  Thus an organ which ceases to have a
function to discharge is subject to atrophy, and no new organ is
possible or capable of development if it is not required by a new
function to which it corresponds.

What has been said of organic variations is also true of social
institutions.  And when the jury is contemplated from this point
of view, we see that <p 195>it has been artificially grafted by a
stroke of the legislator's pen on the judicial institutions of the
continent, without the long-continued, spontaneous and organic
connections which it had, for instance, with the English people.
The jury had even disappeared from the continental countries in
which it had left traces of former existence; for it had not found
in the race-characteristics or the social organism that favourable
environment which is supplied in England by the natural groundwork
of institutions and principles which, as Mittermaier says, are its
necessary correlative.

The jury, as it has been politically established on the continent
of Europe, is what Spencer calls a false membrane in the social
organism, having no physiological connection with the rest of the
body politic.  So that it is not yet acclimatised, even in France,
after a century of uninterrupted trial.[18]



[18] The actual state of the law in Europe, so far as regards the
jury for common crimes and offences, is as follows:--England,
Scotland, Ireland, and Switzerland have the jury for assizes and
courts of first instance.  France, Italy, Cisleithan Austria,
Istria, Dalmatia, Rhenish Prussia, Alsace-Lorraine, Bavaria,
Bohemia, Gallicia, Belgium, Roumania, Greece, Portugal, Russia,
and Malta, have the criminal jury only.  Spain had suspended it,
but restored it in 1888.  Prussia, Saxony, Baden, Wurtemberg, have
the criminal jury and _echevins_ (bodies of citizens sitting with
the judges) for correctional and police cases.  Denmark, Sweden,
and Finland, have the _echevins_.  Holland, Norway, Hungary,
Slavonia, Poland, Servia, and Turkey, have neither juries nor
_echevins__.



As for the other bio-sociological law, of single organs for single
functions, it seems to me that if in England the jury and the
magistracy have been developed side by side and interwoven, this
is only a case of organic integration.  But on the continent, as
<p 196>the jury has been added artificially to the magistracy,
this is on the other hand a genuine example of non-natural growth.

And if it be said that the jury, as an advance from the
homogeneous to the heterogeneous, indicates a higher degree of
social evolution, we must draw a distinction between
differentiations which amount to evolution and those which, on the
contrary, are symptoms of dissolution.  Division of labour,
physiological or social, is a true evolutionary differentiation;
whilst modifications introduced by a disease in the animal
organism, or by a revolt in the social organism, are but the
beginning of a more or less extended dissolution.

Now the jury belongs to the domain of social pathology, for it is
essentially contrary to the law of the specialisation of
functions, according to which every organ which becomes more
adapted to a given task is no longer adapted to any other.  It is
only in the lower organisms that the same tissue or organ can
perform different functions, whilst in the vertebrates the stomach
can only serve for digestion, the lungs for oxygenation, and so
on.  Similarly in primitive societies, each individual is soldier,
hunter, tiller of the soil, &c., whilst with the progress of
social evolution every man performs his special function, and
becomes unfitted for other labours.  In the jury we have a return
to the primitive confusion of social functions, by giving to any
chance comer, who may be an excellent labourer, or artist, a very
delicate judicial function, for which he has no capacity to-day,
and will have no available experience to-morrow.
<p 197>

In modern societies, to tell the truth, there is another function
assigned to all citizens, outside of their special capacity, and
that is the electoral duty.  But the cases are very different.
The franchise does not demand a labour so difficult and delicate
as critical judgment, and the reconstruction of the conditions of
an act and of its author.  It has no direct influence on the
positive function of the person elected, but on the contrary it is
a confession of the special incapacity of the elector to do what
he intrusts to the capacity of the person elected.  The franchise
is but an elementary function of the assimilation of physiological
elements in the social organism, which in the animal organism is
performed by the aggregate of living cells, and in society by the
aggregate of individuals, not being idiots or criminals, who
possess the minimum of social energy.

Far different is the administration of criminal justice, a
technical and very noble function, which has nothing in common
with the elementary function of the franchise.  I could not indeed
agree with the assertion of Carrara, who thought it a
contradiction to deny to the people any participation in the
exercise of the judicial authority when they are allowed to
participate in the exercise of legislative authority.  In the
first place, the people have but a very indirect share in the
legislative function, and, even where the referendum exists, very
useful as I believe it to be, the people have only a simple,
almost negative function, to say Yes or No to a law which they
have not made, and would have had no technical ability to make.
Thus the argument of Carrara could <p 198>only lead to the popular
election of judges, as of legislators, and to a control by the
people of the administrative action of the judges when elected No
doubt this would have theoretical advantages, though in my opinion
it would raise practical difficulties, especially in nations which
do not possess a very keen conscience and political activity,
after enfeeblement by centuries of despotism, or of political and
administrative tutelage and centralisation.


The jury, then, is a retrogressive institution, as shown by
history and sociology, for it represents the medi<ae>val and
instinctive phase of criminal justice.  It has, indeed, a few
advantages (there is always a certain profit in misfortune),
especially when it operates on the final outcome of the classical
theories--bringing to bear, for instance, an irresistible force
against repeated theft, or murders committed at the instigation of
others.  And it has sometimes drawn attention to necessary penal
reforms, after accepting certain conclusions of the positive
school, such as the acquittal of criminals of passion, and
political prisoners, or a greater severity towards habitual
criminals.

But the only possible conclusion from the foregoing criticisms is
that the jury should be abolished for the trial of common crimes,
_*after_ the introduction of reforms which would ensure the
capacity and independence of the judges.

Meanwhile, since it is much easier to establish a new social
institution than to abolish one, it is worth while to indicate the
principal and most urgent reforms which should be made in the jury
system, so <p 199>as to eliminate its more serious and frequent
disadvantages.

The theoretical distinction of the classical school between
ordinary and political crimes is not very precise, for the so-
called political crimes are either not crimes (as when they are
confined to the manifestation of an idea), or they are common
crimes which spring from a lofty and social passion in
individuals, who have the characteristics of the criminal by
passion, or, in other words,--are but quasi-criminals; or else
they are common crimes committed by ordinary malefactors, under
the pretext of a popular idea.  Instead of distinguishing crimes,
I think we ought to distinguish between ordinary and political
criminals, according to their determining motives, and the social
bearings and historical moment of their acts.  At the same time,
whilst our criminal laws retain this distinction, I think it is
useful to keep the jury for the trial of political crimes and
offences, and for those connected with the press and with society
as a whole; for if in these cases the jury might yield to the
influence of class interests and prejudices (as for instance in
the trial of actions arising out of the conflict of capital and
labour), the danger will still be less than it would be with
judges alone, who are not sufficiently independent of the
executive, which in its turn is but the secular arm of the
dominant class, and which therefore combines the interests and
prejudices of the political order with those of the economic and
moral order which dominate the jury.

For common crimes it would be necessary to with<p 200>hold from a
jury the trial of prisoners who avow their crime.  The essence of
a trial by indictment is the principle that the discussion as to
punishment is a private affair, and it has no further ground for
existence when one of the parties withdraws from the duel.  Hence
the English mistrust of a prisoner's confession of guilt, which in
the inquisitorial trial, on the other hand, is a mainstay of the
evidence.  Yet I believe that in these cases the Scottish system
is preferable to the English.  In England the judge begins by
asking the prisoner if he is Guilty or Not Guilty, and in case of
a confession he passes sentence without a verdict from the jury.
In Scotland, on the contrary, the prosecutor can furnish his
proof, in spite of the confession of the prisoner, and demand a
verdict from the jury.  In this way it is possible to avoid not
only a scandalous acquittal of prisoners who have confessed their
guilt (as happens in Italy, France, and elsewhere), but also the
danger that the confession may not be true, and that an innocent
man may be condemned.

Juries ought, moreover, as proposed by M. Ellero, to specify
attenuating circumstances, on each of which a special question
ought to be put to them.

The jury ought also to have the right of spontaneously finding in
a sense less serious than that of the charge, even when no
corresponding question has been put to them.

But at the same time it cannot be denied that these would only be
palliatives, more or less efficacious.

The only positive conclusion is that, whilst retaining the jury
for crimes of the political and social <p 201>order, we should aim
at its abolition for common crimes, immediately after securing
stringent reforms as to the independence and capacity of the
judges.


IV.

It needs no further demonstration that the modern organisation of
punishment, based partly on the assumption that we can measure the
moral culpability of criminals, and partly on an illusion as to
their general amendment, and almost entirely reduced, in
consequence, to imprisonment and the cell system, has absolutely
failed to protect society against crime.

Holtzendorff, one of the best known of the classical school,
frankly confessed that ``the prison systems have made shipwreck.''
So also in Italy we have had disquisitions ``on the futility of
repression,'' and in Germany it has been held that ``existing
criminal law is powerless against crime.''  Thus the necessity of
taking steps to counteract this failure is forced upon us more and
more every day.  We must proceed either by way of legislative
reforms, as effectual as we can make them, but always inspired by
reaction against the established prison system, or by a propaganda
on scientific lines.  The most striking form which has been taken
by the latter process is the International Union of Penal Law,
which in 1891, two years after its foundation, numbered nearly six
hundred members of various nationalities, and which in the second
clause of its charter, in spite of the varied reservations of a
few members, notably supported the positive theories.

The defects of the penal system inspired by the <p 202>theories of
the classical school of criminal law, and by the actual
regulations of the classical prison school, may be briefly summed
up.  They are, a fallacious scale of moral responsibility;
absolute ignorance and neglect of the physio-psychological types
of criminals; intervals between verdict and sentence on the one
hand, and between the sentence and its execution on the other,
with a consequent abuse of pardons; disastrous practical effects
of corruption and of criminal association in prisons; millions of
persons condemned to short terms of imprisonment, which are
foolish and absurd; and a continuous, inexorable increase of
recidivism.

So that the tribunals of Europe, as M. Prins observed, with the
absolute impersonality of modern justice, allow their sentences to
fall upon unhappy wretches as a tap allows water to fall drop by
drop upon the ground.

Without counting fines or police detention, there were sentenced
in Italy, in the ten years 1880-89, to various terms of
imprisonment, 587,938 persons by the Pretors, and 465,130 by the
Correctional Tribunals.  That is, more than a million terms in the
minor courts within ten years!

And the total number sentenced in Italy to various punishments, by
Pretors, Tribunals, and Assize Courts, in the same ten years, was
not less than 3,230,000.

As for recidivism, without repeating the familiar figures of its
annual increase, it will suffice to recall the astounding fact to
which I drew attention before the central Commission of Legal
Judicial Statistics.  <p 203>That is to say, amongst the prisoners
condemned in 1887 for simple homicide, there were 224 who had been
already condemned, either _*for the same crime_ (63), or for a
crime mentioned in the same section of the penal code (181); and
even of those condemned for qualified manslaughter, 78 had already
been condemned, either _*for the same crime_ (8), or for one of
like character.

In France we have figures equally striking, for they relate not to
the effect of exceptional conditions, or conditions peculiar to
this or that country, but to the uniform consequence of the
classical theories of criminal law and prison organisation.

The total number condemned to imprisonment by the French
tribunals, and detained by the police, in the ten years 1879-88,
was 1,675,000; the Tribunal sentences under six days being
113,000.

And the total condemned to punishments of various kinds, by Assize
Courts, Tribunals, and police courts, reached in the same ten
years the enormous number of 6,440,000 individuals!

The meaning of this is that penal justice at the present moment is
a vast machine, devouring and casting up again an enormous number
of individuals, who lose amongst its wheels their life, their
honour, their moral sense, and their health, bearing thenceforth
the ineffaceable scars, and falling into the ever-growing ranks of
professional crime and recidivism, too often without a hope of
recovery.[19]



[19] As regards recidivism and the enormous numbers tried, England
is in as bad a position as Italy and France.  See my articles in
_Nineteenth Century__, 1892, and _Fortnightly Review__, 1894.--ED.



It is impossible, then, to deny the urgent necessity <p 204>of
substituting for our present penal organisation a better system
corresponding to the governing conditions of crime, more effectual
for social defence, and at the same time less gratuitously
disastrous for the individuals with whom it deals.

The positive school, in addition to the partial reforms proposed
by Lombroso, and by myself in the second edition of this work, has
put forward in the _Criminology_ of Garofalo a ``rational system
of punishment,'' whereof it is desirable to give a summary.


I.  MURDERERS (moral insensibility and instinctive
cruelty) who commit--

Murder for greed, or other selfish
     gratification                      Criminal Lunatic Asylums: or
Murder unprovoked by the victim             the death penalty.
Murder with attendant cruelty


II.  VIOLENT OR IMPULSIVE CHARACTERS (deficiency
of the sense of pity, with prejudices on the
subject of honour, on the duty of revenge, &c.).
Adults who commit--

Violent assault suddenly provoked       Removal of the offender from the
     by a cruel injury                      neighbourhood of the victim or
Justifiable homicide in self-defence        his family.

                                        Transportation to an island, colony
Homicide to avenge honour (isolated         or village--at liberty, under
     or endemic)                            supervision (for an indefinite
                                            period, with from 5 to 10 years
                                            supervision).

Bodily injury during a quarrel;         Damages and fine: heavy for such
     slight and transitory malice;          as can pay.  Alternative
     blows; threats; slander; verbal        penalty:--deduction from wages,
     insults                                or forced labour.  Imprisonment
                                            in case of refusal.

Malicious injury or disfigurement;       Criminal lunatic asylum (for
     mutilation; rape or outrage with       hysterical or epileptic), or
     violence; restraint on personal        Transportation for an indefinite
     liberty                                period, with supervision from 5
                                            to 10 years.

<p 205>
Young persons who commit--

                                           Criminal lunatic asylums (for
                                              those with congenital
Crimes of violence without excuse,            tendencies).
     or rape                               Penal colony in case of relapse.
                                           Transportation without constraint.

III.  DISHONEST CRIMINALS.  Adults who commit--

Habitual theft, swindling, incendiarism,    Lunatic asylums (if insane or
     forgery, extortion                         epileptic).  Transportation.

                                            Labour-gangs (unfixed periods);
Occasional theft; swindling;                   or suspension of right to exercise
forgery; extortion; incendiarism               a profession, until complete
                                               reparation of damage.

Peculation; embezzlement; sale of           Loss of office.  Suspension of
     offices; abuse of authority               civil rights.  Fine.  Restitution.

                                            Reparation of damage (with optional
Incendiarism; vindictive destruction           imprisonment).  Criminal
of property (without personal                  lunatic asylums (for the insane).
injury)                                     Transportation (for recidivists).

Bankruptcy, when due to malpractice          Restitution.  Prohibition to trade
                                                or to discharge public functions.

Uttering false coin; forgery of stock        Imprisonment (unfixed periods)
     and certificates; personation,             and fine, in addition to loss of
     false witness, &c.                         office, and restitution.

Bigamy, palming or concealment of            Banishment for unfixed periods.
     birth


Young persons who commit--

                                             An agricultural colony (for unfixed
Theft, swindling, &c.                           periods).


IV.  Persons guilty of--

Outbreaks, resistance or disobedience        Imprisonment (for unfixed periods)
     to authority



In other words, the system of repression proposed
by M. Garofalo amounts to this:--


<p 206>
Absolute elimination of the criminal
                                             Penalty of death

                                             Criminal lunatic asylum.
                                             Transportation with liberty.
                                             Perpetual banishment.
Relative elimination                         Banishment for various periods.
                                             Agricultural colonies.
                                             Interdiction from a particular
                                                neighbourhood.

                                             By payment of money.
Reparation of damages                        Deduction from wages.
Fine (going to the State)                    Forced labour, without
Indemnification of the victims                imprisonment.

Imprisonment for fixed periods for special offences (forgery and outbreaks);
     or as alternative to indemnification or forced labour.
Interdiction of certain professions and public functions.



M. Liszt also, agreeing with the positive school in regard to the
necessity of a radical reform in the penal system, yet with
certain reservations, has propounded a scheme, which, however, as
it does not sufficiently consider various classes of criminals,
whom he divides merely into the habitual and the occasional, would
need completion, especially in comparison with the well-reasoned
scheme of Garofalo.  M. Liszt's system is as follows:--

_Punishment by fines_.

In proportion to the property of the
     offender--not alternative with          For _offences_ (with alternative
     imprisonment                               imprisonment).

Capable of being worked out by               For _contraventions of the law_
     forced labour without imprisonment         (without imprisonment).

_Conditional sentences_.

For first offenders condemned to
     imprisonment, with or without           For _offences_ punishable by

sureties for three years                   imprisonment.

<p 207>
__Imprisonment_ (for an indeterminate period, a maximum and minimum

being enacted).
Separate confinement--six weeks to two years.

House of detention (separate for             2 to 15 years (with police
     one year, then gradual relaxation          supervision and assistance of
                                                discharged prisoners)--or for life.

_Indemnifications_ (always as a civil liability) added to other penalties.



I believe, however, that it is necessary, before laying down
practical and detailed schemes, more or less complete, to
establish certain general criteria, based upon the
anthropological, physical, and social data of crime, such as may
lead up to a positive system of social defence.

These fundamental criteria, it seems to me, can be reduced to the
three following:--(1) No fixity in the periods of segregation of
criminals; (2) the social and public character of the exaction of
damages; (3) the adaptation of defensive measures to the various
types of criminals.

1. For every crime which is committed, the problem of punishment
ought no longer to consist in administering a particular dose, as
being proportionate to the moral culpability of the criminal; but
it should be limited to the question whether by the actual
conditions (breach of law or infliction of injury) and by the
personal conditions (the anthropological type of the criminal) it
is necessary to separate the offender from his social environment
for ever, or for a longer or shorter period, according as he is or
is not regarded as capable of being restored to society, or
whether it is sufficient to exact from him a strict reparation of
the injury which he has inflicted.

Under this head there is a radical contradiction.  <p 208>The
existing schemes of punishment, differing in their machinery (and
out of harmony with the sentence of the judge, often even with the
terms of the law), are all based on the principle of fixed periods
of punishment, graduated into hundreds and thousands of possible
doses, and have regard far more to the crime than to the criminal.
On the other hand we have the positive system of punishment, based
on the principle of an _unfixed segregation_ of the criminal,
which is a logical consequence of the theory that punishment ought
not to be the visitation of a crime by a retribution, but rather a
defence of society adapted to the danger personified by the
criminal.

This principle of unfixed punishment is not new, but it is only
the positive theory which has given it system and life.  The idea
of justice as assigning punishment to a crime, measured out by
days and weeks, is too much opposed to the principle of the
indeterminate sentence to allow it to receive any systematic trial
under the sway of the classical theories.  There has been only an
isolated and exceptional use of it here and there, such as the
seclusion of mad criminals in special asylums, ``during her
Majesty's pleasure,'' in England.  Nevertheless, personal freedom
(which is held to be violated by seclusion for unfixed periods) is
greatly respected by the English people.

The fundamental principle of law is that of a restriction imposed
by the necessity of social existence.  It is evident, therefore,
to begin with, that seclusion for an unfixed period, as for life,
is in no way irreconcilable with this principle of law, when
<p 209>imposed by necessity.  Thus it has been proposed, even by
the classical school, as a mode of compensation or adjustment.

If, indeed, we admit an increase of punishment for a first
relapse, it is logical that this increase should be proportional
to the number of relapses, until we come to perpetual seclusion or
transportation, and even to death, as under the medi<ae>val laws.
So that there are some of the classical school who, by way of
being logical if not practical, and refusing to admit progressive
increase, begin by refusing increase in any degree, even for a
first relapse.

Moreover, if the jurists agree in allowing conditional liberation,
before the term assigned in the sentence, when the prisoner seems
to have given proof of amendment, the natural consequence, by mere
abstract logic, ought to be a prolongation of punishment for the
prisoner who is not amended, but continues to be dangerous.

This is admitted, amongst others, by Ortolan, Davesies de
Pont<e!>s, and Roeder, who quote as favourable, though only for
recidivists, Henke Stelzer, Reichmann, Mohl, Groos, von Struve,
von Lichtenberg, G<o:>tting, Krause, Ahrens, Lucas Bonneville,
Conforti, and others, amongst students of criminality; and
Ducpetiaux, Ferrus, Thomson, Mooser, Diez, Valentini, and D'Alinge
amongst prison experts.

After this first period, the principle of segregation for an
unfixed term, as a basis for the penal system, has been supported
by Despine, and developed by a few German writers.  These latter
have insisted <p 210>especially on the disadvantages of the penal
systems inspired by the classical theories, though they run
somewhat to excess, like Mittelst<a:>dt, who proposed the re-
establishment of the brutal punishment of flogging.

In corporal punishments, it is true, there would be a certain gain
of efficaciousness, particularly against such hardened offenders
as the born criminals, so that there is a reaction in favour of
these punishments.  M. Roncati, for instance, writing of prison
hygiene, says that he would be glad to see ``the maternal
r<e'>gime,'' with its salutary use of physical pain before the
child has developed a moral sense; and if flogging is
objectionable, resort might be had to electricity, which is
capable of giving pain without being dangerous to health or
revolting.  Similarly Bain says that the physiological theory of
pleasure and pain has a close relation to that of rewards and
punishments, and that, as punishment ought to be painful, so long
as it does not injure the convict's health (which imprisonment is
just as likely to do), we might have recourse to electric shocks,
which frighten the subject by their mysterious power, without
being repugnant.  Again, the English Commission of Inquiry into
the results of the law of penal servitude declared in its report
that, ``In English prisons, disciplinary corporal punishments
(formerly the lash, then the birch) are inflicted only for the
most serious offences.  The evidence has shown that in many cases
they produce good results.''

Nevertheless corporal punishments, as the main form of repression,
even when carried out with less <p 211>barbarous instruments, are
too deeply opposed to the sentiment of humanity to be any longer
possible in a penal code.  At the same time they are admissible as
disciplinary punishments, under the form of cold baths, electric
shocks, &c., all the more because, whether prescribed by law or
not, they are inevitable in prisons, and, when not regulated by
law, give rise to many abuses, as was shown at the Stockholm
Prison Conference in 1878.

I agree with Kirchenheim that Dr.  Kraepelin's scheme of seclusion
for unfixed periods is more practical and hopeful.  When the
measure of punishment is fixed beforehand, the judge, as Villert
says, ``is like a doctor who, after a superficial diagnosis,
orders a draft for the patient, and names the day when he shall be
sent out of hospital, without regard to the state of his health at
the time.''  If he is cured before the date fixed, he must still
remain in the hospital; and he must go when the time is up, cured
or not.

Semal reached the same conclusion in his paper on ``conditional
liberation,'' at the second Congress of Criminal Anthropology.

And this notion of segregation for unfixed periods, put forward in
1867 for incorrigible criminals by the Swiss Prison Reform
Association, has already made great progress, especially in
England and America, since the Prison Congress of London (1872)
discussed this very question of indefinite sentences, which the
National Prison Congress at Cincinnati had approved in the
preceding year.

In 1880 M. Garofalo and I both spoke in favour of
<p 212>indefinite segregation, though only for incorrigible
recidivists; and the same idea was strikingly supported in M. Van
Hamel's speech at the Prison Congress at Rome (1885).  The
eloquent criminal expert of Amsterdam, speaking ``on the
discretion which should be left to the judge in awarding
punishment,'' made a primary distinction between habitual
criminals, incorrigible and corrigible, and occasional criminals.
``For the first group, perpetual imprisonment should depend on
certain conditions fixed by law, and on the decision of the judge
after a further inquiry.  For the second group, the application of
an undefined punishment after the completion of the first sentence
will have to depend in the graver cases on the conditions laid
down by law, and in less serious cases upon the same conditions
together with the decision of the judge, who will always decide
from time to time, after further inquiry, as to the necessity for
prolonging the imprisonment.  For the third group, the judge will
have to be limited by law, in deciding the punishment, by special
maximums, and with a general minimum.''

The Prison Congress of Rome naturally did not accept the principle
of punishment for unfixed periods.  More than that, advancing on
the classical tendency, it decided that ``the law should fix the
maximum of punishment beyond which the judge may not in any case
go; and also the minimum, which however may be diminished when the
judge considers that the crime was accompanied by extenuating
circumstances not foreseen by the law.''

It is only of late years, in consequence of the reaction
<p 213>against short terms of imprisonment, that the principle of
segregation for unfixed periods has been developed and accepted by
various writers, in spite of the feeble objections of Tallack,
Wahlberg, Lamezan, von Jagemann, &c.

Apart, also, from theoretical discussion, this principle has been
applied in a significant manner in the United States, by means of
the ``indeterminate sentence.''  The House of Correction at Elmira
(New York) for young criminals carries into effect, with special
regulations of physical and moral hygiene, the indeterminate
imprisonment of young prisoners; and this principle, approved by
the Prison Congresses at Atalanta{sic} (1887), Buffalo (1888), and
Nashville (1889), has been applied also in the New York prisons,
and in the States of Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Minnesota, and
Ohio.

M. Liszt proposes that the indeterminate character of punishment
should be only relative, that is to say, limited between a minimum
and a maximum, these being laid down in the sentence of the judge.
Special commissions for supervising the administration of
punishment, consisting of the Governor of the prison, the Public
Prosecutor, the judge who heard the case, and two members
nominated by Government (instead of the court which passed
sentence, as proposed by Villert and Van Hamel), should decide on
the actual duration of the punishment, after having examined the
convict and his record.  Thus these commissions would be able to
liberate at once (with or without conditions) or to order a
prolongation of punishment, especially for habitual criminals.
<p 214>

With the formation of these commissions there might be associated
the prison studies and aid of discharged prisoners referred to on
a former page.

But I think that this proposal of M. Liszt is acceptable only for
commissions of supervision, or of the execution of punishment,
such as already exist in several countries, with a view solely to
prison administration and benevolence, and in which of course the
experts of criminal anthropology ought to take part, who, as I
have suggested, should be included in every preliminary criminal
inquiry.  As for the determination of the maximum and minimum in
such a sentence, I believe it would not be practicable; the acting
commissions might find it necessary to go beyond them, and it
would be opposed to the very principle of indeterminate
segregation.  The reason given by M. Liszt, that with this
provision the contrast with actual systems of punishment would be
less marked, does not seem to me decisive; for the principle we
maintain is so radically opposed to traditional theories and to
legislative and judicial custom that this optional passing of the
limits would avoid no difficulty, whilst it would destroy the
advantages of the new system.

In other words, when the conditions of the act committed and the
criminal who has committed it show that the reparation of the
damage inflicted is not sufficient by way of a defensive measure,
the judge will only have to pronounce in his sentence an
indefinite detention in the lunatic asylum, the prison for
incorrigibles, or the establishments for occasional criminals
(penal colonies, &c.).

The execution of this sentence will be rendered <p 215>definite by
successive steps, which will no longer be detached, as they now
are, from the action of the magistrate, and taken without his
knowledge, but will be a systematic continuation of his work.
Permanent commissions for the supervision of punishment, composed
of administrative functionaries, experts in criminal anthropology,
magistrates, and representatives of the Public Prosecutor and the
defence, would render impossible that desertion and oblivion of
the convict which now follow almost immediately on the delivery of
the sentence, with the execution of which the judge has nothing to
do, except to see that he is represented.  Pardon, or conditional
liberation, or the serving of the full punishment, are all left at
present to the chance of a blind official routine.  These
commissions would have great social importance, for they would
mean on one hand the protection of society against imprudent
liberation of the most dangerous criminals, and on the other hand
the protection of the less dangerous against the danger of an
imprisonment recognised as excessive and unnecessary.


Allied to the principle of indeterminate segregation is that of
conditional release, which with the progressive prison system,
known as the Irish, is now accepted in nearly all European
countries.  But conditional liberation in the system of definite
punishments, without distinction amongst the types of criminals,
is both contradictory in theory and ineffectual in practice.  At
present, indeed, it has only a mechanical and almost impersonal
applica<p 216>tion, with one fallacious test, that of the alleged
``good conduct'' of the prisoner, which, according to the English
Inquiry Commission in 1863, ``can only have the negative value of
the absence of grave breaches of discipline.''

It will be understood that conditional release, as it would be
organised in the positive system of indeterminate segregation,
ought only to be granted after a physio-psychological examination
of the prisoner, and not after an official inspection of
documents, as at present.  So that it will be refused, no longer,
as now, almost exclusively in regard to the gravity of the crime,
but in regard to the greater or less re-adaptability of the
criminal to social conditions.  It will therefore be necessary to
deny it to mad and born criminals who are guilty of great crimes.

Conditional liberation is now carried out under the special
supervision of the police; but this is an ineffectual measure for
crafty criminals, and disastrous for occasional criminals, who are
shut out by the supervision from re-adaptation to normal
existence.  The system of indeterminate segregation renders all
special supervision useless.  Moreover, this duty only distracts
policemen by compelling them to keep an eye on a few hundred
liberated convicts, and to neglect thousands of other criminals,
who increase the number of unknown perpetrators of crime.

Similarly as to the discharged prisoners' aid societies, which,
notwithstanding their many sentimental declamations, and the
excellence of their intentions, continue to be as sterile as they
are benevolent.  The reason here also is that they <p 217>forget
to take into account the different types of criminals, and that
they are accustomed to give their patronage impartially to all
discharged prisoners, whether they are reclaimable or not.  It
must not be forgotten, moreover, that this aiding of malefactors
ought not to be exaggerated when there are millions of honest
workmen more unfortunate than these liberated prisoners.  In spite
of all the sentimentalism of the prisoners' aid societies, I
believe that a foreman will always be in the right if he chooses
an honest workman for a vacancy in his workshops in preference to
a discharged prisoner.

At the same time these societies may produce good results if they
concern themselves solely with occasional criminals, and
especially with the young, and make their study of crime
contribute to the training of future magistrates and pleaders.


2. The second fundamental principle of the positive system of
social defence against crime is that of indemnification for
damage, on which the positive school has always dwelt, in
combination with radical, theoretical, and practical reforms.

Reparation of damage suffered by the victims of crime may be
regarded from three different points of view:--(1) As an
obligation of the criminal to the injured party; (2) as an
alternative for imprisonment for slight offences committed by
occasional criminals; and (3) as a social function of the State on
behalf of the injured person, but also in the indirect and not
less important interest of social defence.
<p 218>

The positive school has affirmed the last two reforms--the second
on the initiative of Garofalo and Puglia, and the third on my own
proposal, which, as being more radical, has been more sharply
contested by the classical and eclectic schools.

In my treatise on ``The Right of Punishment as a Social
Function,'' I said:  ``Let us not be told that __civil__
reparation is no part of _penal_ responsibility.  I can see no
real difference between the payment of a sum of money as a fine
and its payment as damages; but more than that, I think a mistake
has been made in separating civil and penal measures too
absolutely, whereas they ought to be conjoined for defensive
purposes, in preventing certain particular anti-social acts.''
And again, classifying the measures of social defence (``measures
of prevention, reparation, repression, and elimination''), I said
in regard to measures of reparation:  ``Our proposed reform is not
intended to be theoretical merely, for indeed it may be said
already that this liability to indemnify is established in the
majority of cases; but it should be above all a practical reform,
in the sense that, instead of separating civil and penal measures,
we shall make their joint application more certain, and even
require special regulations to compel the criminal judges, for
instance, to assess the damages, and so avoid the delays and
mischances of a new trial before the civil judges, and to compel
the Public Prosecutor to make an official demand, even when
through ignorance or fear there is no action on the part of the
injured person, that the criminal should be condemned to make good
the loss which he has <p 219>inflicted.  It will then be seen that
the fear of having to make strict restitution will be a spur to
the diligence of the well-to-do, in regard to involuntary
offences, whilst for the poor we shall be able to impose work on
behalf of the injured person in place of pecuniary damages.''

Shortly afterwards Garofalo wrote:  ``In the opinion of our
school, for many offences, especially slighter offences against
the person, it would be serviceable to substitute for a few days'
imprisonment an effectual indemnification of the injured party.
Reparation of damage might become a genuine penal substitute, when
instead of being, as now, a legal consequence, a right which can
be enforced by the rules of civil procedure, it would become an
obligation from which the accused could in no way extract
himself.''

Of all the positive school, Garofalo has insisted most strongly on
these ideas, enlarging upon them in various proposals for the
practical reform of procedure.

The principle has made further progress since the speech of M.
Fioretti at the first Congress of Criminal Anthropology (Rome,
1885), which adopted the resolution brought forward by MM. Ferri,
Fioretti, and Venezian:  ``The Congress, being convinced of the
importance of providing for civil indemnification, in the
immediate interest, not only of the injured party, but also of
preventive and repressive social defence, is of opinion that
legislation could most expeditiously enact the most suitable
measures against such as cause loss to other persons, and against
their accomplices and abettors, by treating the recovery of
damages as a social function as<p 220>signed to its officials,
that is to say, to the Public Prosecutor at the bar, to the judges
in their sentences, to the prison officials in the ultimate
payment for prison labour, and in the stipulation for conditional
release.''

The classical principle that indemnification for loss caused by an
unlawful act is a purely civil and private obligation of the
offender (like that created by any breach of contract!), and that
in consequence it ought to be essentially distinct from the penal
sentence which is a public reparation, has inevitably caused the
complete oblivion of indemnification in every-day judicial
practice.  For the victims of crime, finding themselves compelled
to resort to the courts, and fearing the expense of a civil trial
to give effect to the sentence of damages and interest thereon,
have been driven to abandon the hope of seeing their loss actually
and promptly compensated.  Hence the necessity for some paltry
compromise, which has to be accepted almost as a generous
concession from the offender, together with the revival of private
vengeance, and a loss of confidence in the reparatory action of
social justice.

Even in the scientific domain it has come about that criminal
experts have abandoned the question of indemnification to the
civil experts, and these in their turn have almost suffered it to
pass into oblivion, inasmuch as they always regarded it as
belonging to matters of penal law and procedure.

It is only by the radical innovation of the positive school that
this legal custom has received new energy and vitality.
<p 221>

I do not, however, intend in this place to concern myself with
indemnification from the first point of view, namely, the forms of
procedure necessary to render it more strict and effectual, such
as the official demand and execution by the Public Prosecutor,
even when no action is brought by the injured party; the fixing of
the damages in every penal sentence; the immediate lien and claim
upon the goods of the condemned person, so as to avoid the
pretence of inability to pay; the paying down of the sum, or a
part of the salary or wages of solvent defendants; compulsory
labour by those unable to pay; the assignment of part of the
prison wages for the benefit of the victims; the payment of all or
most of the damages as a necessary condition of pardon or
conditional release; the establishment of a treasury of fines for
prepayment to the family of the victims; the liability of the
heirs of the condemned persons for indemnifications, and so forth.

All these propositions are in sharp contrast with Art. 37 of the
new Italian penal code, which has given no other guarantee to the
victims of offences than the superfluous, or ironical, or immoral
declaration that ``penal condemnation does not prejudice the right
of the injured person to restitution and indemnification''--as
though there were any doubt of the fact.

I only wish to insist on the question of principle, that is, on
the essentially public character which we assign to
indemnification as a social function.  For us, to compare the
liability of the criminal to repair the loss caused by his crime
with the liability arising from breach of contract is simply
immoral.
<p 222>

Crime, just as it implies a social reaction in the form of an
indefinite segregation of the criminal, when the act is serious
and the author dangerous, ought also to imply a social reaction in
the shape of indemnification, accessory to segregation when that
is necessary, or adequate by itself for social defence when the
act is not serious, and the author is not dangerous.  For slight
offences by occasional criminals, strict indemnification will, on
the one hand, avoid the disadvantages of short terms of
imprisonment, and will, on the other hand, be much more
efficacious and sensible than an assured provision of food and
shelter, for a few days or weeks, in the State prisons.

Indemnification may naturally take two forms, as a fine or an
indemnity payable to the State, and as an indemnity or a
reparation payable to the injured person.

It may also be added that the State should be made responsible for
the rights of the victims, and give them immediate satisfaction,
especially for crimes of violence, recouping itself from the
offender, as it does, or ought to do, for legal costs.

The evolution of punishment is a striking proof of this.  First,
the reaction against crime is an entirely private concern; then it
assumes a weaker form in pecuniary reparation, whereof, by and by,
a portion goes to the State, which presently retains the whole
sum, leaving to the victim the poor consolation of proceeding
separately for an indemnification.  Nothing therefore could be
more in accord with this evolution of punishment than the proposed
reform, whereby <p 223>the indemnification of a merely private
injury, as it is regarded in the primitive phase of penal justice,
becomes a public function, so far as it is the legal and social
consequence of the offence.

The classical principles in this respect, and the practical
consequences which flow from them, are more like a humorous farce
than an institution of justice; and it is only the force of habit
which prevents the world from realising its full comicality.

In fine, citizens pay taxes in return for the public services of
the State, amongst which that of public security is the chief.
And the State actually expends millions every year upon this
social function.  Nevertheless, every crime which is committed is
followed by a grotesque comedy.  The State, which is responsible
for not having been able to prevent crime, and to give a better
guarantee to the citizens, arrests the criminal (if it can arrest
him--and seventy per cent. of _*discovered_ crimes go unpunished).
Then, with the accused person before it, the State, ``which ought
to concern itself with the lofty interests of eternal justice,''
does not concern itself with the victims of the crime, leaving the
indemnification to their prosaic ``private interest,'' and to a
separate invocation of justice.  And then the State, in the name
of eternal justice, exacts from the criminal, in the shape of a
fine payable into the public treasury, a compensation for its own
defence--which it does not secure, even when the crime is only a
trespass upon private property!

Thus the State, which cannot prevent crime, and can only repress
it in a small number of cases, and <p 224>which fails accordingly
in its first duty, for which the citizens pay it their taxes,
demands a price for all this!  And then again the State,
sentencing a million and a half to imprisonment within ten years,
puts the cost of food and lodging on the shoulders of the same
citizens, whom it has failed either to defend or to indemnify for
the loss which they have suffered!  And all in the name of eternal
retributive justice.

This method of ``administering justice'' must be radically
altered.  The State must indemnify individuals for the damage
caused by crimes which it has not been able to prevent (as is
partially recognised in cases of public disaster), recouping
itself from the criminals.

Only then shall we secure a strict reparation of damage, for the
State will put in motion its inexorable fiscal machinery, as it
now does for the recovery of taxes; and on the other hand the
principle of social community of interests will be really admitted
and applied, not only against the individual but also for him.
For we believe that if the individual ought to be always
responsible for the crimes which he commits, he ought also to be
always indemnified for the crimes of which he is the victim.

In any case, as the indefinite segregation of the criminal is the
fundamental principle of the positive system of social defence
against crime, apart from the technical systems of imprisonment
and detention, so indemnification as a social function is a second
essential principle, apart from the special rules of procedure for
carrying it into effect.
<p 225>

These two fundamental principles of the positive system would
still be incomplete if they did not come into practical operation
according to a general rule, which leads up to the practical
organisation of social defence--that is to say, the adaptation of
defensive measures to the various criminal types.

The tendency of the classical theories on crime and prison
discipline is in sharp contrast, for their ideal is the
``uniformity of punishment'' which lies at the base of all the
more recent penal codes.

If for the classical school the criminal is but an average and
abstract type, the whole difference of treatment is, of course,
reduced to a graduation of the ``amount of crime'' and the
``amount of punishment.''  And then it is natural that this
punitive dosing should be more difficult when the punishments are
different in kind, and not very similar in their degrees of
coincident afflictive and correctional power.  Thus the ideal
becomes a single punishment, apportioned first by the legislature
and then by the judge, in an indefinite number of doses.

Here and there a solitary voice has been heard, even amongst the
classical experts, objecting to this tendency towards dogmatic
uniformity; but it has had no influence.  The question brought
forward by M. D'Alinge at the Prison Congress in London
_(Proceedings_, 1872, p. 327), ``whether the moral classification
of prisoners ought to be the main foundation of penitentiary
systems, either in association or on the cellular plan,'' which he
himself decided in the affirmative, was not so much as discussed,
and it was not even referred to at the <p 226>successive
Congresses at Stockholm (1878), Rome (1885), and St. Petersburg
(1889).  On the contrary, the Congress at Stockholm decided that,
``reserving minor and special punishments for certain slight
infractions of the law, or for such as do not point to the corrupt
nature of their authors, it is desirable to adopt for every prison
system the greatest possible legal assimilation of punishments by
imprisonment, with no difference except in their duration, and the
consequences following upon release.''[20]



[20] _Proceedings__, i. 138-70, 551-7, 561-3.  Now and then,
however, a prison expert of more positive tendencies maintains
``the very great use, or rather the scientific necessity, of the
classification of prisoners as a basis for the punitive and prison
system'' (Beltrani Scalia.)



To positivists, the ``uniformity of punishment,'' even of mere
detention, appears simply absurd, since it ignores the capital
fact of different categories of criminals.

There must be homogeneity between the evil and its remedy; for, as
Dumesnil says, ``the prisoner is a moral (I would add a physical)
patient, more or less curable, and we must apply to him the great
principles of the art of medicine.  To a diversity of ills we must
apply a diversity of remedies.''

In this connection, however, we must avoid the two extremes,
uniformity of punishment and the so-called individualisation of
punishment, the latter especially in fashion amongst American
prison experts.  No doubt it would be a desirable thing to apply a
particular treatment to each convict, after a physical and
psychological study of his individuality, and of the conditions
which led him into crime; but this is not practicable when the
number of prisoners is <p 227>very great, and the managing staff
have no adequate notions of criminal biology and psychology.  How
can a governor individualise the penal treatment of four or five
hundred prisoners?  And does not the cellular system, which
reduces the characteristic manifestations of the personal
dispositions of prisoners to a minimum, levelling them all by the
uniformity of routine and silence, render it impossible to observe
and get to know the special character of each condemned person,
and so specialising the discipline?  Where, too, are we to find
the necessary governors and warders who would know how to
discharge this difficult duty?  The solid fact that particular
houses of correction or punishment are in excellent condition when
their governors have the psychological intuition of a De Metz, a
Crofton, a Spagliardi, or a Roukawichnikoff, and languish when he
departs, strikingly demonstrates that the whole secret of success
lies in the spirit of a wise governor, skilled in psychology,
rather than in the slender virtue of the cell.

Just as an imperfect code with good judges succeeds better than a
``monumental'' code with foolish judges, so a prison system,
however ingenious and symmetrical, is worthless without a staff to
correspond.

And as the question of the staff is always very serious,
especially for financial reasons, I believe that, instead of the
impracticable idea of individualisation in punishment, we ought to
substitute that of classification, which is equally efficacious
and more easily applied.  It cannot be denied that criminal
anthropologists are not all agreed on the classification of
<p 228>criminals.  But I have already shown that the differences
between proposed classifications are only formal and of secondary
importance; and again, the number of those who agree to the
classification which I have proposed increases day by day.

Before inquiring how we can practically organise the positive
system of social defence on the basis of this anthropological
classification of criminals, we must bear in mind two rules,
common to all the technical proposals of the same system.

First, care must be taken that segregation does not become or
continue to be (as it is too often at present) a welcome refuge of
idleness and criminal association, instead of a deprivation.

Penitentiaries for condemned prisoners--the classical prison
experts make no distinction between their cells for prisoners
before trial and those for convicts!--should not be so comfortable
as to excite the envy (a vast injustice and imprudence) of the
honest and ill-fed rural labourer vegetating in his cottage, or of
the working-man pining in his garret.

Secondly, the obligation to labour should be imperative for all
who are in prison, except in case of sickness.  Prisoners should
pay the State, not as now for their tobacco and wine, but for
food, clothes, and lodging, whilst the remainder of their earnings
should go to indemnify their victims.

The classical theory declares that ``the State,'' as Pessina
writes, ``being compelled to adopt deprivation of liberty as the
principal means of penal repression and retribution, contracts an
absolute <p 229>obligation to provide those whom they punish in
this way not only with bodily sustenance, but also with the means
of supplying their intellectual and moral needs.''  So the State
maintains in idleness the majority even of those who are said to
be ``sentenced to hard labour,'' and the offence, after it has
served the turn of the offender, further assures him free lodging
and food, shifting the burden on to honest citizens.

I cannot see by what moral or legal right the crime ought to
exempt the criminal from the daily necessity of providing for his
own subsistence, which he experienced before he committed the
crime, and which all honest men undergo with so many sacrifices.
The irony of these consequences of the classical theories could
not, in fact, be more remarkable.  So long as a man remains
honest, in spite of pathetic misery and sorrow, the State takes no
trouble to guarantee for him the means of existence by his labour.
It even bans those who have the audacity to remind society that
every man, by the mere fact of living, has the right to live, and
that, as work is the only means of obtaining a livelihood, every
man has the right (as all should recognise the duty) of working in
order to live.

But as soon as any one commits a crime, the State considers it its
duty to take the utmost care of him, ensuring for him comfortable
lodging, plenty of food, and light labour, if it does not grant
him a happy idleness!  And all this, again, in the name of eternal
and retributive justice.

It may be added that our proposals are the only <p 230>way of
settling the oft-recurring question as to the economic competition
(by the price of commodities), and the moral competition (in the
regularity of work) which prison labour unjustly wages with free
and honest labour.  As a matter of fact, as prisoners can only
remain idle or work, they must clearly be made to work.  But they
must be made to work at trades which come less into competition
with free labour and it is especially necessary to give prisoners
wages equal to those of free labourers, on condition that they pay
the State for their food, clothes, and lodging, whilst the
remainder goes to indemnify their victims.

Over the prison gates I should like to carve that maxim of
universal application:  ``He who will not work, neither shall he
eat.''



V.

Since the novel proposals put forward half a century ago, amongst
others by doctors Georget and Brierre de Boismont, a whole library
of volumes has been published in favour of criminal lunatic
asylums.  A few voices here and there were heard in opposition or
reserve, but these have almost entirely ceased.

Criminal lunatic asylums were adopted in England as early as 1786.
In 1815 Bethlehem Hospital was appropriated to criminal lunatics,
and the Broadmoor Asylum was founded in 1863.  Similar asylums
exist at Dundrum in Ireland (1850), at Perth in Scotland (1858),
at New York (1874), and in Canada (1877).

On the continent of Europe there is not to this day a regular
asylum for mad criminals, though France, <p 231>after an
experiment in treating condemned madmen at Bic<e^>tre, opened a
separate wing for them in the prison at Gaillon.  Holland has
assigned to them the hospital of Bosmalen (Brabant); Germany has
special wards in the establishments at Waldheim, Bruchsaal, Halle,
and Hamburg; and Italy, after founding a special ward in 1876, at
the establishment for relapsed prisoners at Aversa, has converted
the Ambrogiana establishment at Montelupo in Tuscany, into an
asylum for insane convicts, and for prisoners under observation as
being of unsound mind.  The new Italian penal code, though not
openly recognising the foundation of asylums for criminals
acquitted on the ground of insanity, has, in its general spirit of
eclecticism, given judges the power of handing them over to the
competent authority when it would be dangerous to release them
(Art. 46).  At the Montelupo Asylum criminals acquitted on the
ground of insanity are also detained, at first under observation,
then by a definite order from the president of the Tribunal, who
can revoke his order on the petition of the family, or of the
authorities.

The inquiry into existing legislation on insane criminals,
undertaken by the ``Soci<e'>t<e'> G<e'>n<e'>rale des prisons de
Paris,'' showed that in France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Croatia,
Belgium, Portugal, and Sweden, the authors of crimes or offences
who are acquitted on the ground of insanity are withdrawn from all
control by the judicial authority, and entrusted to the more or
less regular and effectual control of the administrative
authority.  In England, <p 232>Holland, Denmark, Spain, and
Russia, on the contrary, the judicial authority is empowered and
even compelled to order the seclusion of these individuals in an
ordinary or a criminal lunatic asylum.


Of the objections raised against this form of social defence
against insane criminals, I pass over that of the cost, which is
considerable; for even from the financial point of view I believe
that the actual system, which gives no guarantee of security
against madmen with criminal tendencies, is more costly to the
administration, if only by reason of the damage which they cause.
I also pass over the other objection, based on the violent scenes
which are said to be inseparable from the association of such
prisoners; for experience has shown that forebodings are ill
founded in regard to criminal asylums where the inmates are
classified according to their tendencies, under the direction of a
staff with special knowledge, who are able to prevent such
outbreaks.  In ordinary asylums, on the other hand, a few insane
criminals are sufficient to render the maintenance of order very
difficult, and their inevitable and frequent outbreaks have dire
effects on the other patients.

The most serious and repeated difficulties in regard to lunatic
asylums spring from the very principles of the defensive function
of society.

It is said in the first place that the author of a dangerous
action is either a madman or else a criminal.  If he is a madman,
he has nothing to do with penal justice--so Fabret, Mendel, and
others have said; his action is not a crime, for he had no
<p 233>control over himself, and he ought to go to an ordinary
asylum, special measures being taken for him, as for every other
dangerous madman.  Or else he is a criminal, and then he has
nothing to do with a lunatic asylum, and he ought to go to prison.

But there is a fallacy in this dilemma, for it leaves out the
intermediate cases and types, where particular individuals are at
the same time mad and criminal.  And even if it were a question of
madmen only, the logical consequence would not be to bar out
special asylums, for it seems clear that if ordinary madmen (not
criminals, that is, not the authors of dangerous actions) ought to
go to an ordinary asylum, criminal madmen, or madmen with a
tendency to commit dangerous or criminal actions, as well as those
who have committed them, ought to go to a special asylum for this
category of madmen.  For, on the other hand, we constantly see
that administrative authorities which observe the same rules for
the seclusion of ordinary and criminal madmen do not prevent the
release of the latter, some time after the crime, when the
disturbance of mind and even the recollection of the deed are all
but effaced; and criminal madmen commit other violent or
outrageous excesses, very soon after they are left exposed to
their diseased tendencies.[21]



[21] M. Lunier, writing in 1881 of epileptics, and the method of
treatment and aid appropriate to them, says that of 33,000 known
epileptics in France, 5,200 only are in private or public asylums,
whilst 28,000 remain with their families.  From these figures it
would appear very probable that these 28,000 epileptics left at
liberty commit crimes and offences.


It may be answered that it is sufficient to have <p 234>special
wings in ordinary asylums, which would also get over the
repugnance of families against the association of their quiet and
harmless patients with murderous and outrageous madmen.  But
experience has already proved that these special wards do not work
well, for it is too difficult with the same staff to apply such
varied treatment and discipline as are necessary for ordinary and
criminal lunatics.

Fabret says that ``a so-called criminal, when he is seen to be
mad, should cease to be regarded as a criminal, and ought purely
and simply to resume his ordinary rights.''

But, in the first place, if a madman is distinguished from all
other inoffensive madmen by the grave fact of having killed, or
burned, or outraged, it is clear that he cannot ``purely and
simply'' return to the same kind of treatment which is given to
harmless lunatics.

The truth is that this argument applies to a large number of ideas
which science is continually weeding out, and which have proceeded
on the assumption that madness is an involuntary misfortune which
must be treated, and that crime is a voluntary fault which must be
chastised.  It is evident on the other hand that crime as well as
folly, being the result of abnormal conditions of the individual,
and of the physical and social environment, is always a question
for social defence, whether it is or is not accompanied in the
criminal by a more or less manifest and clinical form of mental
malady.

The same reply holds good for the second objection to asylums for
criminal madmen, when it is said that <p 235>a madman cannot, for
the sole reason that he has killed or stolen, be shut up
indefinitely, perhaps for ever, in an asylum.

Mancini, who was keeper of the seals, and at the same time a great
criminal pleader, aptly expressed the ideas of the classical
school when replying to an interpellation of Deputy Righi on the
foundation of criminal lunatic asylums:--``I could never
understand how the same court, which is obliged by law to acquit
upon a verdict of the jury that the accused is insane, and
therefore not responsible, could also decree the compulsory
seclusion in an asylum, for any period, of the same accused
person. . . .  Is it because he has committed a crime?  But that
is not true, for the man who did not know what he was doing, and
who for that reason has been declared innocent before the law, and
irresponsible, cannot have committed a crime.  There is
consequently no legal reason why he should lose the exercise and
enjoyment of that liberty which is not denied to any other
unfortunate beings who are diseased like himself.''

It would be impossible to put more clearly the pure classical
theory on crime and punishment; but perhaps it would be equally
impossible to show less solicitude for social defence against
criminal attacks.  For it is certain that the mad murderer ``has
committed no crime'' from the ethical and legal point of view of
the classical school; but it is still more certain that there is a
dead man, and a family left behind who may be ruined by the deed,
and it is very probable that this homicide, ``innocent before the
law,'' <p 236>will renew his outrage on other victims--and at any
rate they are innocent.

And as for the indefinite period of seclusion in an asylum, it is
well to remember, from the point of view of individual rights,
that the formula with which a mad criminal is committed to an
asylum ``during her Majesty's pleasure'' had its origin in
England, in the classic land of the _habeas corpus_--the sheet
anchor of the ordinary citizen.  Again, it is easy to see that the
indefinite seclusion of mad criminals is rendered necessary by the
same reasons which create the fundamental rule for criminals of
every kind.  It may therefore come to a question of allowing or
disallowing the general principles of the positive school.  But it
cannot be denied that they are unassailable, both in theory and in
practice.  Crime is a phenomenon as natural as madness--the
existence of society compels the organised community to defend
itself against every anti-social action of the individual--the
only difficulty is to adapt the form and duration of this self-
defence to the form and intensity (the motives, conditions, and
consequences) of the action.  Indefinite seclusion, therefore, in
a special establishment is inevitable on account of the special
condition of these individuals.

The practical considerations of social defence are so strong that
the great majority of classical criminal experts now accept
criminal lunatic asylums, in spite of their manifest contradiction
of the formal theories of moral responsibility, on the strength of
which these asylums were, and still are, opposed by the
intransigents of the classical school.  This is why the new
<p 237>Italian penal code, in spite of its progressive aim, had
not the courage in 1889 to adopt them frankly; and in the
definitive text, as in the ministerial draft, it took refuge in an
eclectic arrangement which has already met with a crowd of
obstacles, due to the vagueness of the principles inspiring the
code.

These criminal lunatic asylums ought to be of two kinds, differing
in their discipline, one for the insane authors of serious and
dangerous crimes, such as homicide, incendiarism, rape, and the
like; and the other for slighter crimes, such as petty theft,
violent language, outrages on public decency, and the like.  For
the latter, seclusion should be shorter than for the others.  Thus
in England convicts are sent to the State Asylum at Broadmoor,
whilst minor offenders are sent to a county asylum.

Persons thus confined should be (1) prisoners acquitted on the
ground of insanity, or sentenced for a fixed period, at the
preliminary inquiry; (2) convicts who become insane during the
expiation of their sentence; (3) insane persons who commit crimes
in the ordinary asylums; (4) persons under observation for weak
intellect in special wards, who have been put on their trial, and
given grounds for suspecting madness.

At Broadmoor, on December 31, 1867, there were 389 male patients
and 126 female; and in 1883 there were 381 males and 132 females,
thus classified:--

    Mad Criminals.          Male.   Female.
Murder  ... ... ... ... ... 155 ... 85
Attempted murder    ... ... ... 111 ... 18
Parricide   ... ... ... ... ... 7   ... 6
Theft   ... ... ... ... ... 23  ... 3

<p 238>

Mad Criminals.          Male.   Female.
Incendiarism    ... ... ... ... 24  ... 1
Military offences   ... ... ... 21  ... --
Attempted suicide   ... ... ... 3   ...



In Germany, in the prison at Waldheim, the proportion of mad
criminals to the corresponding classes of ordinary criminals was
as follows:--
                                    Percentage
            Crimes.             In Prison.  Insane.
Homicide, actual or attempted   ... 74      ...  17.6
Murder and malicious wounding   ... 51      ...  9.8
Highway robbery with violence   ... 64      ... 12.5
Incendiarism    ... ... ... ... ... 219     ... 6.8
Rape    ... ... ... ... ... ... 52      ... 5.8
Indecent assault... ... ... ... 299     ... 5.7
Perjury ... ... ... ... ... ... 220     ... 2.7
Military crimes ... ... ... ... 23      ... 21.7
Crimes against property ... ... ... 5,116   ... 1.9
Other offences  ... ... ... ... 158     ... 0.6
                                ----        ----
                Total   ... ... 6,276   ... 2.7



That is to say, there was (1) a very large proportion of madmen
amongst the military offenders, which may point to the effect of
military life, or else a careless selection for conscription, or
both causes taken together; and (2) a greater proportion of mad
criminals amongst the more serious offenders, partly because the
authors of crimes of violence are subjected to more strict and
frequent observation for madness.

It seems to me that this fact, which is also confirmed by the
figures for England, is the most cogent argument in favour of
criminal lunatic asylums.


For born criminals, since, as Dr. Maudsley says, we are face to
face, if not exactly with a degenerate species, at least with a
degenerate variety of the <p 239>human species, and the problem is
to diminish their number as much as possible, a preliminary
question at once arises, namely, whether the penalty of death is
not the most suitable and efficacious form of social defence
against the anti-social class, when they commit crimes of great
gravity.

It is a question which for a century past has divided the criminal
experts and wearied the general public, with perhaps more
sentimental declamations than positive contributions; a question
revived by the positive school, which, however, only brought it
forward, without discussing it, at the first Congress on Criminal
Anthropology at Rome; whilst it has been recently settled by the
new Italian penal code, which is the first code amongst the
leading States to decree (January 1, 1890) the legal abolition of
the death penalty, after its virtual abolition in Italy since the
year 1876, except for military crimes.

Amongst the classical experts, as amongst the positivists, there
are those who would abolish and those who would retain the death
penalty; but the disagreement on this subject is not equally
serious in the two camps.  For whilst the classical abolitionists
almost all assert that the death penalty is inequitable, the
positivists are unanimous in declaring it legitimate, and only a
few contest its practical efficacy.

It seems to me that the death penalty is prescribed by nature, and
operates at every moment in the life of the universe.  Nor is it
opposed to justice, for when the death of another man is
absolutely necessary it is legitimate, as in the cases of lawful
self-<p 240>defence, whether of the individual or of society,
which is admitted by classical abolitionists such as Beccaria and
Carrara.

The universal law of evolution shows us also that vital progress
of every kind is due to continual selection, by the death of the
least fit in the struggle for life.  Now this selection, in
humanity as with the lower animals, may be natural or artificial.
It would therefore be in agreement with natural laws that human
society should make an artificial selection, by the elimination of
anti-social and incongruous individuals.

We ought not, however, to carry these conclusions too far, for
every problem has its relative bearings, and positive observation,
unlike logic, does not admit simple and exact solutions.  It must
be observed that this idea of artificial selection, though true,
would lead to exaggerated conclusions, if it were carried into the
sociological field without reserve, and without the necessary
balance between the interests and rights of the community and of
individuals.  If this idea were taken absolutely, indeed, it would
render legitimate and even obligatory an ultra-Spartan elimination
of all children born abortive or incurably diseased, or anti-
social through their idiotcy or mental insanity.

On the other hand, to recognise that the death penalty may be
legitimate as an extreme and exceptional measure is not to
acknowledge that it is necessary in the normal conditions of
social life.  Now it cannot be questioned that in these normal
conditions society may defend itself otherwise than by death, as
<p 241>by perpetual seclusion or transportation, the failure of
which, by the escape of convicts, is too rare to be decisive
against it.

The preventive and deterrent efficacy of the death penalty is very
problematical when we examine it not by our own impressions as
average human beings, calmly and theoretically, but with the data
of criminal psychology, which is its only true sphere of
observation.  Every one who commits a crime is either carried away
by sudden passion, when he thinks of nothing, or else he acts
coolly and with premeditation, and then he is determined in his
action, not by a dubious comparison between the death penalty and
imprisonment for life, but simply by a hope of impunity.  This is
especially the case with born criminals, whose main psychological
characteristic is an excess of improvidence, combined with moral
insensibility.

If a convict tells us that he fears death, this merely means that
he has the momentary impression, which cannot, however, restrain
him from crime, for here again, by the same psychological
tendency, he will be subject only to the criminal temptation.

And if it is true that, when the criminal has been tried and
condemned, he fears death more than imprisonment for life (always
excepting condemned suicides, and those who by their physical and
moral insensibility laugh at death up to the foot of the
scaffold), it is none the less necessary to try and to condemn
them.

Indeed statistics prove that the periodic variations of the more
serious crimes is independent of the <p 242>number of
condemnations and executions, for they are determined by very
different causes.  Tuscany, where there has been no death penalty
for a century, is one of the provinces with the lowest number of
serious crimes; and in France, in spite of the increase of general
crime and of population, charges of murder, poisoning, parricide,
and homicide, dropped from 560 in 1826 to 430 in 1888, though the
number of executions diminished in the same period from 197 to 9.

The death penalty is an easy panacea, but it is far from being
capable of solving a problem so complex as that of serious crime.
The idea of killing off the incorrigibles and the born criminals
is easily conceived, and Diderot, in his Letter to Landois,
maintained that it was a natural consequence of the denial of
free-will, saying:  ``What is the grand distinction between man
and man?  Doing good and doing harm.  The man who does harm ought
to be extinguished, not punished.''  But as against this too
facile notion we must look to experience, and to the other
material and moral conditions of social life, for the necessary
balance and completion.

I will not further discuss the death penalty, for it is by this
time an exhausted question from the intellectual standpoint, and
has passed into the domain of prejudice for or against, and this
prejudice is concerned rather with the more or less repugnant
method of execution than with the penalty itself.  In its favour
there is the absolute, irrevocable, and instantaneous elimination
from society of an individual who has shown himself absolutely
unadaptable, and dangerous to society.  But I hold that, if we
would <p 243>draw from the death penalty the only positive utility
which it possesses, namely, artificial selection, then we must
have courage enough to apply it resolutely in all cases where it
is necessary from this point of view, that is to say, to all born
criminals, who are the authors of the most serious crimes of
violence.  In Italy, for example, it would be necessary to execute
at least one thousand persons every year, and in France nearly two
hundred and fifty, in place of the annual seven or eight.

Otherwise the death penalty must be considered as an unserviceable
and neglected means of terror, merely to be printed in the codes;
and in that case it would be acting more seriously to abolish it.

So regarded it is too much like those motionless scarecrows which
husbandmen set up in their fields, dotted about with the foolish
notion that the birds will be frightened away from the corn.  They
may cause a little alarm at first sight; but by and by the birds,
seeing that the scarecrow never moves and cannot hurt them, lose
their fear, and even perch on the top of it.  So it is with
criminals when they see that the death penalty is never or very
rarely applied; and one cannot doubt that criminals judge of the
law, not by its formulation in the codes, but by its practical and
daily application.

Since the deterrent efficacy of punishments in general, including
the death penalty, is quite insignificant for the born criminals,
who are insensible and improvident, the rare cases of execution
will certainly not cure the disease of society.  Only the
slaughter of several hundred murderers every year would have
<p 244>a sensible result in the way of artificial selection; but
that is more easily said than done.  And I imagine that, at normal
periods, in no modern and civilised State would a series of daily
executions of the capital sentence be possible.  Public opinion
would not endure it, and a reaction would soon set in.[22]



[22] In every case I think that executions should take place in
prison, and by means of a poison administered as soon as the
sentence takes effect.  In North America electricity has been
tried, but executions by this process appear to be as horrible and
repulsive as those by the guillotine, the garotte, the scaffold,
or the rifle.  (See the _Medico-Legal Journal_ of New York, March
and September, 1889.) From the ``Summarised Information on Capital
Punishment,'' published by the Howard Association in 1881, I take
the following figures on capital punishment in Europe and
America:--


                                Death
        State.                  Sentences.  Executions.
Austria (1870-9)    ... ... ... ... ... 806 ... 16
France (1870-9) ... ... ... ... ... 198 ... 93
Spain (1868-77) ... ... ... ... ... 291 ... 26
Sweden (1869-78)    ... ... ... ... ... 32  ... 3
Denmark (1868-77)   ... ... ... ... ... 94  ... 1
Bavaria (1870-9)    ... ... ... ... ... 240 ... 7
Italy (1867-76) ... ... ... ... ... 392 ... 34
Germany, North (1869-78)    ... ... ... 484 ... 1
England (1860 79)   ... ... ... ... ... 665 ... 372
Ireland (1860-79)   ... ... ... ... ... 66  ... 36
Scotland (1860-79)  ... ... ... ... ... 40  ... 15
Australia and New Zealand (1870-9)  ... 453 ... 123
United States, about 2,500 murders annually--about 100
executions and 100 lynchings annually.



In Finland, between 1824 and 1880 there was no execution.  In
Holland, Portugal, Roumania, and Italy, capital punishment is
abolished by law; and in Belgium virtually.  Switzerland also has
abolished it, but a few cantons, under the influence of a few
atrocious and recurrent crimes, revived it in their codes, but did
not carry it out.  In the United States it has been abolished in
Michigan, Wisconsin, Rhode Island, and Maine.  An inquiry into the
legislation and statistics relating to murder in Europe and
America was instituted by Lord Granville in July, 1880 and the
results were published in 1881.  (``Reports on the Laws of Foreign
Countries respecting Homicidal Crime.'')



In a manuscript register of executions in the Duchy of Ferrara
between 970 and 1870, I found that, excluding the nineteenth
century, there were 5,627 <p 245>executions in 800 years (3,981
for theft, and 1,009 for homicide), that is an average of 700 in
each century, in the city of Ferrara alone.  And at Rome,
according to the records of the Convent of St. John the Beheaded,
between 1500 and 1770 there were 5,280 executions, or 1,955 in
each century, in the city of Rome alone.  Now, if we consider the
proportion of population in Ferrara and Rome to that of Italy as a
whole, we reach an enormous number of executions in former
centuries, which can scarcely have been fewer than four hundred
every year.

These were serious applications of the death penalty, to which we
certainly owe in some degree the purification of society by the
elimination of individuals who would otherwise have swelled their
criminal posterity.

In conclusion, if we wish to treat the death penalty seriously,
and derive from it the only service of which it is capable, we
must apply it on this enormous scale; or else, if it is retained
as an ineffectual terror, we should be acting more seriously if we
were to expunge it from the penal code, after excluding it from
our ordinary practice.  And as I shall certainly not have the
courage to ask for the restoration of these medi<ae>val modes of
extermination, I am still, for the practical considerations above
mentioned, a convinced abolitionist, especially for such countries
as Italy, where a more or less artificial and superficial current
of public opinion is keenly opposed to capital punishment.


Setting aside the death penalty, as unnecessary in <p 246>normal
times, and inapplicable in the only proportions which would make
it efficacious, for the born criminals who commit the most serious
crimes, there remains only a choice between these two modes of
elimination--transportation for life and indefinite seclusion.

This is the only choice for the positivists; for we cannot attach
much importance to the opinion of the German jurists,
Holtzendorff, Geyer, and others, who would do away with perpetual
imprisonment altogether.  Professor Lucchini took up this theory
in Italy, saying that the personal freedom of the convict ought to
be limited in its exercise, but not suppressed as a right, and
that imprisonment for life destroys ``the moral and legal
personality of the criminal in one of its most important human
factors, the sociable instinct.''  He added that punishment
``ought not to become exhausted by excess of duration.''

Surely it is not speaking seriously to say that the right of the
individual cannot be suppressed if necessity demands it, when we
see it done every day in cases of legitimate self-defence; and
that punishment is exhausted by excess of duration, when it is
precisely the duration of banishment from one's kind which
constitutes the only real efficacy of punishment; and to speak of
the sociable instinct in connection with the most anti-social
criminals.

And it is only by oblivion of the elementary and least contestable
data of criminal bio-psychology that the exclusion of all life-
punishments can be maintained, on the ground that this perpetuity
``is contrary to the reformative principle of punishment, to the
principle that punishment ought to aim not only at
<p 247>afflicting the prisoner, but also at arousing in him, if
possible, the moral sense, or at strengthening him, and opening up
to him a path by which he can hope to be readmitted into society,
amended and rehabilitated.  Perpetuity of punishment excludes this
possibility.''

The framers of the Dutch penal code replied to these observations
of Professor Pols, first in the name of common sense, that
``punishment is not inflicted for the benefit of the prisoner, but
for that of society,'' and secondly, with something of irony, that
``even for the sake of the abolition of capital punishment, and to
prevent a reaction in favour of this punishment, we must uphold
the right of shutting up for ever the few malefactors whose
release would be dangerous.''

It is entirely futile to consider the amendment of criminals as
opposed to imprisonment for life, when it is known that born
criminals, authors of the most serious crimes, for whom such
punishment is reserved, are precisely those whose amendment is
impossible, and that the moral sense attributed to them is only a
psychological fallacy of the classical psychologist, who
attributes to the conscience of the criminal that which he feels
in his own honest and normal conscience.

But it is easy enough to see that this opposition to perpetual
detention, though it has remained without effect, as being too
doctrinaire and sentimental, is only a symptom of the historical
tendency of the classical schools, entirely in favour of the
criminal, and always tending to the relaxation of punishments.
The interests of society are too much disregarded <p 248>when it
is sought to pass from the abolition of capital punishment to that
of imprisonment for life.  If the tendency is not checked, we may
expect to see some classical expert demanding the abolition of all
punishment for these unfortunate criminals, with their delicate
moral sensibilities!

The question, therefore, is between transportation or indefinite
seclusion.

Much has been written for and against transportation, and there
was a lively discussion of the problem in Italy, some twenty years
ago, between M. Beltrani Scalia, a former director-general of
prisons, and the advocates of this form of elimination of
criminals.  Without going into the details of the controversy, it
is evident that the experience of countries like England, which
for a long time transported its criminals at a cost of hundreds of
millions, and then abandoned the practice, is in itself a
noteworthy example.

Yet it is only an objection, so far as it goes, against
transportation as formerly practised, that is to say, with
enormous prisons built in distant lands.  M. Beltrani Scalia
justly said that we might as well build them at home, for they
will cost less and be more serviceable.  The example of France in
its practical application of this policy is not encouraging.

However, there is in transportation, as in the death penalty, an
unquestionable element of reason.  For when it is perpetual, with
very faint chances of return, it is the best mode of ridding
society of its most injurious factors, without our being compelled
to keep them in those compulsory human hives which are known as
cellular prisons.
<p 249>

But again, there is the question of simple transportation, first
put into practice by England, which consists of planting convicts
on an island or desert continent, with the opportunity of living
by labour, or else of letting them loose in a savage country,
where the convicts, who in civilised countries are themselves half
savage, would represent a partial civilisation, and, from being
highwaymen and murderers, might become military leaders in
countries where, at any rate, the revival of their criminal
tendencies would meet with an immediate and energetic resistance,
in place of the slow machinery of our criminal trials.

For Italy, however, the question presents itself in a special
form; for there a sort of internal deportation, in the lands which
are not tilled on account of the malaria, would be far more
serviceable.  If the dispersion of this malaria demands a human
hecatomb, it would evidently be better to sacrifice criminals than
honest husbandmen.  Transportation across the sea was very
difficult for Italy a few years ago, especially in view of the
lack of colonies; for then there was always the obstacle of which
Franklin spoke in reference to transported English convicts, in
his well-known retort:  ``What would you say if we were to
transport our rattlesnakes to England?''  But since Italy has had
her colony of Erythrea the idea of transportation has been taken
up again.  In May, 1890, I brought forward a resolution in
Parliament in favour of an experimental penal colony in our
African dependencies.  The proposal found many supporters, in
spite of the opposition of the keeper of the seals, who forgot
that he had written in his report <p 250>on the draft penal code
that prisoners might also be detained in the colonies.  Soon
afterwards the proposal was renewed by Deputy De Zerbi, and
accepted by M. Beltrani Scalia, director-general of prisons.

In a similar manner M. Prins declares himself in favour of
transportation for Belgium, since the constitution of the Congo
State.

But it is my matured opinion that transportation ought not to be
an end in itself.  The penal colony for adults ought to be a
pioneer of the free agricultural colony.  The problem of a penal
colony in our African possessions cannot, therefore, be solved in
advance of two other questions.

Before all, we must see whether these possessions offer suitable
districts for agricultural colonisation.  And secondly, we must
consider whether convicts would not cost less to transport into
districts nearer home which need to be cleared, a plan which would
also prevent their going over to the enemy, becoming leaders or
guides of the barbarous tribes which are at war with us.

In any case, whether we decide on transportation to the interior
or beyond the seas, for born and habitual criminals, there is
still the question as to the form of seclusion.

In this connection the idea has been suggested of ``establishments
for incorrigibles,'' or hardened criminals, wherein should be
confined for life, or (the same thing in this case) for an
indefinite period, born criminals who have committed serious
crimes, habitual criminals, and confirmed recidivists.
<p 251>

The congenital character and hereditary transmission of criminal
tendencies in these individuals fully justify the words of
Quetelet, that ``moral diseases are like physical diseases: they
are contagious, or epidemic, or hereditary.  Vice is transmitted
in some families in the same way as scrofula or consumption.  The
greater number of crimes come from a comparatively few families,
which need a special supervision, an isolation like that which we
impose on sick persons suspected of carrying the germs of
infection.''  So Aristotle speaks of a man who, being accused of
beating his father, answered:  ``My father beat my grandfather,
who used to beat his father cruelly; and you see my son--before he
is grown up he will fly into passions and beat me.''  And Plutarch
added to this:  ``The sons of vicious and corrupt men reproduce
the very nature of their parents.''

This is the explanation of Plato's idea, who, ``admitting the
principle that children ought not to suffer for the crimes of
their parents, yet, putting the case of a father, a grandfather,
and a great-grandfather who had been condemned to death, proposed
that their descendants should be banished, as belonging to an
incorrigible family.''  Carrara called this a mistaken idea, but
it seems to us to be substantially just.  It may be remembered
that when De Metz in 1839 founded his agricultural penal colony at
Metray, once celebrated but now in decay (for the whole success of
these foundations depends on the exceptional psychological
qualities of their governors), out of 4,454 children, 871, or 20
per cent., were the children of convicts.  We quite agree with
Crofton's proposal to <p 252>place the children of convicts in
industrial schools or houses of correction.

A special establishment for the perpetual or indefinite seclusion
of incorrigible criminals has been proposed or approved in Italy
by Lombroso, Curcio, Barini, Doria, Tamassia, Garofalo, Carelli;
in France by Despine, Labatiste, Tissot, Leveill<e'>; in Russia by
Minzloff; in England by May; in Germany by Kraepelin and
Lilienthal; in Austria by Wahlberg; in Switzerland by Guillaume;
in America by Wines and Wayland; in Holland by Van Hamel; in
Portugal by Lucas; &c.

But I believe that, in order to establish the fact of
incorrigibility, the number of relapses should vary in regard to
different criminals and crimes.  Thus, for instance, in the case
of murders, especially by born criminals, the first crime should
lead to an order for imprisonment for life.  In the case of less
serious crimes, such as rape, theft, wounding, swindling, &c.,
from two to four relapses should be necessary before the habitual
criminal is sentenced to such imprisonment.

These ideas are approximately carried out, especially in the
countries which, having made no great advance in the criminal
sciences, meet with less of pedantic opposition to practical
reforms.

Thus we find that France, after the proposals of Michaux, Petit,
and Migneret, and especially after the advocacy of M. Reinach,
followed by several publications of a like kind, agreed to the law
of 1885 on the treatment of recidivism.

Messrs. Murray Brown and Baker spoke at the <p 253>Prison Congress
at Stockholm and at the Soci<e'>t<e'> G<e'>n<e'>rale des Prisons
at Paris, of the system of cumulative and progressive sentences
adopted, though not universally, in England with respect to
hardened criminals.  The term of imprisonment is increased, almost
regularly, on each new relapse.  This is the system which had
already been suggested by Field and Walton Pearson at the Social
Science Congress in October, 1871, and subsequently by Cox and
Call, who was head of the police at Glasgow, at the Congress of
1874, and which, as Mr. Movatt pointed out, was adopted in the
Indian penal code, and had been established in Japan by a decree
fixing perpetual imprisonment after the fourth relapse.

The delegate from Canada at the Prison Congress at Stockholm
testified that short terms of imprisonment increased the number of
offences.  ``After a first sentence many offenders in this class
become professional criminals.  Professional thieves, who are
habitual offenders, ought, with few exceptions, to be sentenced to
imprisonment for life, or for a term equivalent to the probable
remainder of their life.''  The draft Russian code, in 1883,
provides that, ``If it is found that the accused is guilty of
several offences, and that he has committed them through habitual
criminality, or as a profession, the court, when deciding upon the
punishment in relation to the different crimes, may increase it,''
&c.  And the Italian penal code, though with much timidity, has
decreed a special increase of punishment for prisoners ``who have
relapsed several times.''
<p 254>

Quite recently, Senator B<e'>renger introduced a measure in France
``on the progressive increase of punishment in cases of relapse,''
which became law on March 26, 1891, under the title of ``the
modification and increase of punishments.''

It is therefore very probable that even the classical criminalists
will end by accepting the indefinite seclusion of hardened
criminals, as they have already come to accept criminal lunatic
asylums, though both ideas are opposed to the classical theories.

This is so true that at the Prison Congress at St. Petersburg in
1889 the question was first propounded ``whether it can be
admitted that certain criminals should be regarded as
incorrigible, and, if so, what means could be employed to protect
society against this class of convicts.''  And speaking as a
delegate from the Law Society of St. Petersburg, M. Spasovitch
acknowledged that ``this question bore the stamp of its origin on
its face.  Of all the questions in the programme, it seemed to be
the only one directly inspired by the principles of the new
positive school of criminal anthropology, whose theories,
propagated beyond the land of their birth in Italy, tended to a
radical reform in science as well as in legislation, in the penal
law as well as in procedure, in ideas of crime as well as in the
modes of repression.''

The Congress, in spite of some expressions of reserve, as when
Madame Arenal platonically observed that ``an uncorrected criminal
is not synonymous with an incorrigible criminal,'' adopted the
following resolution:--``Without admitting that from <p 255>the
penal and penitentiary point of view there are any absolutely
incorrigible criminals''--which is pure pedantry--``yet since
experience shows that there are in fact individuals who resist the
combined action of punishment and imprisonment''--a notable
admission!--``and who habitually and almost professionally renew
their violation of the laws of society, this section of the
Congress is unanimously of opinion that it is necessary to adopt
special measures against such individuals.''

Similarly the International Union of Penal Law, in its session at
Berne (August, 1890), expressed the opinions of the majority in
the following terms:--``There are malefactors for whom, in view of
their physical and moral condition, the constant application of
ordinary punishments is inadequate.  In this class are specially
included the hardened recidivists, who ought to be considered as
degenerate criminals, or criminals by profession.  Malefactors
ought to be subjected, according to the degree of their
degeneration, or of the danger which they threaten, to special
measures, framed with the purpose of preventing them from
inflicting harm, and of amending them if possible.''  And in the
session at Christiania (August, 1891), after the remarkable
contribution of Van Hamel, the Union, after rejecting the
proposition of Felisch, which spoke of ``the uncorrected'' in
place of the ``incorrigible,'' unanimously approved the
conclusions of Van Hamel:--``With a view to the more complete
study of the character and injurious influence of habitual
offenders, notably of such as are incorrigible (a study which is
absolutely indis<p 256>pensable for legislation), the Union
instructs its officers to urge upon the various Governments the
great importance of statistics of recidivism which shall be
detailed, precise, uniform, and adapted for comparative study.
For incorrigible habitual offenders it is absolutely necessary
that the trial on the last charge shall not definitely determine
the treatment of the offender, but that the decision shall be
carried on to a further inquiry, which shall have regard to the
offender personally, to his past, and to his conduct during a
fixed period of observation.


It is now necessary to inquire what form the perpetual or
indefinite segregation of the criminal should assume.

Two great innovations in regard to prisons, as M. Tarde observes,
have been made or developed within the past century, which are not
yet adopted in every country: penal colonies, whereof
transportation is only a factor, and the prison cell.  The cell
has assumed a leading position since it was brought over from
America to Europe, where, however, the cellular prisons of St.
Michael at Rome, and of Gand, had preceded it.

The cellular system, a product of the reaction against the
enormous physical and moral putrefaction of the inmates of common
prisons and labour establishments, may have had, and doubtless
still has many advocates, amongst other reasons for the spirit of
pietism and religious penitence which always goes with it; but it
is open to strong criticism.

There has already been, amongst the same prison <p 257>experts, a
certain retrogressive movement in regard to isolation.  Absolute
and continued isolation, indeed, both by day and by night
(``solitary confinement'') was at first recommended, even to the
introduction, grotesque in spite of good intentions, of hoods and
masks for the prisoners, a medi<ae>val reminiscence almost
parallel with the Brothers of Pity in some Italian towns, for help
to the wounded.  Presently it was seen that this sort of thing
certainly could not assist in the amendment of the guilty, and
then isolation was relaxed (still making it applicable both by day
and by night) with visits to prisoners by the chaplain, governors,
and representatives of vigilance and prisoners' aid societies.
This is called ``separate confinement.''  After this it was
recognised that the real need for isolation was at night, and then
the Auburn system was arrived at: isolation in cells by night,
with daily labour in common, with an obligation (which cannot be
enforced) of silence.  And finally, seeing that in spite of the
threefold panacea of every prison system (isolation, work, and
instruction, especially religious instruction) relapses still
increased, it was understood that it might not be very useful to
subject a man for months or years to the monastic life of Trappist
brothers, in these monstrous human hives (which Bentham brought to
the notice of the French Constituent Assembly under the name of
``panopticons''), and to discharge him from prison at the end of
his term, and plunge him into all the temptations of an atmosphere
to which his lungs had become disaccustomed.

Then the ``progressive system'' was introduced, <p 258>first in
England, where it was devised by Maconochie, next in Ireland,
which has given it a name, alternated with that of Sir W. Crofton.
This is the most symmetrically perfect machinery, though reminding
one somewhat of a company of marionettes.  It confirms what was
said by Haeckel, that the actual is a summary of the moods of
aspiration, for it precisely sums up the systems which preceded
it, each of which constitutes a phase of the progressive system.
There is first of all a period of brotherly charity--absolute
isolation for the prisoner to fall back upon his conscience, or to
listen to the voice of remorse, or to receive an impression of
devotion and fear.  After this comes the Auburnian phase, of
isolation by night and labour (when labour is accorded) by day,
with the constraint of silence.  Then an intermediary period in
the agricultural colony or labour-gang outside the prison, like a
period of convalescence, to accustom the lungs to the keen air of
liberty.  This is the phase added by Sir W. Crofton to the English
system.  Lastly comes the period of conditional release (on ticket
of leave), whereby the last portion of the punishment is remitted,
and will count as expiated if during the time of liberation, and
for a succeeding period, the convict does not commit another
crime.

The progressive or retrogressive passage from one phase to another
is made by a sort of automatic regulator, depending on the number
of marks gained or lost by the prisoner through his good or bad
behaviour, to which we know the moral or psychological value to be
attached--a value purely negative.
<p 259>

This progressive, gradual, or Irish system has obtained a
supremacy in Europe, so that even Belgium, the classic land of the
cellular system, reconsidered the ideas which it had based on
daily experience, and was the first continental country to
introduce conditional sentences (in 1888), which are the fruit of
short sentences and cellular punishments.

I do not deny that this progressive system is better than the
others, though we must not forget that the almost miraculous
effects of amendment and decrease of recidivism (which indeed are
claimed for every new system, only to be disproved later on) were
due in Ireland to the wholesale emigration of those conditionally
released to North America--an emigration amounting to 46 per cent.
of the prisoners released.  Nor must we forget that this system,
which requires a trained staff of officers, is less difficult to
work in countries where, as in Ireland, there are only a few
hundred prisoners; but it would be much more difficult in Italy or
France, where the prisoners are numbered by tens of thousands.  In
these countries, accordingly, the system will not be practical
unless the principle of classifying prisoners in biological and
psychological categories is conjoined with it; for without this we
shall not get rid of the impersonal system which is the vice of
our present penal law, and under which, even in our prison
administration, we treat the prisoner as a mere symbol, to which
we can apply the three conventional rules of the cell, hard
labour, and instruction.

But I am strongly opposed to, or accept simply as <p 260>accessory
(even for the seclusion of prisoners before trial, after the
preliminary examination), cellular isolation by itself, which has
reached the height of absurdity and inhumanity in cases of
imprisonment for life.

As Mancini said in 1876, discussing the draft of the Italian penal
code, ``the punishment of hard labour for life, which is
substituted in the draft for the capital sentence, differs
substantially in its severity of privation and misery from all
other modes of imprisonment.  It must be undergone in one or two
special prisons to be erected within the country.  It would be the
saddest and most terrible thing which the imagination of man could
conceive.  These tombs of the living, whom society has rejected
for ever, unlike all other prisons, will condemn their inmates to
continuous solitary immurement in cells, and to a life which may
be worse than death itself. . . .  This most wretched condition,
which the free man cannot realise without horror, is to last ten
years; and it is not to be in the power of man to bring it to an
end sooner, if the prisoner, broken down by physical weakness, or
threatened by loss of reason, cannot endure it any longer.''

After this description, I am not sorry that I denounced the
cellular system as one of the madnesses of the nineteenth century.

This useless, stupid, inhuman, costly ``tomb of the living'' must
be repudiated, even when reduced to its lowest terms by the new
Italian code, wherein Parliament, accepting part of my amendment,
fixes the term of absolute seclusion at seven years.
<p 261>

It will be seen by this description of cellular imprisonment that
the classical criminal and prison experts have logically arrived
at the conclusion that perpetual punishment should be abolished;
and this renders recidivism possible even in murder.  But it is
clear that what we ought to abolish is not perpetual separation,
but only the stupidly harsh form of isolation in cells--and this
not only in life sentences, but in all sentences.

Cellular imprisonment is inhuman, because it blots out or weakens,
in the cases of the least degenerate criminals, that social sense
which was already feeble in them, and also because it inevitably
leads to madness or consumption (by onanism, insufficient
movement, air, &c.).  Hence it drives the prison authorities, in
order to avoid these disastrous consequences, to the injustice of
building cells for murderers which are decidedly comfortable, and
consequently a mockery of the honest wretchedness of the cottages
and garrets of the poor.  The treatment of mental diseases
recognises a special form of insanity under the name of prison
madness.

Cellular imprisonment, in temporary or indefinite sentences, can
do nothing for the amendment of the guilty, especially because,
when we do not amend the social environment, it is useless to
lavish care on our prisoners if, as soon as they quit prison, they
must return to the same conditions which led them into crime.  No
adequate social prevention can in any way be provided by the more
or less arcadian devices of the prisoners' aid societies.  The
chief mistake of the prison experts has been to concentrate their
attention <p 262>exclusively on the cell and in the cell,
forgetting the external factors of crime; so that, by a familiar
psychological process, the cell has become for prison experts what
money is to the avaricious: it has ceased to be a means, and has
become an end in itself.

Again, the cellular system is ineffectual because the very
isolation which was its original object is incapable of
realisation.  Prisoners find a thousand means of carrying on
communication with each other, during their walks, or by writing
on the leaves of books lent to them to read, or by knocking on
their walls according to a conventional alphabet, or by writing in
the sand, or by using the drains as telephonic receivers, as was
done in the cellular prisons of Mazas, Milan, &c.  Plain proofs of
this may be found in Lombroso's ``Les Palimpsestes des Prisons.''
``The public, and even well-informed persons, honestly believe
that the cellular prison is a dumb and paralytic thing, without
tongue or hands, simply because the law has ordered silence and
inactivity.  But as no decree, however vigorous, can counteract
the nature of things, so this organism speaks, moves, occasionally
wounds or slays, in spite of all the decrees.  Only, as always
happens when a necessity of humanity is opposed by a law, it acts
by less known, underground and hidden means.''

Moreover, the cellular system is unequal in its application, for
difference of race has much to say to it, and in fact it is a
clumsy machinery of the northern races, repugnant to those of the
south, more dependent on the open air and light.  Apart from that,
isolation has very different effects amongst people of the same
nation, according to the different vocations <p 263>of the
prisoners, especially of occasional offenders.  In this connection
the testimony of Faucher, Ferrus, and Tarde is thoroughly just,
that in prison administration we ought to observe a distinction
between dwellers in town and country.[23]



[23] Yet the question whether the cellular system should be
modified in accordance with the nationality, social condition, and
sex of criminals, which has not been brought forward since the
Prison Congress at Stockholm, was there decided by the following
resolution:--``The cellular system, where it is in operation, may
be applied without distinction of race, social condition (as
regards townsmen or rural population), or sex, provided that the
authorities have regard to these special conditions _in matters of
detail_.  Exception may be made in respect of the young, and if
cellular discipline is applied to them also, it should be in such
a way as not to prejudice their physical and moral development.''
(``Proceedings,'' 1878, pp. 303, 617.)



Again, the cellular system is too costly to be adopted as the only
form of imprisonment--which, however, is enacted in the Italian
penal code, the French law of 1875, and elsewhere.

And it is just by reason of the enormous expenditure on vast
prisons that the grievous and mischievous contrast arises between
the comforts provided for murderers and men guilty of arson in
their cells and the privations to which the honest poor are
exposed in hospitals, poorhouses, town garrets, country hovels,
and barracks.  One of the most significant results which I noticed
at the exhibition of various plans of cells in connection with the
Prison Congress at Rome in 1885 was that it demonstrated to the
general public how the cellular system treats prisoners (whether
before trial or after sentence) better than the poor, who continue
to be honest in spite of their wretchedness.[23]



[23] Even prison experts have been concerned by the vast expense
of the cellular system, and the following question was brought
forward at the <p 264>Congress at Rome:--``What modifications
would be possible, in accordance with recent experience, in the
construction of cellular prisons so as to render it more simple
and less costly, without detriment to the necessary conditions of
a sound and intelligent application of the system?''  Detailed
recommendations were agreed to on the motion of M. Herbette; but
the system is unchanged, with requirements which can be only very
slightly reduced.


<p 264>

In Germany, as well as in France and Italy, legislation has
ordained, by codes and special laws, the cellular system for all
punishment by imprisonment; but fortunately the system has not yet
been adopted, thanks to its enormous cost.  So that we have the
further absurdity of codes based on prison systems which have no
actual existence.  And since criminals have their part in the law,
not as it is written but as it is carried out, the result is
naturally disastrous.

Thus the cellular system bears hard upon the honest classes, both
by its enormous cost, under the form of taxation, and by
competition with free and honest labour.  The competition is moral
in the first place, for the criminal is always assured of daily
work, lodgings, and food, whilst the honest workman is assured of
neither.  Even the economic competition, though not extensive when
we take the totals of free workmen and prisoners, is still very
keen in particular places and for particular industries, whilst
prison labour never indemnifies the State for its expenditure; for
clearly with cellular isolation it is impossible to organise
important and profitable industry.  It is the small industries,
such as shoemaking and carpentry, which crush the same free
industries all round the prison, for they cannot stand against the
artificial competition created by the nominal wages of the prison
hands.  Though for moral and financial <p 265>reasons the convicts
must work, it is evident that on these grounds we cannot accept
the cellular system as a pattern of prison organisation.

It is quite sufficient, in prisons for the segregation of
criminals, to provide for isolation by night, which requires
buildings far more simple and less costly than those of the
cellular prisons.

Work in the open air is the only useful basis of organisation for
convict prisons.

Air, light, movement, field labour, especially in southern
counties and for the majority of prisoners, who are rural--these
are the only physical and moral disinfectants possible for
prisoners not entirely degenerate, or likely to prevent at least
the absolute brutalisation of the incorrigible, by giving them
healthy and more remunerative work.

The penal agricultural colony, in lands which need clearing, is
the best for adults, passing from the least to the most healthy
according to the categories of criminals--born, habitual,
occasional--and according to the gravity of the crimes committed.
To this may be added, for convicts less capable of restoration to
social life, labour in mines, especially when the mines are State
property.  What I have said of malaria I say of fire-damp: it is
much better that these should kill off criminals, than honest
workmen.

The penal agricultural colony in lands already cultivated is best
for children and young people.

This is the ideal and the typical form of segregation for
criminals, against whom it would not be sufficient to exact strict
reparation of damage, on the principles already set forth.
<p 266>

Wherever there is a crowding of humanity, there is human
fermentation and putrefaction.  Only labour in the open air will
secure physical and moral health.  And if agricultural work would
be less fitted for criminals from the towns, there is no reason
why an agricultural colony should not make itself as far as
possible self-sufficing by means of workshops where prisoners
could ply the trade to which they were accustomed when at liberty.
For town convicts without a trade, such as vagabonds, beggars, and
the like, on the ground of their muscular incapacity for hard and
regular work, an agricultural colony is still the most fit, for it
provides light and varied occupations, as the agricultural
colonies of Holland, Belgium, and Austria bear witness.

The same evolution will take place in regard to the segregation of
criminals as in regard to the seclusion of the insane; first,
hospitals and prisons, with a terrible communion of corruption in
both cases; then barrack life, in asylums or penitentiaries, vast
and isolated; lastly, for the insane, a system of so-called
village asylums, and even a free colony for harmless idiots who
can be put to agricultural work and minor trades, as at Gheel in
Belgium.  Similarly for criminals, the sanitary ``elbow room'' of
agricultural colonies will be substituted for the infectious
barrack-life of the great prisons.


As for habitual criminals, their anthropological characteristics
remind us that we must distinguish between the two crises of their
criminal activity, and, as a consequence, between the methods of
defence <p 267>against them.  That is to say, we must distinguish
between the initial moment at which they commit their first crime
and the subsequent period in which they become habitual offenders,
recidivists, and even incorrigible.

Thus it is clear that at the initial moment of their criminal
career they ought to be subjected to the measures which I am about
to indicate for occasional criminals; whereas, when from
occasional they have become, partly by their imprisonment,
habitual offenders, they must be subjected to the measures already
indicated for born criminals.  The latter are incorrigible through
congenital tendency to degenerate, and the former are incorrigible
through acquired tendency; but they end in the same degree of
anti-sociality and brutalisation.  There is, however, this
difference, that habitual offenders nearly always commit less
serious crimes, such as theft, swindling, forgery, indecent
assault, whilst the born criminals, though they may be petty
thieves, or not very formidable swindlers, are more frequently
murderers, footpads, guilty of arson, or the like.  Thus the
discipline of their segregation must vary accordingly.


For occasional criminals, social defence must have a character of
prevention rather than of repression, so as to save them from
being driven, by a mistaken prison organisation, to become
recidivists, and therefore habitual and incorrigible criminals.

It is especially important in this category to discriminate
between the young and the adults, for <p 268>with the former, far
more than with the latter, the preventive methods may have a
sensible effect in diminishing crime.  But we must take care, in
place of the pedantic graduation of responsibility which satisfies
the penal codes, to substitute a physiological and psychical
treatment of children and young people, who are actual criminals
or framing for crime.

Beginning with the physical and moral treatment of foundling
children as one of the most effectual penal substitutes, and
advancing to reformatory constraint and penal sentences upon the
young, there is an entire system crying for radical reform, from
which imprisonment for young persons should always be excluded.
We must therefore abolish the so-called houses of correction; for,
taking no account of the absurd and dangerous confusion created by
the three classes of children committed for paternal correction,
for begging and vagrancy, and for offences, no good can ever come
of it, for the herding and crowding together are nowhere more
productive of fermentation and putrefaction than amongst the
young.

There is nothing for them but separate boarding-out with families
of honest country folk, or else agricultural colonies with a
discipline different from that of the colonies for adult
criminals, but still based on the rule of isolation by night, work
in the open air, and as little crowding as possible.

For adult occasional criminals it is unnecessary to insist any
further on the absurdity and danger of short terms of
imprisonment, with or without isolation in cells, which now
constitute the almost <p 269>exclusive mode of repression.  A few
days in prison, mostly in association with habitual criminals,
cannot exercise any deterrent influence, especially in the
grotesque minimum of one day, or three days, as provided by the
Dutch, Italian, and other codes.  On the contrary, they are
attended by disastrous effects, by destroying the serious
character of justice, relieving prisoners of all fear of
punishment, and consequently driving them to relapse, under the
influence of the disgrace already suffered, and of the corrupting
and compromising association with habitual criminals in prison.

The results of these short terms, indeed, which impose about the
same restriction of liberty as an attack of indigestion, or a
heavy fall of snow, are so manifest that the objection to them is
now almost unanimous, though they still form the basis of the most
recent penal codes.

As to the substitution of other repressive methods in the many
cases of sentence for light offences, theorists and legislators
have proposed domiciliary arrest, sureties, judicial warnings,
compulsory work without imprisonment, conditional suspension of a
sentence or a punishment, qualified banishment.  For the moment
there is a marked preference for conditional sentences.

In my opinion, however, none of these substitutes or short terms
of imprisonment can be applied as effectively or as generally as
is necessary for the large class of occasional offenders.

Domiciliary arrests, indeed, which the Italian penal code applies
only to women and minors for a first <p 270>contravention of the
law, with detention in the house, cannot be made effective.  They
would be useless for those already obliged to remain at home by
their daily occupations, and for the rich, who could have any form
of distraction in their own houses; and they would be injurious to
those who have to earn a living for themselves and their families
in workrooms, shops, offices, &c.  Moreover, this domiciliary
detention would be very difficult in the great towns, where it
would probably require a sentinel for every condemned person.

Bail for good behaviour is too unequal in the case of the poor and
the rich, and therefore too rarely applicable to be any more than
an exceptional and accessory measure, taken in conjunction with
the payment of damages; and this even when it is given by
sureties.

Judicial warning, with or without security, which the new Italian
penal code has sought to revive, in spite of many years'
experience under the older codes, cannot be seriously treated.
Either the prisoner is an occasional offender, or an offender
through passion, having a sense of honour, in which case public
opinion is itself a sufficient lesson for him, without the need of
a little moral lecture from the judge; or else he has no such
moral sensibility, and then the warning is a mere useless
ceremony, without effect either on the criminal or on the public.
So true is this that judicial warning (a different thing from
police warning, which is another so-called preventive measure,
both ineffectual and injurious) is rarely applied by magistrates.
<p 271>

Compulsory work without imprisonment may be admitted, not as a
main punishment, but as a mode of enforcing strict reparation of
damage, which I still believe to be the only suitable measure for
occasional offenders, when the offence is slight.

The same must be said for qualified banishment (temporary removal
from the place where the crime was committed), which may be added
as a preventive measure, and as a satisfaction for the injured
party, in the same cases where the payment of damages is the
principal retribution.

There remains the conditional sentence.  A judge may decide, in
the case of first offenders who appear to him to call for such
treatment, that the sentence or the execution of the sentence,
shall be suspended for a given period, after which, if the
offender has been of good behaviour, and has not committed another
offence, the sentence is effaced and the condemnation is regarded
as non-existent; whilst in the other case the sentence takes
effect, and the punishment is added to that of the new crime.

This conditional suspension, however, assumes two very different
forms.

At Boston, in the State of Massachusetts, from the year 1870 in
the case of minors, and from 1878 in the case of adults, judgment
is suspended without regard even to the gravity of the crime or to
the antecedents of the criminal; and this custom has applied to
the entire State from the year 1880.  All that the judge does is
to fix the period of probation.  There is a probation officer
whose business it is to keep his eye on the persons affected, and
who has <p 272>extensive powers, including that of bringing them
up for sentence even for disorderly conduct, without waiting for
an actual relapse.  This system has also been introduced into New
Zealand and Australia (1886).

In England, after the advocacy of the probation system by the
Howard Association, an Act was passed in 1887 ``to permit the
conditional Release of first Offenders in certain cases.''  This
law combines probation with sureties for good conduct.  Judgment
is given, but sentence is not pronounced.  The suspension is not
granted to any one who has previously committed an offence, or
whose first offence would be liable to a punishment exceeding two
years' imprisonment.  There is no probation officer, for
supervision is replaced by personal or other sureties for good
behaviour.

On the continent of Europe another form has been adopted.  There
is no supervision by a special officer, and no surety for good
behaviour; judgment is delivered and sentence pronounced; and the
suspension is not forfeited by disorderly conduct, but only by an
actual relapse.

This system, so far as the purpose was not effected by various
conditions as to the duration of punishment, which left room for
conditional sentences, as to the interval for taking cognisance of
relapse, and other details, was proposed in France (1884) by
Senator B<e'>renger; but Belgium was the first country to adopt it
in the law of 1888 ``on conditional release and conditional
sentences;'' and France followed in 1891, with the law ``on the
modification and increase of punishments.''
<p 273>

Before that time, at the Prison Congresses of London (1872) and
Rome (1885), there had been some discussion, without resolutions,
on the advisability of substituting for punishment with hard
labour either simple detention without labour or compulsory labour
without imprisonment, or removal from the place where the offence
was committed, or judicial admonition.

But the most noteworthy advocacy of conditional sentences, after
the action taken by the Howard Association in 1881, came from the
International Union of Penal Legislation, which at its Conference
at Berne in 1889 adopted a resolution in its favour, whilst
insisting, at the suggestion of M. Garofalo, ``on the necessity of
deciding its limitation according to local conditions, and to the
public opinion and moral characteristics of various nations.''

The Prison Congress of St. Petersburg discussed the substitution
of judicial admonition or conditional sentences for short terms of
imprisonment; but no resolution could be arrived at on this
occasion, and the matter was postponed to the next international
Prison Congress (Paris, 1895).

In Austria and Germany, again, several Bills have been introduced,
dealing with conditional sentences.

There are statistics for Belgium on the operation of this system.
The law of 1888 requires the keeper of the seals to report
annually to Parliament; and that authority drew up two reports,
dated May 14, 1890, and July 7, 1891.

From the day when the law came into operation up to December 31,
1889, out of 61,787 sentences in <p 274>the Correctional
Tribunals, 8,696 were conditional; and there were 192 relapses.
Out of 222,492 sentences in the Police Courts, 4,499 were
conditional, and there were 45 relapses.

These 13,195 conditional sentences included 8,485 for crimes and
offences under the penal code; 2,286 for breaches of police
regulations; 447 for breaches of communal and provincial
regulations; and 1,977 for contraventions of special laws.

The crimes and offences for which these sentences have been most
frequently pronounced are as follows:--


                                    Correctional.   Police.
Malicious Wounding  ... ... ... ... ... 3,339   ... 491
Thefts, &c  ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,803   ... 206
Resistance to and attacks on Authorities    961     ... 67
Destruction of Inclosures and Property  211     ... 56
Swindling and Breach of Trust   ...  ...    125     ... 5
Slander and Defamation  ... ... ... ... 113     ... 79
Immorality  ... ... ... ... ... ... 112     ... 10

Offences below 100 were: Abusive language, 99; Indecent assaults,
59; Threats, 58; Forgery, 49; Adultery, 48; Adulteration of food,
44; Unlawful wounding, 45; Unlawful possession, 31; Unlawful
carrying and sale of arms, 30; Bankruptcy, 26; Accidental
homicide, 20.

In the year 1890, out of 41,330 sentences in the Correctional
Tribunals, whereof 36,660 were not over six months' imprisonment,
7,932 were conditional, and there were 223 relapses.  Out of
121,461 in the Police Courts, 6,377 were conditional, and there
were 49 relapses.

The proportion for various offences was approximately the same as
in the previous year.

These figures, it is true, do not tell us much about <p 275>the
effects of conditional sentences in Belgium, as we might expect
from the brevity of the experiment; so that the question still
remains in the theoretical phase.

The statistics of the Massachusetts probation system are not much
more instructive.

According to the decennial report (1879-88) of Mr. Savage,
probation officer at Boston, imprisonment was remitted in the
county of Suffolk (including Boston) to 322 persons in 1879 and to
880 in 1888; whilst the number officially recorded for the
following year was 994.  In the course of ten years the probation
officer inquired into the cases of 27,052 persons liable to
supervision.  Of these, 7,251 were put on probation, and 580 were
deprived of the benefit of the law.

The grounds on which the probation system was applied in
Massachusetts were strikingly different from the circumstances
under which conditional sentences were recorded in Belgium.  Thus
in Boston there were put on probation, between 1879 and 1888,
3,161 persons charged with drunkenness for the first time, 222
charged with habitual drunkenness, 211 with drunkenness for the
third time, 958 with theft, 764 with solicitation, 470 with
inflicting bodily harm, 274 with disorderly conduct and idleness,
240 with violation of domicile, especially with intrusion in
business premises.

Thus, apart from the difference of penal legislation and social
life in the two countries, the Boston system is applied mainly to
drunkards, who are not true criminals by the mere fact of
intoxication.
<p 276>

As for the statistics of ascertained relapse, which in Boston
reached 64 out of 1,125 (6 per cent.) in 1889, I think they should
be received with caution.  In the case of every new penal or
penitentiary system or measure, we never fail to receive more or
less wonderful figures on the results obtained; but the common
fate of all these splendid results has always been that they
dwindle down, even if they do not turn into a negative quantity,
so as to indicate the necessity of other more practical and
serviceable measures.  The reason is, and will continue to be the
same, namely, that legislators, judges, and prison warders have no
adequate knowledge of criminals, and their activity is anything
but harmonious.  This accounts for the superficial character, if
nothing more, of the measures which are taken, and which apply far
more to the crime than to the criminal, without so much as
touching the true and deep-seated roots of crime.  Hence also the
inevitable disillusion, almost before the new device is a month
old.

I by no means admit the two principal objections of MM.
Kirchenheim and Wach, that the conditional sentence is repugnant
to the principle of absolute justice, according to which every
offence should be visited by a corresponding punishment, and that
short terms of imprisonment, if they have not always produced a
good result, ought not to be abolished, but only applied in a more
suitable and efficacious manner.

The first objection will not weigh much with those who are guided
by the principles and method of the positive school.  As M.
Gautier says, it is absolutely <p 277>useless to dispute about
consequences when we start from premisses so opposed to each other
as retributive justice, according to which every fault demands a
proportional punishment--``fiat justitia pereat mundus''--and
social defence, according to which a justice without social
advantage is an unjust justice, afflicted with metaphysical
degeneracy.

The second objection appears to me to have no better foundation,
for the disadvantages of punishments by short terms of
imprisonment are organic and inevitable defects.  There is no
chance of their practical amelioration, for they have all been
tried, from the system of association to that of absolute
isolation, from the most inflexible vigour to the mildest
treatment.  Amelioration of short-term punishments can only have
an indirect influence by way of palliation; but it is the actual
imprisonment for a short term which is trifling and unavailing.

At the same time, and not to mention other objections on points of
detail, specially applicable to the form given to conditional
sentences on the continent of Europe, as compared with the
American system, (which is certainly better, since it does not
leave the offender to himself, and is not restricted to the simple
legal relapse), I am not enthusiastically in favour of the
conditional sentence.  And my lack of enthusiasm, in spite of the
first impression, which was decidedly favourable, is based on
different grounds from those hitherto stated by the opponents of
this reform.

In the earliest edition of this work I maintained that repression
ought to be mild in form for occa<p 278>sional criminals, and
progressively severe for recidivists and habitual evildoers, until
it reached perpetual segregation.  The Italian proverb, that ``the
first fault is pardoned and the second whipped,'' is an
unconscious confirmation of the popular opinion.  And from this
point of view the conditional sentence, if combined as in the
French law with progressive severity of repression for
recidivists, is sufficiently attractive in the first instance.

But the conditional sentence, to consider it for a moment as it
has hitherto been propounded and carried out, has two
characteristic defects, in common with the actual penal system, of
which its advocates, for the most part balancing between the
classical and positive school, cannot get rid.

In the first place, whilst the classical school has fixed its
attention on crime, and the positive school studies the criminal,
especially in regard to his biological and psychological
character, the advocates of the conditional sentence (and of the
laws which have so far brought it into operation) oscillate
between the two standpoints, considering the criminal, no doubt,
rather than the crime, but only the average and abstract criminal,
not the living and palpitating criminal, as he is to be found in
his several categories.  In proof of this it is enough to observe
that the ninth article of the Belgian law admits the conditional
sentence, so far as punishment is concerned, when this punishment
does not exceed six months, _*even if the period is made up by the
cumulation of two or more!_  In other words, the conditional
sentence is allowed in the case of a criminal who has
com<p 279>mitted several offences--which substantially (except in
the few cases of connected offences due to the same action, or
arising out of the same occasion) is a mere case of relapse, and
therefore proves in the majority of cases that the law is not
dealing with true occasional criminals; for these, as a rule, like
criminals of passion, only commit a single crime or offence.

The two fundamental conditions of the conditional sentence in
Europe (a slight infraction and a nonrelapsed criminal) do not,
therefore, afford a complete guarantee of the utility of its
application.

It is true that this system tends to fix the attention of the
judge on the personal conditions of the prisoner, requiring him to
decide if the conditional sentence is suitable to the particular
occasion, having regard to the special circumstances of the action
and the individual, apart from the legal limitations of the
offence and of the punishment.

But we know that the crowding of the prisons with persons
condemned to short terms of imprisonment is attended by a grievous
crowding in the courts of prisoners accused of slight offences and
contraventions.  Thus it is inevitable that the judges, even apart
from their ignorance of the biological and psychological
characters of the offenders, being compelled to decide ten or
twenty cases every day, cannot fix their attention on the
procession of figures which files past the magic lantern of the
courts, but simply leave them with a ticket bearing the number of
the article which applies, not to _*them,_ but to their particular
infraction of the law.  Thus the judges will come to
<p 280>pronouncing the conditional sentence almost mechanically,
just as they have come to give the benefit of attenuating
circumstances by force of habit This device also was introduced in
France in 1832, in order to ``individualise punishment''--that is
to say, to compel the judge to apply his sentence rather to the
criminal than to the crime.

So long as penal procedure is not radically reformed, as we have
proposed, in such a manner that the inquiry, the discussion, the
decision upon the evidence, which are the only proper elements of
penal justice, aim at and lead up to the determination of a
prisoner's biological and psychological type, it will be humanly
impossible for the practical application of these judicial
measures to overcome the mechanical impersonality of justice,
which applies rather to the crime than to the criminal.

Hence the conditional sentence, though it was evolved by the abuse
and disastrous effects of short terms of imprisonment, and in
spite of its generating principle that ``the first fault is
pardoned and the second whipped,'' has to-day only the character
of an eclectic graft on the old classic stock of penal law and
procedure.  As such, notwithstanding its attractive features (for
it indicates a step in advance towards the positive system of
social defence, which desires to see the application of collective
defence to the individual's power of offence), it seems to me to
be destined, not long after its earliest application, to deceive
the anticipations of happy and beneficent results, such as its
advocates entertain.

Moreover, the conditional sentence, precisely be<p 281>cause it is
a graft on the old classic stock of penal justice, has another
very serious defect, inasmuch as it overlooks the victims of the
offence.

Its advocates, in fact, continue to maintain that reparation of
damage is a private concern, for which they benevolently recommend
a strict remedy, but which they nevertheless, in practice,
entirely overlook.

The offender who is conditionally sentenced is, therefore, to
secure a suspension of punishment--which, indeed, it is as well to
remember, he also secures, often enough, by a legal limitation,
or, as in Italy, by the remission of punishments under three
months, accorded whenever (as is generally the case) there is a
petition for pardon.  But is there any one who gives a thought to
the victims?

From this point of view it may even be said that the conditional
sentence makes things worse than before; for the victims are not
to have so much as the satisfaction of seeing punishment inflicted
on those who have injured them, in cases of assault, theft,
swindling, and the like.  And it is useless to make the platonic
remark, as M. Fayer has done, that punishment is punishment even
when conditional, and involves the censure of the public
authority, and holds in reserve a punishment for relapse, and
hangs over the head of the offender until his term of probation
has expired.

All this is pretty enough--except the relapse, which implies the
poor consolation of a repetition of the offence, which would be no
great satisfaction for the victims of the first.  But it is all
hypothetical and <p 282>theoretical.  The essential thing, so far
as the victims are concerned, is that the offender goes
unpunished.

It is true that occasional offenders deserve consideration, from
the point of view of prevention in particular; but honest folk who
are injured by them deserve it still more.

I do not therefore agree with Garofalo, who proposed at Brussels
that the conditional sentence should be subject to the consent of
the injured party; but I think that it ought not to be permitted
until there has been an indemnification for the victims of the
offence, or at least a guarantee, either by the offender, or
directly by the State.

In short, for occasional criminals who commit slight offences, in
circumstances which show that they are not of a dangerous type, I
say, as I have said already, that reparation of the damage
inflicted would suffice as a defensive measure, without a
conditional sentence of imprisonment

As to the occasional criminals who commit serious offences, for
which reparation alone would not be sufficient, temporary removal
from the scene of the crime should be added in the less serious
cases, whilst in the cases of greater gravity, owing to material
and personal considerations, there should be indefinite
segregation in an agricultural colony, with lighter work and
milder discipline than those prescribed in colonies for born
criminals and recidivists.


The last category is that of criminals through an impulse of
passion, not anti-social but susceptible of excuse, such as love,
honour, and the like.
<p 283>

For these individuals all punishment is clearly useless, at any
rate as a psychological counteraction of crime, for the very
conditions of the psychological convulsion which caused them to
offend precludes any deterrent influence in a legal menace.

I therefore believe that in typical cases of criminals of passion,
where there is no clear demand for mental treatment in a criminal
lunatic asylum, imprisonment is of no use whatever.  Strict
reparation of damage will suffice to punish them, whilst they are
punished already by genuine and sincere remorse immediately after
the criminal explosion of their legitimate passion.  Temporary
removal from the scene of their crime and from the residence of
the victim's family might be superadded.

Nevertheless it must not be forgotten that I say this in
connection with criminals in whom the passionate impulse is really
exceptional, and who present the physiological and psychical
features of the genuine criminal of passion which I enumerated in
the first chapter.

I come to a different conclusion in the case of criminals who have
merely been provoked, who do not completely present these
features, who are actuated by a combination of social and
excusable passion with an anti-social passion, such as hate,
vengeance, anger, ambition, &c.  Of such a kind are murderers
carried away by anger just in itself, by blood-feuds, or desire to
avenge the honour of their family, by vindication of personal
honour, by grave suspicion of adultery, &c.; persons guilty of
malicious wounding, disfigurement through erotic motives, and the
like.  <p 284>These may be classed as occasional criminals, and
treated accordingly{.??}


Such, then, in general outline, is the positive system of social,
preventive, and repressive defence against crimes and criminals,
in accordance with the inferences from a scientific study of crime
as a natural and social phenomenon.

It is a defensive system which, in the nature of things, must of
necessity be substituted for the criminal and penitentiary systems
of the classical school, so soon as the daily experience of every
nation shall have established the conviction, which at this moment
is more or less profound, but merely of a general character, that
these systems are henceforth incompatible with the needs of
society, not only by their crude pedantry, but also because their
consequences are becoming daily more disastrous.





                  THE MODERN CRIMINAL SCIENCE SERIES

                   _Published under the Auspices of_

        THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF CRIMINAL LAW AND CRIMINOLOGY




                          Criminal Psychology

                             A MANUAL FOR
                  JUDGES, PRACTITIONERS, AND STUDENTS

                         BY HANS GROSS, J.U.D.

            _Professor of Criminal Law at the University of
               Graz, Austria. Formerly Magistrate of the
                Criminal Court at Czernovitz, Austria_

               Translated from the Fourth German Edition

                      BY HORACE M. KALLEN, PH. D.

     _Assistant and Lecturer in Philosophy in Harvard University_

             WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY JOSEPH JASTROW, PH.D.

        PROFESSOR OF PSYCHOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN

                                BOSTON

                      LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY

                                 1918

                          _Copyright, 1911_,
                    BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.

                         _All rights reserved_




GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE MODERN CRIMINAL SCIENCE SERIES.


At the National Conference of Criminal Law and Criminology, held in
Chicago, at Northwestern University, in June, 1909, the American
Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology was organized; and, as a part
of its work, the following resolution was passed:

“_Whereas_, it is exceedingly desirable that important treatises on
criminology in foreign languages be made readily accessible in the
English language, _Resolved_, that the president appoint a committee of
five with power to select such treatises as in their judgment should be
translated, and to arrange for their publication.”

The Committee appointed under this Resolution has made careful
investigation of the literature of the subject, and has consulted by
frequent correspondence. It has selected several works from among the
mass of material. It has arranged with publisher, with authors, and with
translators, for the immediate undertaking and rapid progress of the
task. It realizes the necessity of educating the professions and the
public by the wide diffusion of information on this subject. It desires
here to explain the considerations which have moved it in seeking to
select the treatises best adapted to the purpose.

For the community at large, it is important to recognize that criminal
science is a larger thing than criminal law. The legal profession in
particular has a duty to familiarize itself with the principles of that
science, as the sole means for intelligent and systematic improvement of
the criminal law.

Two centuries ago, while modern medical science was still young, medical
practitioners proceeded upon two general assumptions: one as to the
cause of disease, the other as to its treatment. As to the cause of
disease,--disease was sent by the inscrutable will of God. No man could
fathom that will, nor its arbitrary operation. As to the treatment of
disease, there were believed to be a few remedial agents of universal
efficacy. Calomel and bloodletting, for example, were two of the
principal ones. A larger or smaller dose of calomel, a greater or less
quantity of bloodletting,--this blindly indiscriminate mode of treatment
was regarded as orthodox for all common varieties of ailment. And so his
calomel pill and his bloodletting lancet were carried everywhere with
him by the doctor.

Nowadays, all this is past, in medical science. As to the causes of
disease, we know that they are facts of nature,--various, but
distinguishable by diagnosis and research, and more or less capable of
prevention or control or counter-action. As to the treatment, we now
know that there are various specific modes of treatment for specific
causes or symptoms, and that the treatment must be adapted to the cause.
In short, the individualization of disease, in cause and in treatment,
is the dominant truth of modern medical science.

The same truth is now known about crime; but the understanding and the
application of it are just opening upon us. The old and still dominant
thought is, as to cause, that a crime is caused by the inscrutable moral
free will of the human being, doing or not doing the crime, just as it
pleases; absolutely free in advance, at any moment of time, to choose or
not to choose the criminal act, and therefore in itself the sole and
ultimate cause of crime. As to treatment, there still are just two
traditional measures, used in varying doses for all kinds of crime and
all kinds of persons,--jail, or a fine (for death is now employed in
rare cases only). But modern science, here as in medicine, recognizes
that crime also (like disease) has natural causes. It need not be
asserted for one moment that crime is a disease. But it does have
natural causes,--that is, circumstances which work to produce it in a
given case. And as to treatment, modern science recognizes that penal or
remedial treatment cannot possibly be indiscriminate and machine-like,
but must be adapted to the causes, and to the man as affected by those
causes. Common sense and logic alike require, inevitably, that the
moment we predicate a specific cause for an undesirable effect, the
remedial treatment must be specifically adapted to that cause.

Thus the great truth of the present and the future, for criminal
science, is the individualization of penal treatment,--for that man, and
for the cause of that man’s crime.

Now this truth opens up a vast field for re-examination. It means that
we must study all the possible data that can be causes of crime,--the
man’s heredity, the man’s physical and moral make-up, his emotional
temperament, the surroundings of his youth, his present home, and other
conditions,--all the influencing circumstances. And it means that the
effect of different methods of treatment, old or new, for different
kinds of men and of causes, must be studied, experimented, and compared.
Only in this way can accurate knowledge be reached, and new efficient
measures be adopted.

All this has been going on in Europe for forty years past, and in
limited fields in this country. All the branches of science that can
help have been working,--anthropology, medicine, psychology, economics,
sociology, philanthropy, penology. The law alone has abstained. The
science of law is the one to be served by all this. But the public in
general and the legal profession in particular have remained either
ignorant of the entire subject or indifferent to the entire scientific
movement. And this ignorance or indifference has blocked the way to
progress in administration.

The Institute therefore takes upon itself, as one of its aims, to
inculcate the study of modern criminal science, as a pressing duty for
the legal profession and for the thoughtful community at large. One of
its principal modes of stimulating and aiding this study is to make
available in the English language the most useful treatises now extant
in the Continental languages. Our country has started late. There is
much to catch up with, in the results reached elsewhere. We shall, to be
sure, profit by the long period of argument and theorizing and
experimentation which European thinkers and workers have passed through.
But to reap that profit, the results of their experience must be made
accessible in the English language.

The effort, in selecting this series of translations, has been to choose
those works which best represent the various schools of thought in
criminal science, the general results reached, the points of contact or
of controversy, and the contrasts of method--having always in view that
class of works which have a more than local value and could best be
serviceable to criminal science in our country. As the science has
various aspects and emphases--the anthropological, psychological,
sociological, legal, statistical, economic, pathological--due regard was
paid, in the selection, to a representation of all these aspects. And as
the several Continental countries have contributed in different ways to
these various aspects,--France, Germany, Italy, most abundantly, but the
others each its share,--the effort was made also to recognize the
different contributions as far as feasible.

The selection made by the Committee, then, represents its judgment of
the works that are most useful and most instructive for the purpose of
translation. It is its conviction that this Series, when completed, will
furnish the American student of criminal science a systematic and
sufficient acquaintance with the controlling doctrines and methods that
now hold the stage of thought in Continental Europe. Which of the
various principles and methods will prove best adapted to help our
problems can only be told after our students and workers have tested
them in our own experience. But it is certain that we must first
acquaint ourselves with these results of a generation of European
thought.

In closing, the Committee thinks it desirable to refer the members of
the Institute, for purposes of further investigation of the literature,
to the “Preliminary Bibliography of Modern Criminal Law and Criminology”
(Bulletin No. 1 of the Gary Library of Law of Northwestern University),
already issued to members of the Conference. The Committee believes that
some of the Anglo-American works listed therein will be found useful.


COMMITTEE ON TRANSLATIONS.

     _Chairman_, WM. W. SMITHERS,

     _Secretary of the Comparative Law Bureau of the American Bar
     Association, Philadelphia, Pa._

     ERNST FREUND,

     _Professor of Law in the University of Chicago_.

     MAURICE PARMELEE,

     _Professor of Sociology in the State University of Kansas_.

     ROSCOE POUND,

     _Professor of Law in the University of Chicago_.

     ROBERT B. SCOTT,

     _Professor of Political Science in the State University of
     Wisconsin_.

     JOHN H. WIGMORE,

     _Professor of Law in Northwestern University, Chicago_.




INTRODUCTION TO THE ENGLISH VERSION.


What Professor Gross presents in this volume is nothing less than an
applied psychology of the judicial processes,--a critical survey of the
procedures incident to the administration of justice with due
recognition of their intrinsically psychological character, and yet with
the insight conferred by a responsible experience with a working system.
There is nothing more significant in the history of institutions than
their tendency to get in the way of the very purposes which they were
devised to meet. The adoration of measures seems to be an ineradicable
human trait. Prophets and reformers ever insist upon the values of
ideals and ends--the spiritual meanings of things--while the people as
naturally drift to the worship of cults and ceremonies, and thus secure
the more superficial while losing the deeper satisfactions of a duty
performed. So restraining is the formal rigidity of primitive cultures
that the mind of man hardly moves within their enforced orbits. In
complex societies the conservatism, which is at once profitably
conservative and needlessly obstructing, assumes a more intricate, a
more evasive, and a more engaging form. In an age for which machinery
has accomplished such heroic service, the dependence upon mechanical
devices acquires quite unprecedented dimensions. It is compatible with,
if not provocative of, a mental indolence,--an attention to details
sufficient to operate the machinery, but a disinclination to think about
the principles of the ends of its operation. There is no set of human
relations that exhibits more distinctively the issues of these
undesirable tendencies than those which the process of law adjusts. We
have lost utterly the older sense of a hallowed fealty towards man-made
law; we are not suffering from the inflexibility of the Medes and the
Persians. We manufacture laws as readily as we do steam-rollers and
change their patterns to suit the roads we have to build. But with the
profit of our adaptability we are in danger of losing the underlying
sense of purpose that inspires and continues to justify measures, and to
lose also a certain intimate intercourse with problems of theory and
philosophy which is one of the requisites of a professional equipment
and one nowhere better appreciated than in countries loyal to Teutonic
ideals of culture. The present volume bears the promise of performing a
notable service for English readers by rendering accessible an admirable
review of the data and principles germane to the practices of justice as
related to their intimate conditioning in the psychological traits of
men.

The significant fact in regard to the procedures of justice is that they
are of men, by men, and for men. Any attempt to eliminate unduly the
human element, or to esteem a system apart from its adaptation to the
psychology of human traits as they serve the ends of justice, is likely
to result in a machine-made justice and a mechanical administration. As
a means of furthering the plasticity of the law, of infusing it with a
large human vitality--a movement of large scope in which religion and
ethics, economics and sociology are worthily cooperating--the psychology
of the party of the first part and the party of the second part may well
be considered. The psychology of the judge enters into the consideration
as influentially as the psychology of the offender. The many-sidedness
of the problems thus unified in a common application is worthy of
emphasis. There is the problem of evidence: the ability of a witness to
observe and recount an incident, and the distortions to which such
report is liable through errors of sense, confusion of inference with
observation, weakness of judgment, prepossession, emotional interest,
excitement, or an abnormal mental condition. It is the author’s view
that the judge should understand these relations not merely in their
narrower practical bearings, but in their larger and more theoretical
aspects which the study of psychology as a comprehensive science sets
forth. There is the allied problem of testimony and belief, which
concerns the peculiarly judicial qualities. To ease the step from ideas
to their expression, to estimate motive and intention, to know and
appraise at their proper value the logical weaknesses and personal
foibles of all kinds and conditions of offenders and witnesses,--to do
this in accord with high standards, requires that men as well as
evidence shall be judged. Allied to this problem which appeals to a
large range of psychological doctrine, there is yet another which
appeals to a yet larger and more intricate range,--that of human
character and condition. Crimes are such complex issues as to demand the
systematic diagnosis of the criminal. Heredity and environment,
associations and standards, initiative and suggestibility, may all be
condoning as well as aggravating factors of what becomes a “case.” The
peculiar temptations of distinctive periods of life, the perplexing
intrusion of subtle abnormalities, particularly when of a sexual type,
have brought it about that the psychologist has extended his laboratory
procedures to include the study of such deviation; and thus a common set
of findings have an equally pertinent though a different interest for
the theoretical student of relations and the practitioner. There are, as
well, certain special psychological conditions that may color and quite
transform the interpretation of a situation or a bit of testimony. To
distinguish between hysterical deception and lying, between a
superstitious believer in the reality of an experience and the victim of
an actual hallucination, to detect whether a condition of emotional
excitement or despair is a cause or an effect, is no less a
psychological problem than the more popularly discussed question of
compelling confession of guilt by the analysis of laboratory reactions.
It may well be that judges and lawyers and men of science will continue
to differ in their estimate of the aid which may come to the practical
pursuits from a knowledge of the relations as the psychologist presents
them in a non-technical, but yet systematic analysis. Professor Gross
believes thoroughly in its importance; and those who read his book will
arrive at a clearer view of the methods and issues that give character
to this notable chapter in applied psychology.

The author of the volume is a distinguished representative of the modern
scientific study of criminology, or “criminalistic” as he prefers to
call it. He was born December 26th, 1847, in Graz (Steiermark), Austria,
pursued his university studies at Vienna and Graz, and qualified for the
law in 1869. He served as “Untersuchungsrichter” (examining magistrate)
and in other capacities, and received his first academic appointment as
professor of criminal law at the University of Czernowitz. He was later
attached to the German University at Prague, and is now professor in the
University of Graz. He is the author of a considerable range of volumes
bearing on the administration of criminal law and upon the theoretical
foundations of the science of criminology. In 1893 he issued his
“Handbuch für Untersuchungsrichter, als System der Kriminalistik,” a
work that reached its fifth edition in 1908, and has been translated
into eight foreign languages. From 1898 on he has been the editor of the
“Archiv für Kriminalanthropologie und Kriminalistik,” of which about
twenty volumes have appeared. He is a frequent contributor to this
journal, which is an admirable representative of an efficient technical
aid to the dissemination of interest in an important and difficult
field. It is also worthy of mention that at the University of Graz he
has established a Museum of Criminology, and that his son, Otto Gross,
is well known as a specialist in nervous and mental disorders and as a
contributor to the psychological aspects of his specialty. The volume
here presented was issued in 1897; the translation is from the second
and enlarged edition of 1905. The volume may be accepted as an
authoritative exposition of a leader in his “Fach,” and is the more
acceptable for purposes of translation, in that the wide interests of
the writer and his sympathetic handling of his material impart an
unusually readable quality to his pages.

JOSEPH JASTROW.

MADISON, WISCONSIN,
DECEMBER, 1910.




AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.


The present work was the first really objective Criminal Psychology
which dealt with the mental states of judges, experts, jury, witnesses,
etc., as well as with the mental states of criminals. And a study of the
former is just as needful as a study of the latter. The need has
fortunately since been recognized and several studies of special topics
treated in this book--e.g. depositions of witnesses, perception, the
pathoformic lie, superstition, probability, sensory illusions,
inference, sexual differences, etc.--have become the subjects of a
considerable literature, referred to in our second edition.

I agreed with much pleasure to the proposition of the American Institute
of Criminal Law and Criminology to have the book translated. I am proud
of the opportunity to address Americans and Englishmen in their
language. We of the German countries recognize the intellectual
achievements of America and are well aware how much Americans can teach
us.

I can only hope that the translation will justify itself by its
usefulness to the legal profession.

HANS GROSS.




TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.


The present version of Gross’s Kriminal Psychologie differs from the
original in the fact that many references not of general psychological
or criminological interest or not readily accessible to English readers
have been eliminated, and in some instances more accessible ones have
been inserted. Prof. Gross’s erudition is so stupendous that it reaches
far out into texts where no ordinary reader would be able or willing to
follow him, and the book suffers no loss from the excision. In other
places it was necessary to omit or to condense passages. Wherever this
is done attention is called to it in the notes. The chief omission is a
portion of the section on dialects. Otherwise the translation is
practically literal. Additional bibliography of psychological and
criminological works likely to be generally helpful has been appended.




CONTENTS.


                                                          PAGE

GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE MODERN CRIMINAL SCIENCE
SERIES                                                      v

INTRODUCTION TO THE ENGLISH VERSION                        ix

AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION                 xiii

TRANSLATOR’S NOTE                                         xiv

INTRODUCTION                                                1

PART I. THE SUBJECTIVE CONDITIONS OF EVIDENCE
(THE MENTAL ACTIVITIES OF THE JUDGE)                        7

TITLE A. CONDITIONS OF TAKING EVIDENCE                      7

Topic 1. METHOD                                             7

§ 1 (_a_) General Considerations                            7

§ 2 (_b_) The Method of Natural Science                     9

Topic 2. PSYCHOLOGIC LESSONS                               14

§ 3 (_a_) General Considerations                           14

§ 4 (_b_) Integrity of Witnesses                           16

§ 5 (_c_) Correctness of Testimony                         18

§ 6 (_d_) Presuppositions of Evidence-Taking               20

§ 7 (_e_) Egoism                                           25

§ 8 (_f_) Secrets                                          28

§ 9 (_g_) Interest                                         37

Topic 3. PHENOMENOLOGY: The Outward Expression
of Mental States                                           41

§ 10                                                       41

§ 11 (_a_) General External Conditions                     42

§ 12 (_b_) General Signs of Character                      53

§ 13 (_c_) Particular Character-signs                      61

(_d_) Somatic Character-Units                              69

§ 14 (1) General Considerations                            69

§ 15 (2) Causes of Irritation                              71

§ 16 (3) Cruelty                                           76

§ 17 (4) Nostalgia                                         77

§ 18 (5) Reflex Movements                                  78

§ 19 (6) Dress                                             82

§ 20 (7) Physiognomy and Related Subjects                  83

§ 21 (8) The Hand                                         100

TITLE B. THE CONDITIONS FOR DEFINING THEORIES             105

Topic 1.   THE MAKING OF INFERENCES                       105

§ 22.                                                     105

§ 23 (_a_) Proof                                          106

§ 24 (_b_) Causation                                      117

§ 25 (_c_) Scepticism                                     129

§ 26 (_d_) The Empirical Method in the Study of Cases     136

§ 27 (_e_) Analogy                                        144

§ 28 (_f_) Probability                                    147

§ 29 (_g_) Chance                                         159

§ 30 (_h_) Persuasion and Explanation                     161

§ 31 (_i_) Inference and Judgment                         165

§ 32 (_j_) Mistaken Inferences                            176

§ 33 (_k_) Statistics of the Moral Situation              179

Topic 2. KNOWLEDGE                                        183

§ 34                                                      183

PART II. OBJECTIVE CONDITIONS OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION
(THE MENTAL ACTIVITY OF THE EXAMINEE)                     187

TITLE A. GENERAL CONDITIONS                               187

Topic 1. OF SENSE PERCEPTION                              187

§ 35                                                      187

§ 36 (_a_) General Considerations                         187

     (_b_) The Sense of Sight                             196

§ 37 (1) General Considerations                           196

§ 38 (2) Color-vision                                     204

§ 39 (3) The Blind Spot                                   207

§ 40 (_c_) The Sense of Hearing                           208

§ 41 (_d_) The Sense of Taste                             212

§ 42 (_e_) The Sense of Smell                             213

§ 43 (_f_) The Sense of Touch                             215

Topic 2. PERCEPTION AND CONCEPTION                        221

§ 44                                                      221

Topic 3. IMAGINATION                                      232

§ 45                                                      232

Topic 4. INTELLECTUAL PROCESSES                           238

§ 46 (_a_) General Considerations                         238

§ 47 (_b_) The Mechanism of Thinking                      243

§ 48 (_c_) The Subconscious                               245

§ 49 (_d_) Subjective Conditions                          248

Topic 5. THE ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS                         254

§ 50                                                      254

Topic 6. RECOLLECTION AND MEMORY                          258

§ 51                                                      258

§ 52 (_a_) The Essence of Memory                          259

§ 53 (_b_) The Forms of Reproduction                      263

§ 54 (_c_) The Peculiarities of Reproduction              268

§ 55 (_d_) Illusions of Memory                            275

§ 56 (_e_) Mnemotechnique                                 279

Topic 7. THE WILL                                         281

§ 57                                                      281

Topic 8. EMOTION                                          283

§ 58                                                      283

Topic 9. THE FORMS OF GIVING TESTIMONY                    287

§ 59                                                      287

§ 60 (_a_) General Study of Variety in Forms of Expression       288

§ 61 (_b_) Dialect Forms                                  293

§ 62 (_c_) Incorrect Forms                                296

TITLE B. DIFFERENTIATING CONDITIONS OF GIVING
TESTIMONY                                                 300

Topic 1. GENERAL DIFFERENCES                              300

(_a_) Woman                                               300

§ 63 1. General Considerations                            300

§ 64 2. Difference between Man and Women                  307

3. Sexual Peculiarities                                   311

§ 65 (_a_) General                                        311

§ 66 (_b_) Menstruation                                   311

§ 67 (_c_) Pregnancy                                      317

§ 68 (_d_) Erotic                                         319

§ 69 (_e_) Submerged Sexual Factors                       322

4. Particular Feminine Qualities                          332

§ 70 (_a_) Intelligence                                   332

§ 71 1. Conception                                        333

§ 72 2. Judgment                                          335

§ 73 3. Quarrels with Women                               337

§ 74 (_b_) Honesty                                        340

§ 75 (_c_) Love, Hate and Friendship                      350

§ 76 (_d_) Emotional Disposition and Related
Subjects                                                  359

§ 77 (_e_) Weakness                                       361

§ 78 (_b_) Children                                       364

§ 79 1. General Considerations                            364

§ 80 2. Children as Witnesses                             365

§ 81 3. Juvenile Delinquency                              369

§ 82 (_c_) Senility                                       372

§ 83 (_d_) Differences in Conception                      375

§ 84 (_e_) Nature and Nurture                             384

§ 85 1. The Influence of Nurture                          385

§ 86 2. The Views of the Uneducated                       388

§ 87 3. Onesided Education                                391

§ 88 4. Inclination                                       393

§ 89 5. Other Differences                                 395

§ 90 6. Intelligence and Stupidity                        398

Topic 2. ISOLATED INFLUENCES                              406

§ 91 (_a_) Habit                                          406

§ 92 (_b_) Heredity                                       410

§ 93 (_c_) Prepossession                                  412

§ 94 (_d_) Imitation and the Crowd                        415

§ 95 (_e_) Passion and Emotion                            416

§ 96 (_f_) Honor                                          421

§ 97 (_g_) Superstition                                   422

Topic 3. MISTAKES                                         422

(_a_) Mistakes of the Senses                              422

§ 98 (1) General Considerations                          422

§ 99 (2) Optical Illusions                               427

§ 100 (3) Auditory Illusions                              443

§ 101 (4) Illusions of Touch                              449

§ 102 (5) Illusions of the Sense of Taste                 452

§103 (6) The Illusions of the Olfactory Sense             453

§ 104 (_b_) Hallucinations and Illusions                  454

§ 105 (_c_) Imaginative Ideas                             459

(_d_) Misunderstandings                                  467

§ 106 1. Verbal Misunderstandings                          467

§ 107 2. Other Misunderstandings                           470

(_e_) The Lie                                            474

§ 108 1. General Considerations                            474

§ 109 2. The Pathoformic Lie                               479

Topic 4. ISOLATED SPECIAL CONDITIONS                       480

§ 110 (_a_) Sleep and Dream                               480

§ 111 (_b_) Intoxication                                  484

§ 112 (_c_) Suggestion                                    491

APPENDIX A. BIBLIOGRAPHY, INCLUDING TEXTS MORE EASILY
WITHIN REACH OF ENGLISH READERS                           493

APPENDIX B. WORKS ON PSYCHOLOGY OF GENERAL INTEREST       500

INDEX                                                     503




CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY.




INTRODUCTION.


Of all disciplines necessary to the criminal justice in addition to the
knowledge of law, the most important are those derived from psychology.
For such sciences teach him to know the type of man it is his business
to deal with. Now psychological sciences appear in various forms. There
is a native psychology, a keenness of vision given in the march of
experience, to a few fortunate persons, who see rightly without having
learned the laws which determine the course of events, or without being
even conscious of them. Of this native psychological power many men show
traces, but very few indeed are possessed of as much as criminalists
intrinsically require.

In the colleges and pre-professional schools we jurists may acquire a
little scientific psychology as a “philosophical propaedeutic,” but we
all know how insufficient it is and how little of it endures in the
business of life. And we had rather not reckon up the number of
criminalists who, seeing this insufficiency, pursue serious
psychological investigations.

One especial psychological discipline which was apparently created for
our sake is the psychology of law, the development of which, in Germany,
Volkmar[1] recounts. This science afterward developed, through the
instrumentality of Metzger[2] and Plainer,[3] as criminal psychology.
From the medical point of view especially, Choulant’s collection of the
latter’s, “Quaestiones,” is still valuable. Criminal psychology was
developed further by Hoffbauer,[4] Grohmann,[5] Heinroth,[6]
Schaumann,[7] Münch,[8] Eckartshausen,[9] and others. In Kant’s time the
subject was a bone of contention between faculties, Kant representing in
the quarrel the philosophic, Metzger, Hoffbauer, and Fries,[10] the
medical faculties. Later legal psychology was simply absorbed by
psychiatry, and thereby completely subsumed among the medical
disciplines, in spite of the fact that Regnault,[11] still later,
attempted to recover it for philosophy, as is pointed out in
Friedreich’s[12] well-known text-book (cf. moreover V. Wilbrand’s[13]
text-book). Nowadays, criminal psychology, as represented by Kraus,[14]
Krafft-Ebing,[15] Maudsley,[16] Holtzendorff,[17] Lombroso,[18] and
others has become a branch of criminal anthropology. It is valued as the
doctrine of motives in crime, or, according to Liszt, as the
investigation of the psychophysical condition of the criminal. It is
thus only a part of the subject indicated by its name.[19] How utterly
criminal psychology has become incorporated in criminal anthropology is
demonstrated by the works of Näcke,[20] Kurella,[21] Bleuler,[22]
Dallemagne,[23] Marro,[24] Ellis,[25] Baer,[26] Koch,[27] Maschka,[28]
Thomson,[29] Ferri,[30] Bonfigli,[31] Corre,[32] etc.

Literally, criminal psychology should be _that form of psychology used
in dealing with crime_; not merely, the psychopathology of criminals,
the natural history of the criminal mind. But taken even literally, this
is not all the psychology required by the criminalist. No doubt crime is
an objective thing. Cain would actually have slaughtered Abel even if at
the time Adam and Eve were already dead. But for us each crime exists
only as we perceive it,--as we learn to know it through all those media
established for us in criminal procedure. But these media are based upon
sense-perception, upon the perception of the judge and his assistants,
i.e.: upon witnesses, accused, and experts. Such perceptions must be
psychologically validated. The knowledge of the principles of this
validation demands again a special department of general
psychology--even such a _pragmatic applied psychology as will deal with
all states of mind that might possibly be involved in the determination
and judgment of crime_. It is the aim of this book to present such a
psychology. “If we were gods,” writes Plato in the Symposium, “there
would be no philosophy”--and if our senses were truer and our sense
keener, we should need no psychology. As it is we must strive hard to
determine certainly how we see and think; we must understand these
processes according to valid laws organized into a system--otherwise we
remain the shuttlecocks of sense, misunderstanding and accident. We must
know how all of us,--we ourselves, witnesses, experts, and accused,
observe and perceive; we must know how they think,--and how they
demonstrate; we must take into account how variously mankind infer and
perceive, what mistakes and illusions may ensue; how people recall and
bear in mind; how everything varies with age, sex, nature, and
cultivation. We must also see clearly what series of influences can
prevail to change all those things which would have been different under
normal conditions. Indeed, the largest place in this book will be given
to the witness and the judge himself, since we want in fact, from the
first to keep in mind the creation of material for our instruction; but
the psychology of the criminal must also receive consideration
where-ever the issue is not concerned with his so-called psychoses, but
with the validation of evidence.

Our method will be that fundamental to all psychological investigation,
and may be divided into three parts:[33]

1. The preparation of a review of psychological phenomena.

2. Study of causal relationships.

3. Establishment of the principles of psychic activity.

The subject-matter will be drawn on the one hand, from that already
presented by psychological science, but will be treated throughout from
the point of view of the criminal judge, and prepared for his purposes.
On the other hand, the material will be drawn from these observations
that alone the criminologist at work can make, and on this the
principles of psychology will be brought to bear.

We shall not espouse either pietism, scepticism, or criticism. We have
merely to consider the individual phenomena, as they may concern the
criminalist; to examine them and to establish whatever value the
material may have for him; what portions may be of use to him in the
interest of discovering the truth; and where the dangers may lurk that
menace him. And just as we are aware that the comprehension of the
fundamental concepts of the exact sciences is not to be derived from
their methodology, so we must keep clearly in mind that the truth which
we criminalists have to attain can not be constructed out of the
_formal_ correctness of the content presented us. We are in duty bound
to render it _materially_ correct. But that is to be achieved only if we
are acquainted with principles of psychology, and know how to make them
serve our purposes. For our problem, the oft-quoted epigram of Bailey’s,
“The study of physiology is as repugnant to the psychologist as that of
acoustics to the composer,” no longer holds. We are not poets, we are
investigators. If we are to do our work properly, we must base it
completely upon modern psycho physical fundamentals. Whoever expects
unaided to find the right thing at the right moment is in the position
of the individual who didn’t know whether he could play the violin
because he had not yet tried. We must gather wisdom while we are not
required to use it; when the time for use arrives, the time for harvest
is over.

Let this be our fundamental principle: _That we criminalists receive
from our main source, the witnesses, many more inferences than
observations_, and that this fact is the basis of so many mistakes in
our work. Again and again we are taught, in the deposition of evidence,
that only facts as plain sense-perceptions should be presented; that
inference is the judge’s affair. But we only appear to obey this
principle; actually, most of what we note as fact and sense-perception,
is nothing but a more or less justified judgment, which though presented
in the honestest belief, still offers no positive truth. “Amicus Plato,
sed magis amica Veritas.”

There is no doubt that there is an increasing, and for us jurists, a not
unimportant demand for the study of psychology in its bearing on our
profession. But it must be served. The spirited Abbé de Baëts, said at a
meeting of criminalists in Brussels, that the _present tendency of the
science of criminal law demands the observation of the facts of the
daily life_. In this observation consists the alpha and omega of our
work; we can perform it only with the flux of sensory appearances, and
the law which determines this flux, and according to which the
appearances come, is the law of causation. But we are nowhere so
neglectful of causation as in the deeds of mankind. A knowledge of that
region only psychology can give us. Hence, to become conversant with
psychological principles, is the obvious duty of that conscientiousness
which must hold first place among the forces that conserve the state. It
is a fact that there has been in this matter much delinquency and much
neglect. If, then, we were compelled to endure some bitterness on
account of it, let it be remembered that it was always directed upon the
fact that we insisted on studying our statutes and their commentaries,
fearfully excluding every other discipline that might have assisted us,
and have imported vitality into our profession. It was Gneist[34] who
complained: “The contemporary low stage of legal education is to be
explained like much else by that historical continuity which plays the
foremost rôle in the administration of justice.” Menger[35] does not
mention “historical continuity” so plainly, but he points sternly enough
to the legal sciences as the most backward of all disciplines that were
in contact with contemporary tendencies. That these accusations are
justified we must admit, when we consider what Stölzel[36] and the
genial creator of modern civil teaching demands: “It must be recognized
that jurisprudence in reality is nothing but the thesis of the healthy
human understanding in matters of law.” But what the “healthy human
mind” requires we can no longer discover from our statutory paragraphs
only. How shameful it is for us, when Goldschmidt[37] openly narrates
how a famous scientist exclaimed to a student in his laboratory: “What
do you want here? You know nothing, you understand nothing, you do
nothing,--you had better become a lawyer.”

Now let us for once frankly confess why we are dealt these disgraceful
reproaches. Let us agree that we have not studied or dealt with
jurisprudence as a science, have never envisaged it as an empirical
discipline; that the aprioristic and classical tradition had kept this
insight at a distance, and that where investigation and effort toward
the recognition of the true is lacking, there lacks everything of the
least scientific importance. To be scientifically legitimate, we need
first of all the installation of the disciplines of research which shall
have direct relationships with our proper task. In this way only can we
attain that spiritual independence by means of spiritual freedom, which
Goldschmidt defines as the affair of the higher institutions of
learning, and which is also the ideal of our own business in life. And
this task is not too great. “Life is movement,” cried Alois von
Brinz,[38] in his magnificent inaugural address. “Life is not the
thought, but the thinking which comes in the fullness of action.”

It may be announced with joy and satisfaction, that since the
publication of the first edition of this book, and bearing upon it,
there came to life a rich collection of fortuitous works which have
brought together valuable material. Concerning the testimony of
witnesses, its nature and value, concerning memory, and the types of
reproduction, there is now a considerable literature. Everywhere
industrious hands are raised,--hands of psychologists, physicians, and
lawyers, to share in the work. Should they go on unhurt we may perhaps
repair the unhappy faults committed by our ancestors through stupid
ignorance and destructive use of uncritically collected material.




PART I.

THE SUBJECTIVE CONDITIONS OF EVIDENCE: THE MENTAL ACTIVITIES OF THE
JUDGE.




TITLE A. THE CONDITIONS OF TAKING EVIDENCE.


Topic I. METHOD.


Section 1. (a) General Considerations.

Socrates, dealing in the Meno with the teachability of virtue, sends for
one of Meno’s slaves, to prove by him the possibility of absolutely
certain a priori knowledge. The slave is to determine the length of a
rectangle, the contents of which is twice that of one measuring two
feet; but he is to have no previous knowledge of the matter, and is not
to be directly coached by Socrates. He is to discover the answer for
himself. Actually the slave first gives out an incorrect answer. He
answers that the length of a rectangle having twice the area of the one
mentioned is four feet, thinking that the length doubles with the area.
Thereupon Socrates triumphantly points out to Meno that the slave does
as a matter of fact not yet quite know the truth under consideration,
but that he really thinks he knows it; and then Socrates, in his own
Socratic way, leads the slave to the correct solution. This very
significant procedure of the philosopher is cited by Guggenheim[39] as
an illustration of the essence of a priori knowledge, and when we
properly consider what we have to do with a witness who has to relate
any fact, we may see in the Socratic method the simplest example of our
task. We must never forget _that the majority of mankind dealing with
any subject whatever always believe that they know and repeat the
truth_, and even when they say doubtfully: “I believe.--It seems to me,”
there is, in this tentativeness, more meant than meets the ear. When
anybody says: “I believe that--” it merely means that he intends to
insure himself against the event of being contradicted by better
informed persons; but he certainly has not the doubt his expression
indicates. When, however, the report of some bare fact is in question
(“It rained,” “It was 9 o’clock,” “His beard was brown,” or “It was 8
o’clock,”) it does not matter to the narrator, and if he imparts _such_
facts with the introduction, “I believe,” then he was really uncertain.
The matter becomes important only where the issue involves
partly-concealed observations, conclusions and judgments. In such cases
another factor enters--conceit; what the witness asserts he is fairly
certain of just because he asserts it, and all the “I believes,”
“Perhapses,” and “It seemeds,” are merely insurance against all
accidents.

Generally statements are made without such reservations and, even if the
matter is not long certain, with full assurance. What thus holds of the
daily life, holds also, and more intensely, of court-witnesses,
particularly in crucial matters. Anybody experienced in their conduct
comes to be absolutely convinced that witnesses do not know what they
know. A series of assertions are made with utter certainty. Yet when
these are successively subjected to closer examinations, tested for
their ground and source, only a very small portion can be retained
unaltered. Of course, one may here overshoot the mark. It often happens,
even in the routine of daily life, that a man may be made to feel shaky
in his most absolute convictions, by means of an energetic attack and
searching questions. Conscientious and sanguine people are particularly
easy subjects of such doubts. Somebody narrates an event; questioning
begins as to the indubitability of the fact, as to the exclusion of
possible deception; the narrator becomes uncertain, he recalls that,
because of a lively imagination, he has already believed himself to have
seen things otherwise than they actually were, and finally he admits
that the matter might probably have been different. During trials this
is still more frequent. The circumstance of being in court of itself
excites most people; the consciousness that one’s statement is, or may
be, of great significance increases the excitement; and the
authoritative character of the official subdues very many people to
conform their opinions to his. What wonder then, that however much a man
may be convinced of the correctness of his evidence, he may yet fail in
the face of the doubting judge to know anything certainly?

Now one of the most difficult tasks of the criminalist is to hit, in
just such cases, upon the truth; neither to accept the testimony blindly
and uncritically; nor to render the witness, who otherwise is telling
the truth, vacillating and doubtful. But it is still more difficult to
lead the witness, who is not intentionally falsifying, but has merely
observed incorrectly or has made false conclusions, to a statement of
the truth as Socrates leads the slave in the Meno. It is as modern as it
is comfortable to assert that this is not the judge’s business--that the
witness is to depose, his evidence is to be accepted, and the judge is
to judge. Yet it is supposed before everything else that the duty of the
court is to establish the material truth--that the formal truth is
insufficient. Moreover, if we notice false observations and let them by,
then, under certain circumstance, we are minus one important piece of
evidence _pro_ and _con_, and the whole case may be turned topsy turvy.
At the very least a basis of development in the presentation of evidence
is so excluded. We shall, then, proceed in the Socratic fashion. But,
inasmuch as we are not concerned with mathematics, and are hence more
badly placed in the matter of proof, we shall have to proceed more
cautiously and with less certainty, than when the question is merely one
of the area of a square. On the one hand we know only in the rarest
cases that we are not ourselves mistaken, so that we must not, without
anything further, lead another to agree with us; on the other hand we
must beware of perverting the witness from his possibly sound opinions.
It is not desirable to speak of suggestion in this matter, since, if I
believe that the other fellow knows a matter better than I and conform
to his opinion, there is as yet no suggestion. And this pure form of
change of opinion and of openness to conviction is commonest among us.
Whoever is able to correct the witness’s apparently false conceptions
and to lead him to discover his error of his own accord and then to
speak the truth--whoever can do this and yet does not go too far,
deducing from the facts nothing that does not actually follow from--that
man is a master among us.


Section 2. (b) The Method of Natural Science.[40]

If now we ask how we are to plan our work, what method we are to follow,
we must agree that to establish scientifically the principles of our
discipline alone is not sufficient. If we are to make progress, the
daily routine also must be scientifically administered. Every sentence,
every investigation, every official act must satisfy the same demand as
that made of the entire juristic science. In this way only can we rise
above the mere workaday world of manual labor, with its sense-dulling
disgust, its vexatious monotony, and its frightful menace against law
and justice. While jurists merely studied the language of dead laws,
expounding them with effort unceasing, and, one may complain,
propounding more, we must have despaired of ever being scientific. And
this because law as a science painfully sought justification in
deduction from long obsolete norms and in the explanation of texts. To
jurisprudence was left only the empty shell, and a man like Ihering[41]
spoke of a “circus for dialectico-acrobatic tricks.”

Yet the scientific quality is right to hand. We need only to take hold
of the method, that for nearly a century has shown itself to us the most
helpful. Since Warnkönig (1819)[42] told us, “Jurisprudence must become
a natural science,” men have rung changes upon this battle cry (cf.
Spitzer[43]). And even if, because misunderstood, it led in some
directions wrongly, it does seem as if a genuinely scientific direction
might be given to our doctrines and their application. We know very well
that we may not hurry. Wherever people delayed in establishing the right
thing and then suddenly tried for it, they went in their haste too far.
This is apparent not only in the situations of life; it is visible, in
the very recent hasty conclusions of the Lombrosists, in their very
good, but inadequate observations, and unjustified and strained
inferences. We are not to figure the scientific method from these.[44]
It is for us to gather facts and to study them. The drawing of
inferences we may leave to our more fortunate successors. But in the
daily routine we may vary this procedure a little. We draw there
_particular_ inferences from correct and simple observations. “From
facts to ideas,” says Öttingen.[45] “The world has for several
millenniums tried to subdue matter to preconceptions and the world has
failed. Now the procedure is reversed.” “From facts to ideas”--there
lies our road, let us for once observe the facts of life without
prejudice, without maxims built on preconceptions; let us establish
them, strip them of all alien character. Then finally, when we find
nothing more in the least doubtful, we may theorize about them, and draw
inferences, modestly and with caution.

Every fundamental investigation must first of all establish the nature
of its subject matter. This is the maxim of a book, “Über die
Dummheit”[46] (1886), one of the wisest ever written. The same axiomatic
proposition must dominate every legal task, but especially every task of
criminal law. It is possible to read thousands upon thousands of
testimonies and to make again this identical, fatiguing, contrary
observation: The two, witness and judge, have not defined the nature of
this subject; they have not determined what they wanted of each other.
The one spoke of one matter, the other of another; but just what the
thing really was that was to have been established, the one did not know
and the other did not tell him. But the blame for this defective
formulation does not rest with the witness--formulation was the other
man’s business.

When the real issue is defined the essentially modern and scientific
investigation begins. Ebbinghaus,[47] I believe, has for our purpose
defined it best. It consists in trying to keep constant the complex of
conditions demonstrated to be necessary for the realization of a given
effect. It consists in varying these conditions, in isolating one from
the other in a numerically determinable order, and finally, in
establishing the accompanying changes with regard to the effect, in a
quantified or countable order.

I can not here say anything further to show that this is the sole
correct method of establishing the necessary principles of our science.
The aim is only to test the practicality of this method in the routine
of a criminal case, and to see if it is not, indeed, the only one by
which to attain complete and indubitable results. If it is, it must _be
of use_ not only during the whole trial--not only in the testing of
collected evidence, but also in the testing of every individual portion
thereof, analyzed into its component elements.

Let us first consider the whole trial.

The _effect_ is here the evidence of A’s guilt. The complex conditions
for its establishment are the collective instruments in getting
evidence; the individual conditions are to be established by means of
the individual sources of evidence--testimony of witnesses, examination
of the premises, obduction, protocol, etc.

_The constantification of conditions_ now consists in standardizing the
present instance, thus: Whenever similar circumstances are given, i.e.:
the same instruments of evidence are present, the evidence of guilt is
established. Now the accompanying changes with regard to the effect,
i.e.: proof of guilt through evidence, have to be tested--therefore the
individual conditions--i.e.: the individual sources of evidence have to
be established and their values to be determined and _varied_. Finally,
the accompanying change in effect (conviction by evidence) is to be
tested. The last procedure requires discussion; the rest is self
evident. In our business isolation is comparatively easy, inasmuch as
any individual statement, any visual impression, any effect, etc., may
be abstracted without difficulty. Much harder is the determination of
its value. If, however, we clearly recognize that it is necessary to
express the exact value of each particular source of evidence, and that
the task is only to determine comparative valuation, the possibility of
such a thing, in at least a sufficiently close degree of certainty, must
be granted. The valuation must be made in respect of two things--(1) its
_reliability_ (subjective and relative); (2) its _significance_
(objective and absolute). On the one hand, the value of the evidence
itself must be tested according to the appraisement of the person who
presents it and of the conditions under which he is important; on the
other, what influence evidence accepted as reliable can exercise upon
the _effect_, considered in and for itself. So then, when a testimony is
being considered, it must first be determined whether the witness was
able and willing to speak the truth, and further, what the importance of
the testimony may be in terms of the changes it may cause in the
_organization_ of the case.

Of greatest importance and most difficult is the variation of conditions
and the establishment of the changes thereby generated, with regard to
the _effect_,--i.e.: the critical interpretation of the material in
hand. Applied to a case, the problem presents itself in this wise: I
consider each detail of evidence by itself and cleared of all others,
and I vary it as often as it is objectively possible to do so. Thus I
suppose that each statement of the witness might be a lie, entirely or
in part; it might be incorrect observation, false inference, etc.--and
then I ask myself: Does the evidence of guilt, the establishment of an
especial trial, now remain just? If not, is it just under other and
related possible circumstances? Am I in possession of these
circumstances? If now the degree of apparent truth is so far tested that
these variations may enter and the accusation still remain just, the
defendant is convicted: but only under these circumstances.

The same procedure here required for the conduct of a complete trial, is
to be followed also, in miniature, in the production of particulars of
evidence. Let us again construe an instance. The _effect_ now is the
establishment of the objective correctness of some particular point
(made by statements of witnesses, looks, etc.). The _complex of
conditions_ consists in the collection of these influences which might
render doubtful the correctness--i.e., dishonesty of witnesses,
defective examination of locality, unreliability of the object,
ignorance of experts, etc. It is necessary to know clearly which of
these influences might be potent in the case in hand, and to what
degree. The _standardization_ consists, also this time, in the
comparison of the conditions of the present case with those of other
cases. The _variation_, again, consists in the abstraction from the
evidence of those details which might possibly be incorrect, thus
correcting it, from various points of view, and finally, in observing
the _effect_ as it defines itself under this variety of formulation.

This procedure, adopted in the preparation and judgment of each new
piece of evidence, excludes error as far as our means conceivably
permit. Only one thing more is needful--a narrow and minute research
into that order of succession which is of indispensable importance in
every natural science. “Of all truths concerning natural phenomena,
those which deal with the order of succession are for us the most
important. Upon a knowledge of them is grounded every intelligent
anticipation of the future” (J. S. Mill).[48] The oversight of this
doctrine is the largest cause of our failures. We must, in the
determination of evidence, cleave to it. Whenever the question of
influence upon the “_effect_” is raised, the problem of order is found
invariably the most important. Mistakes and impossibilities are in the
main discovered only when the examination of the order of succession has
been undertaken.

In short: We have confined ourselves long enough to the mere study of
our legal canons. We now set out upon an exact consideration of their
material. To do this, obviously demands a retreat to the starting-point
and a beginning we ought to have made long ago; but natural sciences, on
which we model ourselves, have had to do the identical thing and are now
at it openly and honestly. Ancient medicine looked first of all for the
universal panacea and boiled theriac; contemporary medicine dissects,
uses the microscope, and experiments, recognizes no panacea, accepts
barely a few specifics. Modern medicine has seen the mistake. But we
lawyers boil our theriac even nowadays and regard the most important
study, the study of reality, with arrogance.


Topic II. PSYCHOLOGIC LESSONS.


Section 3. (a) General Considerations.

Of the criminalist’s tasks, the most important are those involving his
dealings with the other men who determine his work, with witnesses,
accused, jurymen, colleagues, etc. These are the most pregnant of
consequences. In every case his success depends on his skill, his tact,
his knowledge of human nature, his patience, and his propriety of
manner. Anybody who takes the trouble, may note speedily the great
differences in efficiency between those who do and those who do not
possess such qualities. That they are important to witnesses and accused
is undoubted. But this importance is manifest to still others. The
intercourse between various examining judges and experts is a matter of
daily observation. One judge puts the question according to law and
expects to be respected. He does not make explicit how perfectly
indifferent the whole affair is to him, but experts have sufficient
opportunity to take note of that fact. The other narrates the case,
explains to the experts its various particular possibilities, finds out
whether and what further elucidation they demand, perhaps inquires into
the intended manner and method of the expert solution of the problem,
informs himself of the case by their means, and manifests especial
interest in the difficult and far too much neglected work of the
experts. It may be said that the latter will do their work in the one
case as in the other, with the same result. This would be true if,
unfortunately, experts were not also endowed with the same imperfections
as other mortals, and are thus far also infected by interest or
indifference. Just imagine that besides the examining magistrate of a
great superior court, every justice and, in addition, all the chiefs and
officials manifested equal indifference! Then even the most devoted
experts would grow cool and do only what they absolutely had to. But if
all the members of the same court are actuated by the same keen interest
and comport themselves as described, how different the affair becomes!
It would be impossible that even the indifferent, and perhaps least
industrious experts, should not be carried out of themselves by the
general interest, should not finally realize the importance of their
position, and do their utmost.

The same thing is true of the president, the jurymen and their
fellow-judges. It is observable that here and there a presiding justice
succeeds in boring all concerned during even criminal cases interesting
in themselves; the incident drags on, and people are interested only in
finally seeing the end of the matter. Other presiding justices again,
fortunately the majority, understand how to impart apparent importance
to even the simplest case. Whatever office anybody may hold,--he and his
mates are commissioned in the common task, and should the thing come up
for judgment, everybody does his best. The difference here is not due to
temperamental freshness or tediousness; the result depends only upon a
correct or incorrect psychological handling of the participants. The
latter must in every single case be led and trained anew to interest,
conscientiousness and co-operation. In this need lies the educational
opportunity of the criminal judge. Whether it arises with regard to the
accused, the witness, the associate justice, or the expert, is all one;
it is invariably the same.

That knowledge of human nature is for this purpose most important to the
criminalist will be as little challenged as the circumstance that such
knowledge can not be acquired from books. Curiously enough, there are
not a few on the subject, but I suspect that whoever studies or
memorizes them, (such books as Pockel’s, Herz’s, Meister’s, Engel’s,
Jassoix’s, and others, enumerated by Volkmar) will have gained little
that is of use. A knowledge of human nature is acquired only (barring of
course a certain talent thereto) by persevering observation, comparison,
summarization, and further comparison. So acquired, it sets its
possessor to the fore, and makes him independent of a mass of
information with which the others have to repair their ignorance of
mankind. This is to be observed in countless cases in our profession.
Whoever has had to deal with certain sorts of swindlers, lying
horsetraders, antiquarians, prestidigitators, soon comes to the
remarkable conclusion, that of this class, exactly those who flourish
most in their profession and really get rich understand their trade the
least. The horse-dealer is no connoisseur whatever in horses, the
antiquarian can not judge the value nor the age and excellence of
antiquities, the card-sharp knows a few stupid tricks with which, one
might think, he ought to be able to deceive only the most innocent
persons. Nevertheless they all have comfortable incomes, and merely
because they know their fellows and have practised this knowledge with
repeatedly fresh applications.

I do not of course assert that we criminalists need little scholarly
knowledge of law, and ought to depend entirely upon knowledge of men. We
need exactly as much more knowledge as our task exceeds that of the
horse-dealer, but we can not do without knowledge of humanity. The
immense onerousness of the judge’s office lies in just the fact that he
needs so very much more than his bare legal knowledge. He must, before
all things, be a jurist and not merely a criminalist; he must be in full
possession not only of the knowledge he has acquired in his academy, but
of the very latest up-to-date status of his entire science. If he
neglects the purely theoretical, he degenerates into a mere laborer. He
is in duty bound not only to make himself familiar with hundreds of
things, to be able to consort with all sorts of crafts and trades, but
also, finally, to form so much out of the material supplied him by the
law as is possible to human power.


Section 4. (b) Integrity of Witnesses.

One of the criminal judge’s grossest derelictions from duty consists in
his simply throwing the witness the question and in permitting him to
say what he chooses. If he contents himself in that, he leaves to the
witness’s conscience the telling of the truth, and the whole truth; the
witness is, in such a case, certainly responsible for one part of the
untruthful and suppressed, but the responsibility for the other, and
larger part, lies with the judge who has failed to do his best to bring
out the uttermost value of the evidence, indifferently for or against
the prisoner. The work of education is intended for this purpose,--not,
as might be supposed, for training the populace as a whole into good
witnesses, but to make that individual into a good, trustworthy witness
who is called upon to testify for the first, and, perhaps, for the last
time in his life. This training must in each case take two
directions--it must make him _want_ to tell the truth; it must make him
_able_ to tell the truth. The first requirement deals not only with the
lie alone, it deals with the development of complete conscientiousness.
How to face the lie itself can not be determined by means of training,
but conscientious answers under examination can certainly be so
acquired. We are not here considering people to whom truth is an utter
stranger, who are fundamentally liars and whose very existence is a
libel on mankind. We consider here only those people who have been
unaccustomed to speaking the full and unadulterated truth, who have
contented themselves throughout their lives with “approximately,” and
have never had the opportunity of learning the value of veracity. It may
be said that a disturbingly large number of people are given to
wandering, in conversation, and in the reproduction of the past. They do
not go straight, quickly, and openly to the point, they loiter toward
it--“If I do not reach it in a bee line, I can get along on by-paths, if
not to-day, then to-morrow; and if I really do not get to it at all, I
do get somewhere else.” Such people have not homes but inns--if they are
not in one place, another will do.

These persons are characterized by the event that whenever one has seen
their loitering and puts the matter to them with just anger, they either
get frightened or say carelessly, “Oh, I thought this was not so
accurate.” This famine of conscience, this indifference to truth, does
far-reaching damage in our profession. I assert that it does immensely
greater harm than obvious falsehood, because, indeed, the unvarnished
lie is much more easily discoverable than the probable truth which is
still untruth. Moreover, lies come generally from people with regard to
whom one is, for one reason or another, already cautious, while these
insinuating approximations are made by people who are not mistrusted at
all.[49]

The lack of conscientiousness is common to all ages, both sexes, and to
all sorts and conditions of men. But it is most characteristically
frequent and sharply defined among people who have no real business in
life. Whoever romances in the daily life, romances when he ought to be
absolutely truthful. The most dangerous of this class are those who make
a living by means of show and exhibition. They are not conscienceless
because they do nothing worth while; they do nothing worth while because
they are conscienceless. To this class belong peddlers, street
merchants, inn-keepers, certain shop-keepers, hack-drivers, artists,
etc., and especially prostitutes (cf. Lombroso, etc., etc.). All these
people follow a calling perhaps much troubled, but they do no actual
work and have chosen their profession to avoid regular, actual work.
They have much unoccupied time, and when they are working, part of the
work consists of gossip, part of loafing about, or of a use of the hands
that is little more. In brief,--since they loiter about and make a
profit out of it, it is no wonder that in giving evidence they also loaf
and bring to light only approximate truth. Nor is it difficult to
indicate analogous persons in the higher walks of life.

The most hateful and most dangerous of these people are the congenital
tramps--people who did not have to work and faithfully pursued the
opportunity of doing nothing. Whoever does not recognize that the world
has no place for idlers and that life on God’s earth must be earned by
labor, is without conscience. No conscientious testimony need be
expected from such. Among the few rules without exception which in the
course of long experience the criminalist may make, this is one--that
_the real tramps of both sexes and all walks of life will never testify
conscientiously;--hic niger est, hunc Tu, Romane, caveto_.


Section 5. (c) The Correctness of Testimony.

The training of the witness into a _capacity_ for truth-telling must be
based, (1) on the judge’s knowledge of all the conditions that affect,
negatively, correct observations and reproductions; (2) on his making
clear to himself whether and which conditions are operative in the case
in question; and (3) on his aiming to eliminate this negative influence
from the witness. The last is in many cases difficult, but not
impossible. That mistakes have been made is generally soon noted, but
then, “being called and being chosen” are two things; and similarly, the
discovery of _what_ is correct and the substitution of the essential
observations for the opinionative ones, is always the most difficult of
the judge’s tasks.

When the witness is both unwilling to tell the truth and unable to do
so, the business of training may be approached from a few common
view-points. Patience with the witness is perhaps the most important key
to success. No doubt it is difficult to be patient where there is no
time; and what with our contemporary over-tasking, there is no time. But
that must be altered. Justice must have strength to keep everybody’s
labor proportional to his task. A nation whose representatives do not
grant money enough for this purpose must not expect satisfactory law
courts--“no checkee no washee;” no money no justice. People who have
time will acquire patience.

Patience is necessary above all while taking evidence. A great many
witnesses are accustomed to say much and redundantly, and again, most
criminal justices are accustomed to try to shut them off and to require
brief statements. That is silly. If the witness is wandering on purpose,
as many a prisoner does for definite reasons of his own, he will spread
himself still more as he recognizes that his examiner does not like it.
To be disagreeable is his purpose. He is never led by impatience beyond
his introduction, and some piece of evidence is lost because almost
every accused who speaks unintelligibly on purpose, says too much in
the course of his speech and brings things to light that no effort might
otherwise have attained to. Besides, whoever is making a purposely
long-winded testimony does not want to say anything superfluous, and if
he actually does so, is unaware of it. And even when he knows that he is
talking too much (most of the time he knows it from the impatient looks
of his auditors), he never can tell just what exceeded the measure. If,
then, he is asked to cut it short, he remains unmoved, or at most begins
again at the beginning, or, if he actually condescends, he omits things
of importance, perhaps even of the utmost importance. Nor must it be
forgotten that at least a large proportion of such people who are
brought to court have prepared their story or probably blocked it out in
the rough. If they are not permitted to follow their plans, they get
confused, and nothing coherent or half-coherent is discovered. And
generally those who say most have thought their testimony over before.
Those who merely have to say no more than _yes_ and _no_ at the trial do
not reduce the little they are going to say to any great order; that is
done only by such as have a story to tell. Once the stream of talk
breaks loose it is best allowed to flow on, and only then interrupted
with appropriate questions when it threatens to become exhausting. Help
against too much talk can be found in one direction. But it must be made
use of before the evil begins, and is in any event of use only in the
description of a long chain of events,--e.g., a great brawl. There, if
one has been put in complete possession of the whole truth, through one
or more witnesses, the next witness may be told: “Begin where X entered
the room.” If that is not done, one may be compelled to hear all the
witness did the day before the brawl and how these introductions, in
themselves indifferent, have led to the event. But if you set the
subject, the witness simply abandons the first part of possibly studied
testimony without thereby losing his coherence. The procedure may be
accurately observed: The witness is told, “Begin at this or that point.”
This deliverance is generally followed by a pause during which he
obviously reviews and sets aside the part of his prepared speech dealing
with the events preliminary to the required points. If, however, the
setting of a starting point does not work and the witness says he must
begin at the earlier stage, let him do so. Otherwise he tries so hard to
begin according to request that, unable to go his own way, he confuses
everything.

The patience required for taking testimony is needful also in
cross-examination. Not only children and slow-witted folk, but also
bright persons often answer only “yes” and “no,”[50] and these bare
answers demand a patience most necessary with just this bareness, if the
answers are to be pursued for some time and consecutively. The danger of
impatience is the more obvious inasmuch as everyone recognizes more or
less clearly that he is likely to set the reserved witness suggestive
questions and so to learn things that the witness never would have said.
Not everybody, indeed, who makes monosyllabic replies in court has this
nature, but in the long run, this common characteristic is manifest, and
these laconic people are really not able to deliver themselves
connectedly in long speeches. If, then, the witness has made only the
shortest replies and a coherent well-composed story be made of them, the
witness will, when his testimony is read to him, often not notice the
untruths it might contain. He is so little accustomed to his own
prolonged discourse that at most he wonders at his excellent speech
without noticing even coarse falsehoods. If, contrary to expectation, he
does notice them, he is too chary of words to call attention to them,
assents, and is glad to see the torture coming to an end. Hence, nothing
but endless patience will do to bring the laconic witness to say at
least enough to make his information coherent, even though brief. It may
be presented in this form for protocol.


Section 6. (d) Presuppositions of Evidence-Taking.

One of the most important rules of evidence-taking is not to suppose
that practically any witness is skilled in statement of what he
remembers. Even of child training, Fröbel[51] says, “Men must be drawn
out, not probed.” And this is the more valid in jurisprudence, and the
more difficult, since the lawyers have at most only as many hours with
the individual as the teacher has years. However, we must aim to draw
the witness out, and if it does not work at first, we must nevertheless
not despair of succeeding.

The chief thing is to determine the witness’s level and then meet him on
it. We certainly can not succeed, in the short time allowed us, to raise
him to ours. “The object of instruction” (says Lange[52]) “is to endow
the pupil with more apperceptive capacity, i.e., to make him
intellectually free. It is therefore necessary to discover his ‘funded
thoughts,’ and to beware of expounding too much.” This is not a little
true. The development of apperceptive capacity is not so difficult for
us, inasmuch as our problem is not to prepare our subject for life, but
for one present purpose. If we desire, to this end, to make one more
intellectually free, we have only to get him to consider with
independence the matter with which we are concerned, to keep him free of
all alien suggestions and inferences, and to compel him to see the case
as if no influences, personal or circumstantial, had been at work on
him. This result does not require merely the setting aside of special
influences, nor the setting aside of all that others have said to him on
the matter under discussion, nor the elucidation of the effect of
fear,[53] of anger, of all such states of mind as might here have been
operative,--it requires the establishment of his unbiased vision of the
subject from a period antecedent to these above-mentioned influences.
Opinions, valuations, prejudices, superstitions, etc., may here be to a
high degree factors of disturbance and confusion. Only when the whole
Augean stable is swept out may the man be supposed capable of
apperception, may the thing he is to tell us be brought to bear upon him
and he be permitted to reproduce it.

This necessary preliminary is not so difficult if the second of the
above-mentioned rules is observed and the “funded thought” of the
witness is studied out. It may be said, indeed, that so long as two
people converse, unaware of each other’s “funded thought,” they speak
different languages. Some of the most striking misunderstandings come
from just this reason. It is not alone a matter of varying verbal
values, leading to incompatible inferences; actually the whole of a
man’s mind is involved. It is generally supposed to be enough to know
the meaning of the words necessary for telling a story. But such
knowledge leads only to external and very superficial comprehension;
real clearness can be attained only by knowing the witness’s habits of
thought in regard to all the circumstances of the case. I remember
vividly a case of jealous murder in which the most important witness was
the victim’s brother, an honest, simple, woodsman, brought up in the
wilderness, and in every sense far-removed from idiocy. His testimony
was brief, decided and intelligent. When the motive for the murder, in
this case most important, came under discussion, he shrugged his
shoulders and answered my question--whether it was not committed on
account of a girl--with, “Yes, so they say.” On further examination I
reached the astonishing discovery that not only the word “jealousy,” but
the very notion and comprehension of it were totally foreign to the man.
The single girl he at one time thought of was won away from him without
making him quarrelsome, nobody had ever told him of the pangs and
passions of other people, he had had no occasion to consider the
theoretic possibility of such a thing, and so “jealousy” remained
utterly foreign to him. It is clear that his hearing now took quite
another turn. All I thought I heard from him was essentially wrong; his
“funded thought” concerning a very important, in this case a regulative
concept, had been too poor.

The discovery of the “funded thought” is indubitably not easy. But its
objective possibility with witness and accused is at least a fact. It is
excluded only where it is most obviously necessary--in the case of the
jury, and the impossibility in this case turns the institution of trial
by jury into a Utopian dream. The presiding officer of a jury court is
in the best instances acquainted with a few of the jurymen, but never so
far as to have been entrusted with their “funded thought.” Now and then,
when a juryman asks a question, one gets a glimpse of it, and when the
public prosecutor and the attorney for the defence make their speeches
one catches something from the jury’s expressions; and then it is
generally too late. Even if it be discovered earlier nothing can be done
with it. Some success is likely in the case of single individuals, but
it is simply impossible to define the mental habits of twelve men with
whom one has no particular relations.

The third part of the Fröbelian rule, “To presuppose as little as
possible,” must be rigidly adhered to. I do not say this
pessimistically, but simply because we lawyers, through endless
practice, arrange the issue so much more easily, conceive its history
better and know what to exclude and what, with some degree of certainty,
to retain. In consequence we often forget our powers and present the
unskilled laity, even when persons of education, too much of the
material. Then it must be considered that most witnesses are uneducated,
that we can not actually descend to their level, and their unhappiness
under a flood of strange material we can grasp only with difficulty.
Because we do not know the witness’s point of view we ask too much of
him, and therefore fail in our purpose. And if, in some exceptional
case, an educated man is on the stand, we fail again, since, having the
habit of dealing with the uneducated, we suppose this man to know our
own specialties because he has a little education. Experience does not
dispel this illusion. Whether actual training in another direction dulls
the natural and free outlook we desire in the witness, or whether, in
our profession, education presupposes tendencies too ideal, whatever be
the reasons, it is a fact that our hardest work is generally with the
most highly educated witnesses. I once had to write a protocol based on
the testimony of a famous scholar who was witness in a small affair. It
was a slow job. Either he did not like the terms as I dictated them, or
he was doubtful of the complete certainty of this or that assertion. Let
alone that I wasted an hour or two, that protocol, though rewritten, was
full of corrections and erasures. And the thing turned out to be
nonsense at the end. The beginning contradicted the conclusion; it was
unintelligible, and still worse, untrue. As became manifest later,
through the indubitable testimony of many witnesses, the scholar had
been so conscientious, careful and accurate that he simply did not know
what he had seen. His testimony was worthless. I have had such
experiences repeatedly and others have confessed them. To the question:
Where not presuppose too much? the answer is: everywhere. First of all,
little must be presupposed concerning people’s powers of observation.
They claim to have heard, seen or felt so and so, and they have not
seen, heard, or felt it at all, or quite differently. They assent
vigorously that they have grasped, touched, counted or examined
something, and on closer examination it is demonstrated that it was only
a passing glance they threw on it. And it is still worse where something
more than ordinary perception is being considered, when exceptionally
keen senses or information are necessary. People trust the conventional
and when close observation is required often lack the knowledge proper
to their particular status. In this way, by presupposing especial
professional knowledge in a given witness, great mistakes are made.
Generally he hasn’t such knowledge, or has not made any particular use
of it.

In the same way too much attention and interest are often presupposed,
only to lead later to the astonishing discovery of how little attention
men really pay to their own affairs. Still less, therefore, ought
knowledge in less personal things be presupposed, for in the matter of
real understanding, the ignorance of men far exceeds all
presuppositions. Most people know the looks of all sorts of things, and
think they know their essences, and when questioned, invariably assert
it, quite in good faith. But if you depend on such knowledge bad
results arise that are all the more dangerous because there is rarely
later opportunity to recognize their badness.

As often as any new matter is discussed with a witness, it is necessary,
before all, to find out his general knowledge of it, what he considers
it to be, and what ideas he connects with it. If you judge that he knows
nothing about it and appraise his questions and conclusions accordingly,
you will at least not go wrong in the matter, and all in all attain your
end most swiftly.

At the same time it is necessary to proceed as slowly as possible. It is
Carus[54] who points out that a scholar ought not to be shown any object
unless he can not discover it or its like for himself. Each power must
have developed before it can be used. Difficult as this procedure
generally is, it is necessary in the teaching of children, and is there
successful. It is a form of education by examples. The child is taught
to assimilate to its past experience the new fact, e.g.: in a comparison
of some keen suffering of the child with that it made an animal suffer.
Such parallels rarely fail, whether in the education of children or of
witnesses. The lengthy description of an event in which, e.g., somebody
is manhandled, may become quite different if the witness is brought to
recall his own experience. At first he speaks of the event as perhaps a
“splendid joke,” but as soon as he is brought to speak of a similar
situation of his own, and the two stories are set side by side, his
description alters. This exemplification may be varied in many
directions and is always useful. It is applicable even to accused,
inasmuch as the performer himself begins to understand his deed, when it
can be attached to his fully familiar inner life.

The greatest skill in this matter may be exercised in the case of the
jury. Connect the present new facts with similar ones they already know
and so make the matter intelligible to them. The difficulty here, is
again the fact that the jury is composed of strangers and twelve in
number. Finding instances familiar to them all and familiar in such wise
that they may easily link them with the case under consideration, is a
rare event. If it does happen the success is both significant and happy.

It is not, however, sufficient to seek out a familiar case analogous to
that under consideration. The analogy should be discovered for each
event, each motive, each opinion, each reaction, each appearance, if
people are to understand and follow the case. Ideas, like men, have an
ancestry, and a knowledge of the ancestors leads to a discovery of the
cousins.


Section 7. (e) Egoism.

It is possible that the inner character of egoism shall be as profoundly
potent in legal matters as in the daily life. Goethe has experienced its
effect with unparalleled keenness. “Let me tell you something,” he
writes (Conversations with Eckermann. Vol. 1). “All periods considered
regressive or transitional are subjective. Conversely all progressive
periods look outward. The whole of contemporary civilization is
reactionary, because subjective.... The thing of importance is
everywhere the individual who is trying to show off his lordliness.
Nowhere is any mentionable effort to be found that subordinates itself
through love of the whole.”

These unmistakable terms contain a “discovery” that is applicable to our
days even better than to Goethe’s. _It is characteristic of our time
that each man has an exaggerated interest in himself._ Consequently, he
is concerned only with himself or with his immediate environment, he
understands only what he already knows and feels, and he works only
where he can attain some personal advantage. It is hence to be concluded
that we may proceed with certainty only when we count on this
exaggerated egoism and use it as a prime factor. The most insignificant
little things attest this. A man who gets a printed directory will look
his own name up, though he knows it is there, and contemplate it with
pleasure; he does the same with the photograph of a group of which his
worthy self is one of the immortalized. If personal qualities are under
discussion, he is happy, when he can say,--“Now I am by nature so.”--If
foreign cities are under discussion, he tells stories of his native
city, or of cities that he has visited, and concerning things that can
interest only him who has been there. Everyone makes an effort to bring
something of his personal status to bear,--either the conditions of his
life, or matters concerning only him. If anybody announces that he has
had a good time, he means without exception, absolutely without
exception, that he has had an opportunity to push his “I” very
forcefully into the foreground.

Lazarus[55] has rightly given this human quality historical
significance: “Pericles owed a considerable part of his political
dictatorate to the circumstance of knowing practically all Athenian
citizens by name. Hannibal, Wallenstein, Napoleon I, infected their
armies, thanks to ambition, with more courage than could the deepest
love of arms, country and freedom, just through knowing and calling by
name the individual soldiers.”

Daily we get small examples of this egoism. The most disgusting and
boresome witness, who is perhaps angry at having been dragged so far
from his work, can be rendered valuable and useful through the initial
show of a little _personal_ interest, of some comprehension of his
affairs, and of some consideration, wherever possible, of his views and
efficiency. Moreover, men judge their fellows according to their
comprehension of their own particular professions. The story of the
peasant’s sneer at a physician, “But what can he know when he does not
even know how to sow oats?” is more than a story, and is true of others
besides illiterate boors. Such an attitude recurs very frequently,
particularly among people of engrossing trades that require much
time,--e.g., among soldiers, horsemen, sailors, hunters, etc. If it is
not possible to understand these human vanities and to deal with these
people as one of the trade, it is wise at least to suggest such
understanding, to show interest in their affairs and to let them believe
that really you think it needful for everybody to know how to saddle a
horse correctly, or to distinguish the German bird-dog from the English
setter at a thousand paces. What is aimed at is not personal respect for
the judge, but for the judge’s function, which the witness identifies
with the judge’s person. If he has such respect, he will find it worth
the trouble to help us out, to think carefully and to assist in the
difficult conclusion of the case. There is an astonishing difference
between the contribution of a sulking and contrary witness and of one
who has become interested and pleased by the affair. Not only quantity,
but truth and reliability of testimony, are immensely greater in the
latter case.

Besides, the antecedent self-love goes so far that it may become very
important in the examination of the accused. Not that a trap is to be
set for him; merely that since it is our business to get at the truth,
we ought to proceed in such proper wise with a denying accused as might
bring to light facts that otherwise careful manipulation would not have
brought out. How often have anonymous or pseudonymous criminals betrayed
themselves under examination just because they spoke of circumstances
involving their capital _I_, and spoke so clearly that now the clue was
found, it was no longer difficult to follow it up. In the examination of
well-known criminals, dozens of such instances occur--the fact is not
new, but it needs to be made use of.

A similar motive belongs to subordinate forms of egoism--the obstinacy
of a man who may be so vexed by contradiction as to drive one into
despair, and who under proper treatment becomes valuable. This I learned
mainly from my old butler, a magnificent honest soldier, a figure out of
a comedy, but endowed with inexorable obstinacy against which my skill
for a long time availed nothing. As often as I proposed something with
regard to some intended piece of work or alteration, I got the identical
reply--“It won’t do, sir.” Finally I got hold of a list and worked my
plan--“Simon, this will now be done as Simon recently said it should be
done,--namely.” At this he looked at me, tried to think when he had said
this thing, and went and did it. And in spite of frequent application
this list has not failed once for some years. What is best about it is
that it will serve, mutatis mutandis, with criminals. As soon as ever
real balkiness is noted, it becomes necessary to avoid the least
appearance of contradictoriness, since that increases difficulties. It
is not necessary to lie or to make use of trickery. Only, avoid direct
contradiction, drop the subject in question, and return to it indirectly
when you perceive that the obstinate individual recognizes his error.
Then you may succeed in building him a golden bridge, or at least a
barely visible sidedoor where he can make his retreat unnoticed. In that
case even the most difficult of obstinates will no longer repeat the old
story. He will repeat only if he is pressed, and this although he is
repeatedly brought back to the point. If, however, the matter is once
decided, beware of returning to it without any other reason, save to
confirm the settled matter quite completely,--that would be only to wake
the sleeper to give him a sleeping powder.

Speaking generally, the significant rule is this: _Egoism, laziness and
conceit are the only human motives on which one may unconditionally
depend_. Love, loyalty, honesty, religion and patriotism, though firm as
a rock, may lapse and fall. A man might have been counted on for one of
these qualities ten times with safety, and on the eleventh, he might
collapse like a house of cards. Count on egoism and laziness a hundred
or a thousand times and they are as firm as ever. More simply, count on
egoism--for laziness and conceit are only modifications of egoism. The
latter alone then should be the one human motive to keep in mind when
dealing with men. There are cases enough when all the wheels are set in
motion after a clue to the truth, i.e., when there is danger that the
person under suspicion is innocent; appeals to honor, conscience,
humanity and religion fail;--but run the complete gamut of self-love
and the whole truth rings clear. Egoism is the best criterion of the
presence of veracity. Suppose a coherent explanation has been painfully
constructed. It is obvious that the correctness of the construction is
studied with reference to the given motive. Now, if the links in the
chain reach easily back to the motive, there is at least the possibility
that the chain is free of error. What then of the motive? If it is
noble--friendship, love, humaneness, loyalty, mercy--the constructed
chain may be correct, and happily is so oftener than is thought; but it
_need not_ be correct. If, however, the structure rests on egoism, in
any of its innumerable forms, and if it is logically sound, then the
whole case is explained utterly and reliably. The construction is
indubitably correct.


Section 8. (f) Secrets.

The determination of the truth at law would succeed much less frequently
than it does if it were not for the fact that men find it very difficult
to keep secrets. This essentially notable and not clearly understood
circumstance is popularly familiar. Proverbs of all people deal with it
and point mainly to the fact that keeping secrets is especially
difficult for women. The Italians say a woman who may not speak is in
danger of bursting; the Germans, that the burden of secrecy affects her
health and ages her prematurely; the English say similar things still
more coarsely. Classical proverbs have dealt with the issue; numberless
fairy tales, narratives, novels and poems have portrayed the difficulty
of silence, and one very fine modern novel (Die Last des Schweigens, by
Ferdinand Kürnberger) has chosen this fact for its principal motive. The
universal difficulty of keeping silence is expressed by Lotze[56] in the
dictum that we learn expression very young and silence very late. The
fact is of use to the criminalist not only in regard to criminals, but
also with regard to witnesses, who, for one reason or another, want to
keep something back. The latter is the source of a good deal of danger,
inasmuch as the witness is compelled to speak and circles around the
secret in question without touching it, until he points it out and half
reveals it. If he stops there, the matter requires consideration, for “a
half truth is worse than a whole lie.” The latter reveals its subject
and intent and permits of defence, while the half truth may, by
association and circumscriptive limitations, cause vexatious errors both
as regards the identity of the semi-accused and as regards the
circumstances with which he is thus involved. For this reason the
criminalist must consider the question of secrets carefully.

As for his own silence, this must be considered in both directions. That
he is not to blab official secrets is so obvious that it need not be
spoken of. Such blabbing is so negligent and dishonorable that we must
consider it intrinsically impossible. But it not infrequently happens
that some indications are dropped or persuaded out of a criminal judge,
generally out of one of the younger and more eager men. They mention
only the event itself, and not a name, nor a place, nor a particular
time, nor some even more intimate matter--there seems no harm done. And
yet the most important points have often been blabbed of in just such a
way. And what is worst of all, just because the speaker has not known
the name nor anything else concrete, the issue may be diverted and
enmesh some guiltless person. It is worth considering that the effort
above mentioned is made only in the most interesting cases, that crimes
especially move people to disgusting interest, due to the fact that
there is a more varied approach to synthesis of a case when the same
story is repeated several times or by various witnesses. For by such
means extrapolations and combinations of the material are made possible.
By way of warning, let me remind you of an ancient and much quoted
anecdote, first brought to light by Boccaccio: A young and much loved
abbé was teased by a bevy of ladies to narrate what had happened in the
first confession he had experienced. After long hesitation the young
fellow decided that it was no sin to relate the confessed sin if he
suppressed the name of the confessor, and so he told the ladies that his
first confession was of infidelity. A few minutes later a couple of
tardy guests appeared,--a marquis and his charming wife. Both reproached
the young priest for his infrequent visits at their home. The marquise
exclaimed so that everybody heard, “It is not nice of you to neglect me,
your first confessée.” This squib is very significant for our
profession, for it is well known how, in the same way, “bare facts,” as
“completely safe,” are carried further. The listener does not have to
combine them; the facts combine themselves by means of others otherwise
acquired, and finally the most important official matters, on the
concealment of which much may perhaps have depended, become universally
known. Official secrets have a general significance, and must therefore
be guarded at all points and not merely in detail.

The second direction in which the criminal justice must maintain
silence looks toward witnesses and accused. If, in the first instance,
the cause of too much communicativeness was an over-proneness to talk;
its cause in this case is a certain conceit that teases one into
talking. Whether the justice wants to show the accused how much he
already knows or how correctly he has drawn his conclusions; whether he
wishes to impress the witness by his confidences, he may do equally as
much harm in one case as in the other. Any success is made especially
impossible if the judge has been in too much of a hurry and tried to
show himself fully informed at the very beginning, but has brought out
instead some error. The accused naturally leaves him with his false
suppositions, they suggest things to the witness--and what follows may
be easily considered. Correct procedure in such circumstances is
difficult. Never to reveal what is already known, is to deprive oneself
of one of the most important means of examination; use of it therefore
ought not to be belated. But it is much worse to be premature or
garrulous. In my own experience, I have never been sorry for keeping
silence, especially if I had already said something. The only rule in
the matter is comparatively self-evident. Never move toward any
incorrectness and never present the appearance of knowing more than you
actually do. Setting aside the dishonesty of such a procedure, the
danger of a painful exposure in such matters is great.

There is still another great danger which one may beware of, optima
fide,--the danger of knowing something untrue. This danger also is
greatest for the greatest talent and the greatest courage among us,
because they are the readiest hands at synthesis, inference, and
definition of possibilities, and see as indubitable and shut to
contradiction things that at best are mere possibilities. It is
indifferent to the outcome whether a lie has been told purposely or
whether it has been the mere honest explosion of an over-sanguine
temperament. It is therefore unnecessary to point out the occasion for
caution. One need only suggest that something may be learned from people
who talk too much. The over-communicativeness of a neighbor is quickly
noticeable, and if the why and how much of it are carefully studied out,
it is not difficult to draw a significant analogy for one’s own case. In
the matter of secrets of other people, obviously the thing to be
established first is what is actually a secret; what is to be
suppressed, if one is to avoid damage to self or another. When an actual
secret is recognized it is necessary to consider whether the damage is
greater through keeping or through revealing the secret. If it is still
possible, it is well to let the secret be--there is always damage, and
generally, not insignificant damage, when it is tortured out of a
witness. If, however, one is honestly convinced that the secret must be
revealed--as when a guiltless person is endangered--every effort and all
skill is to be applied in the revelation. Inasmuch as the least echo of
bad faith is here impossible, the job is never easy.

The chief rule is not to be overeager in getting at the desired secret.
The more important it is, the less ought to be made of it. It is best
not directly to lead for it. It will appear of itself, especially if it
is important. Many a fact which the possessor had set no great store by,
has been turned into a carefully guarded secret by means of the
eagerness with which it was sought. In cases of need, when every other
means has failed, it may not be too much to tell the witness, cautiously
of course, rather more of the crime than might otherwise have seemed
good. Then those episodes must be carefully hit on, which cluster about
the desired secret and from which its importance arises. If the witness
understands that he presents something really important by giving up his
secret, surprising consequences ensue.

The relatively most important secret is that of one’s own guilt, and the
associated most suggestive establishment of it, the confession, is a
very extraordinary psychological problem.[57] In many cases the reasons
for confession are very obvious. The criminal sees that the evidence is
so complete that he is soon to be convicted and seeks a mitigation of
the sentence by confession, or he hopes through a more honest narration
of the crime to throw a great degree of the guilt on another. In
addition there is a thread of vanity in confession--as among young
peasants who confess to a greater share in a burglary than they actually
had (easily discoverable by the magniloquent manner of describing their
actual crime). Then there are confessions made for the sake of care and
winter lodgings: the confession arising from “firm conviction” (as among
political criminals and others). There are even confessions arising from
nobility, from the wish to save an intimate, and confessions intended to
deceive, and such as occur especially in conspiracy and are made to gain
time (either for the flight of the real criminal or for the destruction
of compromising objects). Generally, in the latter case, guilt is
admitted only until the plan for which it was made has succeeded; then
the judge is surprised with well-founded, regular and successful
establishment of an alibi. Not infrequently confession of small crimes
is made to establish an alibi for a greater one. And finally there are
the confessions Catholics[58] are required to make in confessional, and
the death bed confessions. The first are distinguished by the fact that
they are made freely and that the confessee does not try to mitigate his
crime, but is aiming to make amends, even when he finds it hard; and
desires even a definite penance. Death bed confessions may indeed have
religious grounds, or the desire to prevent the punishment or the
further punishment of an innocent person.

Although this list of explicable confession-types is long, it is in no
way exhaustive. It is only a small portion of all the confessions that
we receive; of these the greater part remain more or less unexplained.
Mittermaier[59] has already dealt with these acutely and cites examples
as well as the relatively well-studied older literature of the subject.
A number of cases may perhaps be explained through pressure of
conscience, especially where there are involved hysterical or nervous
persons who are plagued with vengeful images in which the ghost of their
victim would appear, or in whose ear the unendurable clang of the stolen
money never ceases, etc. If the confessor only intends to free himself
from these disturbing images and the consequent punishment by means of
confession, we are not dealing with what is properly called conscience,
but more or less with disease, with an abnormally excited
imagination.[60] But where such hallucinations are lacking, and
religious influences are absent, and the confession is made freely in
response to mere pressure, we have a case of conscience,[61]--another of
those terms which need explanation. I know of no analogy in the inner
nature of man, in which anybody with open eyes does himself exclusive
harm without any contingent use being apparent, as is the case in this
class of confession. There is always considerable difficulty in
explaining these cases. One way of explaining them is to say that their
source is mere stupidity and impulsiveness, or simply to deny their
occurrence. But the theory of stupidity does not appeal to the
practitioner, for even if we agree that a man foolishly makes a
confession and later, when he perceives his mistake, bitterly regrets
telling it, we still find many confessions that are not regretted and
the makers of which can in no wise be accused of defective intelligence.
To deny that there are such is comfortable but wrong, because we each
know collections of cases in which no effort could bring to light a
motive for the confession. The confession was made because the confessor
wanted to make it, and that’s the whole story.

The making of a confession, according to laymen, ends the matter, but
really, the judge’s work begins with it. As a matter of caution all
statutes approve confessions as evidence only when they agree completely
with the other evidence. Confession is a means of proof, and not proof.
Some objective, evidentially concurrent support and confirmation of the
confession is required. But the same legal requirement necessitates that
the value of the concurrent evidence shall depend on its having been
arrived at and established independently. The existence of a confession
contains powerful suggestive influences for judge, witness, expert, for
all concerned in the case. If a confession is made, all that is
perceived in the case may be seen in the light of it, and experience
teaches well enough how that alters the situation. There is so strong an
inclination to pigeon-hole and adapt everything perceived in some given
explanation, that the explanation is strained after, and facts are
squeezed and trimmed until they fit easily. It is a remarkable
phenomenon, confirmable by all observers, that all our perceptions are
at first soft and plastic and easily take form according to the shape of
their predecessors. They become stiff and inflexible only when we have
had them for some time, and have permitted them to reach an equilibrium.
If, then, observations are made in accord with certain notions, the
plastic material is easily molded, excrescences and unevenness are
squeezed away, lacunæ are filled up, and if it is at all possible, the
adaptation is completed easily. Then, if a new and quite different
notion arises in us, the alteration of the observed material occurs as
easily again, and only long afterwards, when the observation has
hardened, do fresh alterations fail. This is a matter of daily
experience, in our professional as well as in our ordinary affairs. We
hear of a certain crime and consider the earliest data. For one reason
or another we begin to suspect A as the criminal. The result of an
examination of the premises is applied in each detail to this
proposition. It fits. So does the autopsy, so do the depositions of the
witnesses. Everything fits. There have indeed been difficulties, but
they have been set aside, they are attributed to inaccurate observation
and the like,--the point is,--that the evidence is against A. Now,
suppose that soon after B confesses the crime; this event is so
significant that it sets aside at once all the earlier reasons for
suspecting A, and the theory of the crime involves B. Naturally the
whole material must now be applied to B, and in spite of the fact that
it at first fitted A, it does now fit B. Here again difficulties arise,
but they are to be set aside just as before.

Now if this is possible with evidence, written and thereby unalterable,
how much more easily can it be done with testimony about to be taken,
which may readily be colored by the already presented confession. The
educational conditions involve now the judge and his assistants on the
one hand, and the witnesses on the other.

Concerning himself, the judge must continually remember that his
business is not to fit all testimony to the already furnished
confession, allowing the evidence to serve as mere decoration to the
latter, but that it is his business to establish his proof by means of
the confession, and by means of the other evidence, _independently_. The
legislators of contemporary civilization have started with the proper
presupposition--that also false confessions are made,--and who of us has
not heard such? Confessions, for whatever reason,--because the confessor
wants to die, because he is diseased,[62] because he wants to free the
real criminal,--can be discovered as false only by showing their
contradiction with the other evidence. If, however, the judge only fits
the evidence, he abandons this means of getting the truth. Nor must
false confessions be supposed to occur only in case of homicide. They
occur most numerously in cases of importance, where more than one person
is involved. It happens, perhaps, that only one or two are captured, and
they assume all the guilt, e.g., in cases of larceny, brawls, rioting,
etc. I repeat: the suggestive power of a confession is great and it is
hence really not easy to exclude its influence and to consider the
balance of the evidence on its merits,--but this must be done if one is
not to deceive oneself.

Dealing with the witness is still more ticklish, inasmuch as to the
difficulties with them, is added the difficulties with oneself. The
simplest thing would be to deny the existence of a confession, and thus
to get the witness to speak without prejudice. But aside from the fact
of its impossibility as a lie, each examination of a witness would have
to be a comedy and that would in many cases be impossible as the witness
might already know that the accused had confessed. The only thing to be
done, especially when it is permissible for other reasons, is to tell
the witness that a confession exists and to call to his attention that
it is not yet evidence, and finally and above all to keep one’s head and
to prevent the witness from presenting his evidence from the point of
view of the already-established. In this regard it can not be
sufficiently demonstrated that the coloring of a true bill comes much
less from the witness than from the judge. The most excited witness can
be brought by the judge to a sober and useful point of view, and
conversely, the most calm witness may utter the most misleading
testimony if the judge abandons in any way the safe bottom of the
indubitably established fact.

Very intelligent witnesses (they are not confined to the educated
classes) may be dealt with constructively and be told after their
depositions that the case is to be considered as if there were no
confession whatever. There is an astonishing number of
people--especially among the peasants--who are amenable to such
considerations and willingly follow if they are led on with confidence.
In such a case it is necessary to analyze the testimony into its
elements. This analysis is most difficult and important since it must be
determined what, taken in itself, is an element, materially, not
formally, and what merely appears to be a unit. Suppose that during a
great brawl a man was stabbed and that A confesses to the stabbing. Now
a witness testified that A had first uttered a threat, then had jumped
into the brawl, felt in his bag, and left the crowd, and that in the
interval between A’s entering and leaving, the stabbing occurred. In
this simple case the various incidents must be evaluated, and each must
be considered by itself. So we consider--Suppose A had not confessed,
what would the threat have counted for? Might it not have been meant for
the assailants of the injured man? May his feeling in the bag not be
interpreted in another fashion? Must he have felt for a knife only? Was
there time enough to open it and to stab? Might the man not have been
already wounded by that time? We might then conclude that all the
evidence about A contained nothing against him--but if we relate it to
the confession, then this evidence is almost equal to direct evidence of
A’s crime.

But if individual sense-perceptions are mingled with conclusions, and if
other equivalent perceptions have to be considered, which occurred
perhaps to other people, then the analysis is hardly so simple, yet it
must be made.

In dealing with less intelligent people, with whom this construction
cannot be performed, one must be satisfied with general rules. By
demanding complete accuracy and insisting, in any event, on the ratio
sciendi, one may generally succeed in turning a perception, uncertain
with regard to any individual, into a trustworthy one with regard to the
confessor. It happens comparatively seldom that untrue confessions are
discovered, but once this does occur, and the trouble is taken to
subject the given evidence to a critical comparison, the manner of
adaptation of the evidence to the confession may easily be discovered.
The witnesses were altogether unwilling to tell any falsehood and the
judge was equally eager to establish the truth, nevertheless the issue
must have received considerable perversion in order to fix the guilt on
the confessor. Such examinations are so instructive that the opportunity
to make them should never be missed. All the testimony presents a
typical picture. The evidence is consistent with the theory that the
real confessor was guilty, but it is also consistent with the theory
that the real criminal was guilty, but some details must be altered,
often very many. If there is an opportunity to hear the same witnesses
again, the procedure becomes still more instructive. The witnesses
(supposing they want honestly to tell the truth) naturally confirm the
evidence as it points to the second, more real criminal, and if an
explanation is asked for the statements that pointed to the “confessor,”
the answers make it indubitably evident, that their incorrectness came
as without intention; the circumstance that a confession had been made
acted as a suggestion.[63]

Conditions similar to confessional circumstances arise when other types
of persuasive evidence are gathered, which have the same impressive
influence as confessions. In such cases the judge’s task is easier than
the witness’s, since he need not tell them of evidence already at hand.
How very much people allow themselves to be influenced by antecedent
grounds of suspicion is a matter of daily observation. One example will
suffice. An intelligent man was attacked at night and wounded. On the
basis of his description an individual was arrested. On the next day
the suspect was brought before the man for identification. He identified
the man with certainty, but inasmuch as his description did not quite
hit off the suspect he was asked the reason for his certainty. “Oh, you
certainly would not have brought him here if he were not the right man,”
was the astonishing reply. Simply because the suspect was arrested on
the story of the wounded man and brought before him in prison garb, the
latter thought he saw such corroboration for his data as to make the
identification certain--a pure ὑστερον πρωτερον, which did not at all
occur to him in connection with the vivid impression of what he saw. I
believe that to keep going with merely what the criminalist knows about
the matter, belongs to his most difficult tasks.


Section 9. (g) Interest.

Anybody who means to work honestly must strive to awaken and to sustain
the interest of his collaborators. A judge’s duty is to present his
associates material, well-arranged, systematic, and exhaustive, but not
redundant; and to be himself well and minutely informed concerning the
case. Whoever so proceeds may be certain in even the most ordinary and
simplest cases, of the interest of his colleagues,--hence of their
attention; and, in consequence, of the best in their power. These are
essentially self-evident propositions. In certain situations, however,
more is asked with regard to the experts. The expert, whether a very
modest workman or very renowned scholar, must in the first instance
become convinced of the judge’s complete interest in his work; of the
judge’s power to value the effort and knowledge it requires; of the fact
that he does not question and listen merely because the law requires it,
and finally of the fact that the judge is endowed, so far as may be,
with a definite comprehension of the expert’s task.

However conscientiously and intensely the expert may apply himself to
his problem, it will be impossible to work at it with real interest if
he finds no co-operation, no interest, and no understanding among those
for whom he, at least formally, is at work. We may be certain that the
paucity of respect we get from the scientific representatives of other
disciplines (let us be honest,--such is the case) comes particularly
from those relations we have with them as experts, relations in which
they find us so unintelligent and so indifferent with regard to matters
of importance. If the experts speak of us with small respect and the
attitude spreads and becomes general, we get only our full due. Nobody
can require of a criminal judge profound knowledge of all other
disciplines besides his own--the experts supply that--but the judge
certainly must have some insight into them in so far as they affect his
own work, if he is not to meet the expert unintelligent and
unintelligible, and if he is to co-operate with and succeed in
appraising the expert’s work. In a like fashion the judge may be
required to take interest in the experts’ result. If the judge receives
their report and sticks to the statutes, if he never shows that he was
anxious about their verdict, and merely views it as a number, it is no
wonder that in the end the expert also regards his work as a mere
number, and loses interest. No man is interested in a thing unless it is
made interesting, and the expert is no exception. Naturally no one would
say that the judge should pretend interest,--that would be worst of
all;--he must be possessed of it, or he will not do for a judge. But
interest may be intensified and vitalized. If the judge perceives that
the finding of the experts is very important for his case he must at
least meet them with interest in it. If that is present he will read
their reports attentively, will note that he does not understand some
things and ask the experts for elucidation. One question gives rise to
another, one answer after another causes understanding, and
understanding implies an ever-increasing interest. It never happens that
there should be difficulties because of a request to judicial experts to
explain things to the judge. I have never met any in my own practice and
have never heard any complaints. On the contrary, pleasure and
efficiency are generally noticeable in such connections, and the state,
above all, is the gainer. The simple explanation lies here in the fact
that the expert is interested in his profession, interested in just that
concrete way in which the incomparably greater number of jurists are
not. And this again is based upon a sad fact, for us. The chemist, the
physician, etc., studies his subject because he wants to become a
chemist, physician, etc., but the lawyer studies law not because he
wants to become a lawyer, but because he wants to become an official,
and as he has no especial interest he chooses his state position in that
branch in which he thinks he has the best prospects. It is a bitter
truth and a general rule--that those who want to study law and the
science of law are the exceptions, and that hence we have to acquire a
real interest in our subject from laymen, from our experts. But the
interest can be acquired, and with the growth of interest, there is
growth of knowledge, and therewith increase of pleasure in the work
itself and hence success.

The most difficult problem in interest, is arousing the interest of
witnesses--because this is purely a matter of training. Receiving the
attention is what should be aimed at in rousing interest, inasmuch as
full attention leads to correct testimony--i.e., to the thing most
important to our tasks. “No interest, no attention,” says Volkmar.[64]
“The absolutely new does not stimulate; what narrows appreciation,
narrows attention also.” The significant thing for us is that “the
absolutely new does not stimulate”--a matter often overlooked. If I tell
an uneducated man, with all signs of astonishment, that the missing
books of Tacitus’ “Annals” have been discovered in Verona, or that a
completely preserved Dinotherium has been cut out of the ice, or that
the final explanation of the Martian canals has been made at Manora
observatory,--all this very interesting news will leave him quite cold;
it is absolutely new to him, he does not know what it means or how to
get hold of it, it offers him no matter of interest.[65] I should have a
similar experience if, in the course of a big case, I told a man,
educated, but uninterested in the case, with joy, that I had finally
discovered the important note on which the explanation of the events
depended. I could not possibly expect interest, attention, and
comprehension of a matter if my interlocutor knows nothing about the
issue or the reason of the note’s importance. And in spite of the fact
that everything is natural and can be explained we have the same story
every day. We put the witness a definite question that is of immense
importance to us, who are fully acquainted with the problem, but is for
the witness detached, incoherent, and therefore barren of interest. Then
who can require of an uninterested witness, attention, and effective and
well-considered replies?[66] I myself heard a witness answer a judge who
asked him about the weather on a certain day, “Look here, to drag me so
many miles to this place in order to discuss the weather with
me,--that’s--.” The old man was quite right because the detached
question had no particular purpose. But when it was circumstantially
explained to him that the weather was of uttermost significance in this
case, how it was related thereto, and how important his answer would be,
he went at the question eagerly, and did everything thinkable in trying
to recall the weather in question by bringing to bear various associated
events, and did finally make a decidedly valuable addition to the
evidence. And this is the only way to capture the attention of a
witness. If he is merely ordered to pay attention, the result is the
same as if he were ordered to speak louder,--he does it, in lucky cases,
for a moment, and then goes on as before. Attention may be generated but
not commanded, and may be generated successfully with everybody, and at
all times, if only the proper method is hit upon. The first and absolute
requirement is to have and to show the same interest oneself. For it is
impossible to infect a man with interest when you have no interest to
infect with. There is nothing more deadly or boresome than to see how
witnesses are examined sleepily and with tedium, and how the witnesses,
similarly infected, similarly answer. On the other hand, it is
delightful to observe the surprising effect of questions asked and heard
with interest. Then the sleepiest witnesses, even dull ones, wake up:
the growth of their interest, and hence of their attention, may be
followed step by step; they actually increase in knowledge and their
statements gain in reliability. And this simply because they have seen
the earnestness of the judge, the importance of the issue, the case, the
weighty consequences of making a mistake, the gain in truth through
watchfulness and effort, the avoidance of error through attention. In
this way the most useful testimony can be obtained from witnesses who,
in the beginning, showed only despairing prospects.

Now, if one is already himself endowed with keen interest and resolved
to awaken the same in the witnesses, it is necessary carefully to
consider the method of so doing and how much the witness is to be told
of what has already been established, or merely been said and received
as possibly valuable. On the one hand it is true that the witness can be
roused to attention and to more certain and vigorous responses according
to the quantity of detail told him.[67] On the other, caution and other
considerations warn against telling an unknown witness, whose
trustworthiness is not ascertained, delicate and important matters. It
is especially difficult if the witness is to be told of presuppositions
and combinations, or if he is to be shown how the case would alter with
his own answer. The last especially has the effect of suggestion and
must occur in particular and in general at those times alone when his
statement, or some part of it, is apparently of small importance but
actually of much. Often this importance can be made clear to the witness
only by showing him that the difference in the effect of his testimony
is pointed out to him because when he sees it he will find it worth
while to exert himself and to consider carefully his answer. Any one of
us may remember that a witness who was ready with a prompt, and to him
an indifferent reply, started thinking and gave an essentially different
answer, even contradictory to his first, when the meaning and the effect
of what he might say was made clear to him.

How and when the witness is to be told things there is no rule for. The
wise adjustment between saying enough to awaken interest and not too
much to cause danger is a very important question of tact. Only one
certain device may be recommended--it is better to be careful with a
witness during his preliminary examination and to keep back what is
known or suspected; thus the attention and interest of the witness may
perhaps be stimulated. If, however, it is believed that fuller
information may increase and intensify the important factors under
examination, the witness is to be recalled later, when it is safe, and
his testimony is, under the new conditions of interest, to be corrected
and rendered more useful. In this case, too, the key to success lies in
increase of effort--but that is true in all departments of law, and the
interest of a witness is so important that it is worth the effort.


Topic III. PHENOMENOLOGY: STUDY OF THE OUTWARD EXPRESSION OF MENTAL
STATES.


Section 10.

Phenomenology is in general the science of appearances. In our usage it
is the systematic co-ordination of those outer symptoms occasioned by
inner processes, and conversely, the inference from the symptoms to
them. Broadly construed, this may be taken as the study of the habits
and whole bearing of any individual. But essentially only those external
manifestations can be considered that refer back to definite psychical
conditions, so that our phenomenology may be defined as the semiotic of
normal psychology. This science is legally of immense importance, but
has not yet assumed the task of showing how unquestionable inferences
may be drawn from an uncounted collection of outward appearances to
inner processes. In addition, observations are not numerous enough, far
from accurate enough, and psychological research not advanced enough.
What dangerous mistakes premature use of such things may lead to is
evident in the teaching of the Italian positivistic school, which
defines itself also as psychopathic semiotic. But if our phenomenology
can only attempt to approximate the establishment of a science of
symptoms, it may at least study critically the customary popular
inferences from such symptoms and reduce exaggerated theories concerning
the value of individual symptoms to a point of explanation and proof. It
might seem that our present task is destructive, but it will be an
achievement if we can show the way to later development of this science,
and to have examined and set aside the useless material already to hand.


Section 11. (a) General External Conditions.

“Every state of consciousness has its physical correlate,” says
Helmholtz,[68] and this proposition contains the all in all of our
problem. Every mental event must have its corresponding physical
event[69] in some form, and is therefore capable of being sensed, or
known to be indicated by some trace. Identical inner states do not, of
course, invariably have identical bodily concomitants, neither in all
individuals alike, nor in the same individual at different times. Modern
methods of generalization so invariably involve danger and incorrectness
that one can not be too cautious in this matter. If generalization were
permissible, psychical events would have to be at least as clear as
physical processes, but that is not admissible for many reasons. First
of all, physical concomitants are rarely direct and unmeditated
expressions of a psychical instant (e.g., clenching a fist in
threatening). Generally they stand in no causal relation, so that
explanations drawn from physiological, anatomical, or even atavistic
conditions are only approximate and hypothetical. In addition,
accidental habits and inheritances exercise an influence which, although
it does not alter the expression, has a moulding effect that in the
course of time does finally so recast a very natural expression as to
make it altogether unintelligible. The phenomena, moreover, are in most
cases personal, so that each individual means a new study. Again the
phenomena rarely remain constant; e.g.: we call a thing habit,--we say,
“He has the habit of clutching his chin when he is embarrassed,”--but
that such habits change is well known. Furthermore, purely physiological
conditions operate in many directions, (such as blushing, trembling,
laughter,[70] weeping, stuttering, etc.), and finally, very few men want
to show their minds openly to their friends, so that they see no reason
for co-ordinating their symbolic bodily expressions. Nevertheless, they
do so, and not since yesterday, but for thousands of years. Hence
definite expressions have been transmitted for generations and have at
the same time been constantly modified, until to-day they are altogether
unrecognizable. Characteristically, the desire to fool others has also
its predetermined limitations, so that it often happens that simple and
significant gestures contradict words when the latter are false. E. g.,
you hear somebody say, “She went down,” but see him point at the same
time, not clearly, but visibly, _up_. Here the speech was false and the
gesture true. The speaker had to turn all his attention on what he
wanted to say so that the unwatched co-consciousness moved his hand in
some degree.

A remarkable case of this kind was that of a suspect of child murder.
The girl told that she had given birth to the child all alone, had
washed it, and then laid it on the bed beside herself. She had also
observed how a corner of the coverlet had fallen on the child’s face,
and thought it might interfere with the child’s breathing. But at this
point she swooned, was unable to help the child, and it was choked.
While sobbing and weeping as she was telling this story, she spread the
fingers of her left hand and pressed it on her thigh, as perhaps she
might have done, if she had first put something soft, the corner of a
coverlet possibly, over the child’s nose and mouth, and then pressed on
it. This action was so clearly significant that it inevitably led to the
question whether she hadn’t choked the child in that way. She assented,
sobbing.

Similar is another case in which a man assured us that he lived very
peaceably with his neighbor and at the same time clenched his fist. The
latter meant illwill toward the neighbor while the words did not.

It need not, of course, be urged that the certainty of a belief will be
much endangered if too much value is sanguinely set on such and similar
gestures, when their observation is not easy. There is enough to do in
taking testimony, and enough to observe, to make it difficult to watch
gestures too. Then there is danger (because of slight practice) of
easily mistaking indifferent or habitual gestures for significant ones;
of supposing oneself to have seen more than should have been seen, and
of making such observations too noticeable, in which case the witness
immediately controls his gestures. In short, there are difficulties, but
once they are surmounted, the effort to do so is not regretted.

It is to be recommended here, also, not to begin one’s studies with
murder and robbery, but with the simple cases of the daily life, where
there is no danger of making far-reaching mistakes, and where
observations may be made much more calmly. Gestures are especially
powerful habits and almost everybody makes them, mainly _not_
indifferent ones. It is amusing to observe a man at the telephone, his
free hand making the gestures for both. He clenches his fist
threateningly, stretches one finger after another into the air if he is
counting something, stamps his foot if he is angry, and puts his finger
to his head if he does not understand--in that he behaves as he would if
his interlocutor were before him. Such deep-rooted tendencies to gesture
hardly ever leave us. The movements also occur when we lie; and inasmuch
as a man who is lying at the same time has the idea of the truth either
directly or subconsciously before him, it is conceivable that this idea
exercises much greater influence on gesture than the probably transitory
lie. The question, therefore, is one of intensity, for each gesture
requires a powerful impulse and the more energetic is the one that
succeeds in causing the gesture. According to Herbert Spencer[71] it is
a general and important rule that any sensation which exceeds a definite
intensity expresses itself ordinarily in activity of the body. This fact
is the more important for us inasmuch as we rarely have to deal with
light and with not deep-reaching and superficial sensations. In most
cases the sensations in question “exceed a certain intensity,” so that
we are able to perceive a bodily expression at least in the form of a
gesture.

The old English physician, Charles Bell,[72] is of the opinion, in his
cautious way, that what is called the external sign of passion is only
the accompanying phenomenon of that spontaneous movement required by the
structure, or better, by the situation of the body. Later this was
demonstrated by Darwin and his friends to be the indubitable starting
point of all gesticulation:--so, for example, the defensive action upon
hearing something disgusting, the clenching of the fists in anger; or
among wild animals, the baring of the teeth, or the bull’s dropping of
the head, etc. In the course of time the various forms of action became
largely unintelligible and significatory only after long experience. It
became, moreover, differently differentiated with each individual, and
hence still more difficult to understand. How far this differentiation
may go when it has endured generation after generation and is at last
crystallized into a set type, is well known; just as by training the
muscles of porters, tumblers or fencers develop in each individual, so
the muscles develop in those portions of our body most animated by the
mind--in our face and hands, especially, have there occurred through the
centuries fixed expressions or types of movement. This has led to the
observations of common-sense which speak of raw, animal, passionate or
modest faces, and of ordinary, nervous, or spiritual hands; but it has
also led to the scientific interpretation of these phenomena which
afterwards went shipwreck in the form of Lombroso’s “criminal stigmata,”
inasmuch as an overhasty theory has been built on barren, unexperienced,
and unstudied material. The notion of criminal stigmata is, however, in
no sense new, and Lombroso has not invented it; according to an
incidental remark of Kant in his “Menschenkunde,” the first who tried
scientifically to interpret these otherwise ancient observations was the
German J. B. Friedreich,[73] who says expressly that determinate somatic
pathological phenomena may be shown to occur with certain moral
perversions. It has been observed with approximate clearness in several
types of cases. So, for example, incendiarism occurs in the case of
abnormal sexual conditions; poisoning also springs from abnormal sexual
impulses; drowning is the consequence of oversatiated drink mania, etc.
Modern psychopathology knows nothing additional concerning these
marvels; and similar matters which are spoken of nowadays again, have
shown themselves incapable of demonstration. But that there are
phenomena so related, and that their number is continually increasing
under exact observations, is not open to doubt.[74] If we stop with the
phenomena of daily life and keep in mind the ever-cited fact that
everybody recognizes at a glance the old hunter, the retired officer,
the actor, the aristocratic lady, etc., we may go still further: the
more trained observers can recognize the merchant, the official, the
butcher, the shoe-maker, the real tramp, the Greek, the sexual pervert,
etc. Hence follows an important law--_that if a fact is once recognized
correctly in its coarser form, then the possibility must be granted that
it is correct in its subtler manifestations_. The boundary between what
is coarse and what is not may not be drawn at any particular point. It
varies with the skill of the observer, with the character of the
material before him, and with the excellence of his instruments, so that
nobody can say where the possibility of progress in the matter ceases.
Something must be granted in all questions appertaining to this subject
of recognizable unit-characters and every layman pursues daily certain
activities based on their existence. When he speaks of stupid and
intelligent faces he is a physiognomist; he sees that there are
intellectual foreheads and microcephalic ones, and is thus a
craniologist; he observes the expression of fear and of joy, and so
observes the principles of imitation; he contemplates a fine and elegant
hand in contrast with a fat and mean hand, and therefore assents to the
effectiveness of chirognomy; he finds one hand-writing scholarly and
fluid, another heavy, ornate and unpleasant; so he is dealing with the
first principles of graphology;--all these observations and inferences
are nowhere denied, and nobody can say where their attainable boundaries
lie.

Hence, the only proper point of view to take is that from which we set
aside as too bold, all daring and undemonstrated assertions on these
matters. But we will equally beware of asserting without further
consideration that far-reaching statements are unjustified, for we shall
get very far by the use of keener and more careful observation, richer
material, and better instruments.

How fine, for example, are the observations made by Herbert Spencer
concerning the importance of the “timbre” of speech in the light of the
emotional state--no one had ever thought of that before, or considered
the possibilities of gaining anything of importance from this single
datum which has since yielded such a rich collection of completely
proved and correctly founded results. Darwin knew well enough to make
use of it for his own purposes.[75] He points out that the person who is
quietly complaining of bad treatment or is suffering a little, almost
always speaks in a high tone of voice; and that deep groans or high and
piercing shrieks indicate extreme pain. Now we lawyers can make just
such observations in great number. Any one of us who has had a few
experiences, can immediately recognize from the tone of voice with which
a new comer makes his requests just about what he wants. The accused,
for example, who by chance does not know why he has been called to
court, makes use of a questioning tone without really pronouncing his
question. Anybody who is seriously wounded, speaks hoarsely and
abruptly. The secret tone of voice of the querulous, and of such people
who speak evil of another when they are only half or not at all
convinced of it, gives them away. The voice of a denying criminal has in
hundreds of cases been proved through a large number of physiological
phenomena to do the same thing for him; the stimulation of the nerves
influences before all the characteristic snapping movement of the mouth
which alternates with the reflex tendency to swallow. In addition it
causes lapses in blood pressure and palpitation of the heart by means of
disturbances of the heart action, and this shows clearly visible
palpitation of the right carotid (well within the breadth of hand under
the ear in the middle of the right side of the neck). That the left
carotid does not show the palpitation may be based on the fact that the
right stands in much more direct connection with the aorta. All this,
taken together, causes that so significant, lightly vibrating, cold and
toneless voice, which is so often to be perceived in criminals who deny
their guilt. It rarely deceives the expert.

But these various timbres of the voice especially contain a not
insignificant danger for the criminalist. Whoever once has devoted
himself to the study of them trusts them altogether too easily, for even
if he has identified them correctly hundreds of times, it still may
happen that he is completely deceived by a voice he holds as
“characteristically demonstrative.” That timbres may deceive, or
simulations worthy of the name occur, I hardly believe. Such deceptions
are often attempted and begun, but they demand the entire attention of
the person who tries them, and that can be given for only a short time.
In the very instant that the matter he is speaking of requires the
attention of the speaker, his voice involuntarily falls into that tone
demanded by its physical determinants: and the speaker significantly
betrays himself through just this alteration. We may conclude that an
effective simulation is hardly thinkable.

It must, however, be noticed that earlier mistaken observations and
incorrect inference at the present moment--substitutions and similar
mistakes--may easily mislead. As a corroborative fact, then, the
judgment of a voice would have great value; but as a means in itself it
is a thing too little studied and far from confirmed.

There is, however, another aspect of the matter which manifests itself
in an opposite way from voice and gesture. Lazarus calls attention to
the fact that the spectators at a fencing match can not prevent
themselves from imitative accompaniment of the actions of the fencers,
and that anybody who happens to have any swinging object in his hand
moves his hand here and there as they do. Stricker[76] makes similar
observations concerning involuntary movements performed while looking at
drilling or marching soldiers. Many other phenomena of the daily
life--as, for example, keeping step with some pedestrian near us, with
the movement of a pitcher who with all sorts of twistings of his body
wants to guide the ball correctly when it has already long ago left his
hand; keeping time to music and accompanying the rhythm of a wagon
knocking on cobblestones; even the enforcement of what is said through
appropriate gestures when people speak vivaciously--naturally belong to
the same class. So do nodding the head in agreement and shaking it in
denial; shrugging the shoulders with a declaration of ignorance. The
expression by word of mouth should have been enough and have needed no
reinforcement through conventional gestures, but the last are
spontaneously involuntary accompaniments.

On the other hand there is the converse fact that the voice may be
influenced through expression and gesture. If we fix an expression on
our features or bring our body into an attitude which involves passional
excitement we may be sure that we will be affected more or less by the
appropriate emotion. This statement, formulated by Maudsley, is
perfectly true and may be proved by anybody at any moment. It presents
itself to us as an effective corroboration of the so well-known
phenomenon of “talking-yourself-into-it.” Suppose you correctly imagine
how a very angry man looks: frowning brow, clenched fists, gritting
teeth, hoarse, gasping voice, and suppose you imitate. Then, even if you
feel most harmless and order-loving, you become quite angry though you
keep up the imitation only a little while. By means of the imitation of
lively bodily changes you may in the same way bring yourself into any
conceivable emotional condition, the outer expressions of which appear
energetically. It must have occurred to every one of us how often
prisoners present so well the excitement of passion that their
earnestness is actually believed; as for example, the anger of a
guiltless suspect or of an obviously needy person, of a man financially
ruined by his trusted servant, etc. Such scenes of passion happen daily
in every court-house and they are so excellently presented that even an
experienced judge believes in their reality and tells himself that such
a thing can not be imitated because the imitation is altogether too hard
to do and still harder to maintain. But in reality the presentation is
not so wonderful, and taken altogether, is not at all skilful; whoever
wants to manifest _anger_ must make the proper gestures (and that
requires no art) and when he makes the gestures the necessary conditions
occur and these stimulate and cause the correct manifestation of the
later gestures, while these again influence the voice. Thus without any
essential mummery the comedy plays itself out, self-sufficient, correct,
convincing. Alarming oneself is not performed by words, but by the
reciprocal influence of word and gesture, and the power of that
influence is observable in the large number of cases where, in the end,
people themselves believe what they have invented. If they are of
delicate spiritual equilibrium they even become hypochondriacs. Writing,
and the reading of writing, is to be considered in the same way as
gesticulation; it has the same alarming influence on voice and general
appearance as the other, so that it is relatively indifferent whether a
man speaks and acts or writes and thinks. This fact is well known to
everybody who has ever in his life written a really coarse letter.

Now this exciting gesticulation can be very easily observed, but the
observation must not come too late. If the witness is once quite lost in
it and sufficiently excited by the concomitant speeches he will make his
gestures well and naturally and the artificial and untrue will not be
discoverable. But this is not the case in the beginning; then his
gestures are actually not skilful, and at that point a definite force of
will and rather notable exaggerations are observable; the gestures go
further than the words, and that is a matter not difficult to recognize.
As soon as the recognition is made it becomes necessary to examine
whether a certain congruity invariably manifests itself between word and
gesture, inasmuch as with many people the above-mentioned lack of
congruity is habitual and honest. This is particularly the case with
people who are somewhat theatrical and hence gesticulate too much. But
if word and gesture soon conform one to another, especially after a
rather lively presentation, you may be certain that the subject has
skilfully worked himself into his alarm or whatever it is he wanted to
manifest. Quite apart from the importance of seeing such a matter
clearly the interest of the work is a rich reward for the labor
involved.

In close relation to these phenomena is the change of color to which
unfortunately great importance is often assigned.[77] In this regard
paling has received less general attention because it is more rare and
less suspicious. That it can not be simulated, as is frequently asserted
in discussions of simulation (especially of epilepsy), is not true,
inasmuch as there exists an especial physiological process which
succeeds in causing pallor artificially. In that experiment the chest is
very forcibly contracted, the glottis is closed and the muscles used in
inspiration are contracted. This matter has no practical value for us,
on the one hand, because the trick is always involved with lively and
obvious efforts, and on the other, because cases are hardly thinkable in
which a man will produce artificial pallor in the court where it can not
be of any use to him. The one possibility of use is in the simulation of
epilepsy, and in such a case the trick can not be played because of the
necessary falling to the ground.

Paling depends, as is well known, on the cramp of the muscles of the
veins, which contract and so cause a narrowing of their bore which
hinders the flow of blood. But such cramps happen only in cases of
considerable anger, fear, pain, trepidation, rage; in short, in cases of
excitement that nobody ever has reason to simulate. Paling has no value
in differentiation inasmuch as a man might grow pale in the face through
fear of being unmasked or in rage at unjust suspicion.

The same thing is true about blushing.[78] It consists in a sort of
transitory crippling of those nerves that end in the walls of small
arteries. This causes the relaxation of the muscle-fibers of the blood
vessels which are consequently filled in a greater degree with blood.
Blushing also may be voluntarily created by some individuals. In that
case the chest is fully expanded, the glottis is closed and the muscles
of expiration are contracted. But this matter again has no particular
value for us since the simulation of a blush is at most of use only when
a woman wants to appear quite modest and moral. But for that effect
artificial blushing does not help, since it requires such intense effort
as to be immediately noticeable. Blushing by means of external
assistance, e.g., inhaling certain chemicals, is a thing hardly anybody
will want to perform before the court.

With regard to guilt or innocence, blushing offers no evidence whatever.
There is a great troop of people who blush without any reason for
feeling guilty. The most instructive thing in this matter is
self-observation, and whoever recalls the cause of his own blushing will
value the phenomenon lightly enough. I myself belonged, not only as a
child, but also long after my student days, to those unfortunates who
grow fire-red quite without reason; I needed only to hear of some
shameful deed, of theft, robbery, murder, and I would get so red that a
spectator might believe that I was one of the criminals. In my native
city there was an old maid who had, I knew even as a boy, remained
single because of unrequited love of my grandfather. She seemed to me a
very poetical figure and once when her really magnificent ugliness was
discussed, I took up her cause and declared her to be not so bad. My
taste was laughed at, and since then, whenever this lady or the street
she lives in or even her furs (she used to have pleasure in wearing
costly furs) were spoken of, I would blush. And her age may be estimated
from her calf-love. Now what has occurred to me, often painfully,
happens to numbers of people, and it is hence inconceivable why forensic
value is still frequently assigned to blushing. At the same time there
are a few cases in which blushing may be important.

The matter is interesting even though we know nothing about the
intrinsic inner process which leads to the influence on the nervous
filaments. Blushing occurs all the world over, and its occasion and
process is the same among savages as among us.[79] The same events may
be observed whether we compare the flush of educated or uneducated.
There is the notion, which I believed for a long time, that blushing
occurs among educated people and is especially rare among peasants, but
that does not seem to be true. Working people, especially those who are
out in the open a good deal, have a tougher pigmentation and a browner
skin, so that their flush is less obvious. But it occurs as often and
under the same conditions as among others. It might be said for the same
reason that Gypsies never blush; and of course, that the blush may be
rarer among people lacking in shame and a sense of honor is conceivable.
Yet everybody who has much to do with Gypsies asserts that the blush may
be observed among them.

Concerning the relation of the blush to age, Darwin says that early
childhood knows nothing about blushing. It happens in youth more
frequently than in old age, and oftener among women than among men.
Idiots blush seldom, blind people and hereditary albinos, a great deal.
The somatic process of blushing is, as Darwin shows, quite remarkable.
Almost always the blush is preceded by a quick contraction of the
eyelids as if to prevent the rise of the blood in the eyes. After that,
in most cases, the eyes are dropped, even when the cause of blushing is
anger or vexation; finally the blush rises, in most cases irregularly
and in spots, at last to cover the skin uniformly. If you want to save
the witness his blush you can do it only at the beginning--during the
movement of the eyes--and only by taking no notice of it, by not looking
at him, and going right on with your remarks. This incidentally is
valuable inasmuch as many people are much confused by blushing and
really do not know what they are talking about while doing it. There is
no third thing which is the cause of the blush and of the confusion; the
blush itself is the cause of the confusion. This may be indubitably
confirmed by anybody who has the agreeable property of blushing and
therefore is of some experience in the matter. I should never dare to
make capital of any statement made during the blush. Friedreich calls
attention to the fact that people who are for the first time subject to
the procedure of the law courts blush and lose color more easily than
such as are accustomed to it, so that the unaccustomed scene also
contributes to the confusion. Meynert[80] states the matter explicitly:
“The blush always depends upon a far-reaching association-process in
which the complete saturation of the contemporaneously-excited nervous
elements constricts the orderly movement of the mental process, inasmuch
as here also the simplicity of contemporaneously-occurring activities of
the brain determines the scope of the function of association.” How
convincing this definition is becomes clear on considering the processes
in question. Let us think of some person accused of a crime to whom the
ground of accusation is presented for the first time, and to whom the
judge after that presents the skilfully constructed proof of his guilt
by means of individual bits of evidence. Now think of the mass of
thoughts here excited, even if the accused is innocent. The deed itself
is foreign to him, he must imagine that; should any relation to it (e.g.
presence at the place where the deed was done, interest in it, ownership
of the object, etc.) be present to his mind, he must become clear
concerning this relationship, while at the same time the possibilities
of excuse--alibi, ownership of the thing, etc.--storm upon him. Then
only does he consider the particular reasons of suspicion which he must,
in some degree, incarnate and represent in their dangerous character,
and for each of which he must find a separate excuse. We have here some
several dozens of thought-series, which start their movement at the same
time and through each other. If at that time an especially dangerous
apparent proof is brought, and if the accused, recognizing this danger,
blushes with fear, the examiner thinks: “Now I have caught the rascal,
for he’s blushing! Now let’s go ahead quickly, speed the examination and
enter the confused answer in the protocol!” And who believes the accused
when, later on, he withdraws the “confession” and asserts that he had
said the thing because they had mixed him up?

In this notion, “you blush, therefore you have lied; you did it!” lie
many sins the commission of which is begun at the time of admonishing
little children and ended with obtaining the “confessions” of the
murderous thief.

Finally, it is not to be forgotten that there are cases of blushing
which have nothing to do with psychical processes. Ludwig Meyer[81]
calls it “artificial blushing” (better, “mechanically developed
blushing”), and narrates the case of “easily-irritated women who could
develop a blush with the least touch of friction, e.g., of the face on a
pillow, rubbing with the hand, etc.; and this blush could not be
distinguished from the ordinary blush.” We may easily consider that such
lightly irritable women may be accused, come before the court without
being recognized as such, and, for example, cover their faces with their
hands and blush. Then the thing might be called “evidential.”


Section 12. (b) General Signs of Character.

Friedrich Gerstäcker, in one of his most delightful moods, says
somewhere that the best characteristicon of a man is how he wears his
hat. If he wears it perpendicular, he is honest, pedantic, and boresome.
If he wears it tipped slightly, he belongs to the best and most
interesting people, is nimble-witted and pleasant. A deeply tipped hat
indicates frivolity and obstinate imperious nature. A hat worn on the
back of the head signifies improvidence, easiness, conceit, sensuality
and extravagance; the farther back the more dangerous is the position of
the wearer. The man who presses his hat against his temples complains,
is melancholy, and in a bad way. It is now many years since I have read
this exposition by the much-traveled and experienced author, and I have
thought countless times how right he was, but also, how there may be
numberless similar marks of recognition which show as much as the
manner of wearing a hat. There are plenty of similar expositions to be
known; one man seeks to recognize the nature of others by their manner
of wearing and using shoes; the other by the manipulation of an
umbrella; and the prudent mother advises her son how the candidate for
bride behaves toward a groom lying on the floor, or how she eats
cheese--the extravagant one cuts the rind away thick, the miserly one
eats the rind, the right one cuts the rind away thin and carefully. Many
people judge families, hotel guests, and inhabitants of a city, and not
without reason, according to the comfort and cleanliness of their
privies.

Lazarus has rightly called to mind what is told by the pious Chr. von
Schmidt, concerning the clever boy who lies under a tree and recognizes
the condition of every passer-by according to what he says. “What fine
lumber,”--“Good-morning, carpenter,”--“What magnificent
bark,”--“Good-morning, tanner,”--“What beautiful
branches,”--“Good-morning, painter.” This significant story shows us how
easy it is with a little observation to perceive things that might
otherwise have been hidden. With what subtle clearness it shows how
effective is the egoism which makes each man first of all, and in most
cases exclusively, perceive what most concerns him as most prominent!
And in addition men so eagerly and often present us the chance for the
deepest insight into their souls that we need only to open our
eyes--seeing and interpreting is so childishly easy! Each one of us
experiences almost daily the most instructive things; e.g. through the
window of my study I could look into a great garden in which a house was
being built; when the carpenters left in the evening they put two blocks
at the entrance and put a board on them crosswise. Later there came each
evening a gang of youngsters who found in this place a welcome
playground. That obstruction which they had to pass gave me an
opportunity to notice the expression of their characters. One ran
quickly and jumped easily over,--that one will progress easily and
quickly in his life. Another approached carefully, climbed slowly up the
board and as cautiously descended on the other side--careful,
thoughtful, and certain. The third climbed up and jumped down--a deed
purposeless, incidental, uninforming. The fourth ran energetically to
the obstruction, then stopped and crawled boldly underneath--disgusting
boy who nevertheless will have carried his job ahead. Then, again, there
came a fifth who jumped,--but too low, remained hanging and tumbled; he
got up, rubbed his knee, went back, ran again and came over
magnificently--and how magnificently will he achieve all things in life,
for he has will, fearlessness, and courageous endurance!--he can’t sink.
Finally a sixth came storming along--one step, and board and blocks fell
together crashing, but he proudly ran over the obstruction, and those
who came behind him made use of the open way. He is of the people who go
through life as path-finders; we get our great men from among such.

Well, all this is just a game, and no one would dare to draw conclusions
concerning our so serious work from such observations merely. But they
can have a corroborative value if they are well done, when large
numbers, and not an isolated few, are brought together, and when
appropriate analogies are brought from appropriate cases. Such studies,
which have to be sought in the daily life itself, permit easy
development; if observations have been clearly made, correctly
apprehended, and if, especially, the proper notions have been drawn from
them, they are easily to be observed, stick in the memory, and come
willingly at the right moment. But they must then serve only as indices,
they must only suggest: “perhaps the case is the same to-day.” And that
means a good deal; a point of view for the taking of evidence is
established, not, of course, proof as such, or a bit of evidence, but a
way of receiving it,--perhaps a false one. But if one proceeds carefully
along this way, it shows its falseness immediately, and another
presented by memory shows us another way that is perhaps correct.

The most important thing in this matter is to get a general view of the
human specimen--and incidentally, nobody needs more to do this than the
criminalist. For most of us the person before us is only “A, suspected
of _x_.” But our man is rather more than that, and especially he was
rather more before he became “A suspected of _x_.” Hence, the greatest
mistake, and, unfortunately, the commonest, committed by the judge, is
his failure to discuss with the prisoner his more or less necessary
earlier life. Is it not known that every deed is an outcome of the total
character of the doer? Is it not considered that deed and character are
correlative concepts, and that the character by means of which the deed
is to be established cannot be inferred from the deed alone? “Crime is
the product of the physiologically grounded psyche of the criminal and
his environing external conditions.” (Liszt). Each particular deed is
thinkable only when a determinate character of the doer is brought in
relation with it--a certain character predisposes to determinate deeds,
another character makes them unthinkable and unrelatable with this or
that person. But who thinks to know the character of a man without
knowing his view of the world, and who talks of their world-views with
his criminals? “Whoever wants to learn to know men,” says Hippel,[82]
“must judge them according to their wishes,” and it is the opinion of
Struve:[83] “A man’s belief indicates his purpose.” But who of us asks
his criminals about their wishes and beliefs?

If we grant the correctness of what we have said we gain the conviction
that we can proceed with approximate certainty and conscientiousness
only if we speak with the criminal, not alone concerning the deed
immediately in question, but also searchingly concerning the important
conditions of his inner life. So we may as far as possible see clearly
what he is according to general notions and his particular
relationships.

The same thing must also be done with regard to an important witness,
especially when much depends upon his way of judging, of experiencing,
of feeling, and of thinking, and when it is impossible to discover these
things otherwise. Of course such analyses are often tiring and without
result, but that, on the other hand, they lay open with few words whole
broadsides of physical conditions, so that we need no longer doubt, is
also a matter of course. Who wants to leave unused a formula of
Schopenhauer’s: “We discover what we are through what we do?” Nothing is
easier than to discover from some person important to us what he does,
even though the discovery develops merely as a simple conversation about
what he has done until now and what he did lately. And up to date we
have gotten at such courses of life only in the great cases; in cases of
murder or important political criminals, and then only at externals; we
have cared little about the essential deeds, the smaller forms of
activity which are always the significant ones. Suppose we allow some
man to speak about others, no matter whom, on condition that he must
know them well. He judges their deeds, praises and condemns them, and
thinks that he is talking about them but is really talking about himself
alone, for in each judgment of the others he aims to justify and enhance
himself; the things he praises he does, what he finds fault with, he
does not; or at least he wishes people to believe that he does the
former and avoids the latter. And when he speaks unpleasantly about his
friends he has simply abandoned what he formerly had in common with
them. Then again he scolds at those who have gotten on and blames their
evil nature for it; but whoever looks more closely may perceive that he
had no gain in the same evil and therefore dislikes it. At the same
time, he cannot possibly suppress what he wishes and what he needs. Now,
whoever knows this fact, knows his motives, and to decide in view of
these with regard to a crime is seldom difficult. “Nos besoins sont nos
forces”--but superficial needs do not really excite us while what is an
actual need does. Once we are compelled, our power to achieve what we
want grows astoundingly. How we wonder at the great amount of power used
up, in the case of many criminals! If we know that a real need was
behind the crime, we need no longer wonder at the magnitude of the
power. The relation between the crime and the criminal is defined
because we have discovered his needs. To these needs a man’s pleasures
belong also; every man, until the practically complete loss of vigor,
has as a rule a very obvious need for some kind of pleasure. It is human
nature not to be continuously a machine, to require relief and pleasure.

The word pleasure must of course be used in the loosest way, for one man
finds his pleasure in sitting beside the stove or in the shadow, while
another speaks of pleasure only when he can bring some change in his
work. I consider it impossible not to understand a man whose pleasures
are known; his will, his power, his striving and knowing, feeling and
perceiving cannot be made clearer by any other thing. Moreover, it
happens that it is a man’s pleasures which bring him into court, and as
he resists or falls into them he reveals his character. The famous
author of the “Imitation of Christ,” Thomas à Kempis, whose book is,
saving the Bible, the most wide-spread on earth, says: “Occasiones
hominem fragilem non faciunt, sed, qualis sit, ostendunt.” That is a
golden maxim for the criminalist. Opportunity, the chance to taste, is
close to every man, countless times; is his greatest danger; for that
reason it was great wisdom in the Bible that called the devil, the
Tempter. A man’s behavior with regard to the discovered or sought-out
opportunity exhibits his character wholly and completely. But the chance
to observe men face to face with opportunity is a rare one, and that
falling-off with which we are concerned is often the outcome of such an
opportunity. But at this point we ought not longer to learn, but to
know; and hence our duty to study the pleasures of men, to know how
they behave in the presence of their opportunities.

There is another group of conditions through which you may observe and
judge men in general. The most important one is to know yourself as well
as possible, for accurate self-knowledge leads to deep mistrust with
regard to others, and only the man suspicious with regard to others is
insured, at least a little, against mistakes. To pass from mistrust to
the reception of something good is not difficult, even in cases where
the mistrust is well-founded and the presupposition of excellent motives
among our fellows is strongly fought. Nevertheless, when something
actually good is perceivable, one is convinced by it and even made
happy. But the converse is not true, for anybody who is too trusting
easily presupposes the best at every opportunity, though he may have
been deceived a thousand times and is now deceived again. How it happens
that self-knowledge leads to suspicion of others we had better not
investigate too closely--it is a fact.

Every man is characterized by the way he behaves in regard to his
promises. I do not mean keeping or breaking a promise, because nobody
doubts that the honest man keeps it and the scoundrel does not. I mean
the _manner_ in which a promise is kept and the _degree_ in which it is
kept. La Roche-Foucauld[84] says significantly: “We promise according to
our hopes, and perform according to our fears.” When in any given case
promising and hopes and performance and fears are compared, important
considerations arise,--especially in cases of complicity in crime.

When it is at all possible, and in most cases it is, one ought to
concern oneself with a man’s style,--the handwriting of his soul. What
this consists of cannot be expressed in a definite way. The style must
simply be studied and tested with regard to its capacity for being
united with certain presupposed qualities. Everybody knows that
education, bringing-up, and intelligence are indubitably expressed in
style, but it may also be observed that style clearly expresses softness
or hardness of a character, kindness or cruelty, determination or
weakness, integrity or carelessness, and hundreds of other qualities.
Generally the purpose of studying style may be achieved by keeping in
mind some definite quality presupposed and by asking oneself, while
reading the manuscript of the person in question, whether this quality
fuses with the manuscript’s form and with the individual tendencies and
relationships that occur in the construction of the thought. One
reading will of course not bring you far, but if the reading is repeated
and taken up anew, especially as often as the writer is met with or as
often as some new fact about him is established, then it is almost
impossible not to attain a fixed and valuable result. One gets then
significantly the sudden impression that the thing to be proved, having
the expression of which the properties are to be established, rises out
of the manuscript; and when that happens the time has come not to dawdle
with the work. Repeated reading causes the picture above-mentioned to
come out more clearly and sharply; it is soon seen in what places or
directions of the manuscript that expression comes to light--these
places are grouped together, others are sought that more or less imply
it, and soon a standpoint for further consideration is reached which
naturally is not evidential by itself, but has, when combined with
numberless others, corroborative value.

Certain small apparently indifferent qualities and habits are important.
There are altogether too many of them to talk about; but there are
examples enough of the significance of what is said of a man in this
fashion: “this man is never late,” “this man never forgets,” “this man
invariably carries a pencil or a pocket knife,” “this one is always
perfumed,” “this one always wears clean, carefully brushed
clothes,”--whoever has the least training may construct out of such
qualities the whole inner life of the individual. Such observations may
often be learned from simple people, especially from old peasants. A
great many years ago I had a case which concerned a disappearance. It
was supposed that the lost man was murdered. Various examinations were
made without result, until, finally, I questioned an old and very
intelligent peasant who had known well the lost man. I asked the witness
to describe the nature of his friend very accurately, in order that I
might draw from his qualities, habits, etc., my inferences concerning
his tendencies, and hence concerning his possible location. The old
peasant supposed that everything had been said about the man in question
when he explained that he was a person who never owned a decent tool.
This was an excellent description, the value of which I completely
understood only when the murdered man came to life and I learned to know
him. He was a petty lumberman who used to buy small wooded tracts in the
high mountains for cutting, and having cut them down would either bring
the wood down to the valley, or have it turned to charcoal. In the fact
that he never owned a decent tool, nor had one for his men, was
established his whole narrow point of view, his cramped miserliness,
his disgusting prudence, his constricted kindliness, qualities which
permitted his men to plague themselves uselessly with bad tools and
which justified altogether his lack of skill in the purchase of tools.
So I thought how the few words of the old, much-experienced peasant were
confirmed utterly--they told the whole story. Such men, indeed, who say
little but say it effectively, must be carefully attended to, and
everything must be done to develop and to understand what they mean.

But the judge requires attention and appropriate conservation of his own
observations. Whoever observes the people he deals with soon notices
that there is probably not one among them that does not possess some
similar, apparently unessential quality like that mentioned above. Among
close acquaintances there is little difficulty in establishing which of
their characteristics belong to that quality, and when series of such
observations are brought together it is not difficult to generalize and
to abstract from them specific rules. Then, in case of need, when the
work is important, one makes use of the appropriate rule with pleasure,
and I might say, with thanks for one’s own efforts.

One essential and often useful symbol to show what a man makes of
himself, what he counts himself for, is his use of the word _we_.
Hartenstein[85] has already called attention to the importance of this
circumstance, and Volkmar says: “The _we_ has a very various scope, from
the point of an accidental simultaneity of images in the same sensation,
representation or thought, to the almost complete circle of the family
_we_ which breaks through the _I_ and even does not exclude the most
powerful antagonisms; hatred, just like love, asserts its _we_.” What is
characteristic in the word _we_ is the opposition of a larger or smaller
group of which the _I_ is a member, to the rest of the universe. I say
_we_ when I mean merely my wife and myself, the inhabitants of my house,
my family, those who live in my street, in my ward, or in my city; I say
_we_ assessors, we central-Austrians, we Austrians, we Germans, we
Europeans, we inhabitants of the earth. I say we lawyers, we blonds, we
Christians, we mammals, we collaborators on a monthly, we old students’
society, we married men, we opponents of jury trial. But I also say _we_
when speaking of accidental relations, such as being on the same train,
meeting on the same mountain peak, in the same hotel, at the same
concert, etc. In a word _we_ defines all relationships from the
narrowest and most important, most essential, to the most individual and
accidental. Conceivably the we unites also people who have something
evil in common, who use it a great deal among themselves, and because of
habit, in places where they would rather not have done so. Therefore, if
you pay attention you may hear some suspect who denies his guilt, come
out with a we which confesses his alliance with people who do the things
he claims not to: _we_ pickpockets, _we_ house-breakers, _we_ gamblers,
inverts, etc.

It is so conceivable that man as a social animal seeks companionship in
so many directions that he feels better protected when he has a comrade,
when he can present in the place of his weak and unprotected _I_ the
stronger and bolder _we_; and hence the considerable and varied use of
the word. No one means that people are to be caught with the word; it is
merely to be used to bring clearness into our work. Like every other
honest instrument, it is an index to the place of the man before us.


Section 13. (c) Particular Character-signs.

It is a mistake to suppose that it is enough in most cases to study that
side of a man which is at the moment important--his dishonesty only, his
laziness, etc. That will naturally lead to merely one-sided judgment and
anyway be much harder than keeping the whole man in eye and studying him
as an entirety. Every individual quality is merely a symptom of a whole
nature, can be explained only by the whole complex, and the good
properties depend as much on the bad ones as the bad on the good ones.
At the very least the quality and quantity of a good or bad
characteristic shows the influence of all the other good and bad
characteristics. Kindliness is influenced and partly created through
weakness, indetermination, too great susceptibility, a minimum
acuteness, false constructiveness, untrained capacity for inference; in
the same way, again, the most cruel hardness depends on properties
which, taken in themselves, are good: determination, energy, purposeful
action, clear conception of one’s fellows, healthy egotism, etc. Every
man is the result of his nature and nurture, i.e. of countless
individual conditions, and every one of his expressions, again, is the
result of all of these conditions. If, therefore, he is to be judged, he
must be judged in the light of them all.

For this reason, all those indications that show us the man as a whole
are for us the most important, but also those others are valuable which
show him up on one side only. In the latter case, however, they are to
be considered only as an index which never relieves us from the need
further to study the nature of our subject. The number of such
individual indications is legion and no one is able to count them up and
ground them, but examples of them may be indicated.

We ask, for example, what kind of man will give us the best and most
reliable information about the conduct and activity, the nature and
character, of an individual? We are told: that sort of person who is
usually asked for the information--his nearest friends and
acquaintances, and the authorities. Before all of these nobody shows
himself as he is, because the most honest man will show himself before
people in whose judgment he has an interest at least as good as, if not
better than he is--that is fundamental to the general egoistic essence
of humanity, which seeks at least to avoid reducing its present welfare.
Authorities who are asked to make a statement concerning any person, can
say reliably only how often the man was punished or came otherwise in
contact with the law or themselves. But concerning his social
characteristics the authorities have nothing to say; they have got to
investigate them and the detectives have to bring an answer. Then the
detectives are, at most, simply people who have had the opportunity to
watch and interrogate the individuals in question,--the servants,
house-furnishers, porters, corner-loafers, etc. Why we do not question
the latter ourselves I cannot say; if we did we might know these people
on whom we depend for important information and might put our questions
according to the answers that we need. It is a purely negative thing
that an official declaration is nowadays not unfrequently presented to
us in the disgusting form of the gossip of an old hag. But in itself the
form of getting information about people through servants and others of
the same class is correct. One has, however, to beware that it is not
done simply because the gossips are most easily found, but because
_people show their weaknesses most readily before those whom they hold
of no account_. The latter fact is well known, but not sufficiently
studied. It is of considerable importance. Let us then examine it more
closely: Nobody is ashamed to show himself before an animal as he is, to
do an evil thing, to commit a crime; the shame will increase very little
if instead of the animal a complete idiot is present, and if now we
suppose the intelligence and significance of this witness steadily to
increase, the shame of appearing before him as one is increases in a
like degree. So we will control ourselves most before people whose
judgment is of most importance to us. The Styrian, Peter Rosegger, one
of the best students of mankind, once told a first-rate story of how the
most ultimate secrets of certain people became common talk although all
concerned assured him that nobody had succeeded in getting knowledge of
them. The news-agent was finally discovered in the person of an old,
humpy, quiet, woman, who worked by the day in various homes and had
found a place, unobserved and apparently indifferent, in the corner of
the sitting-room. Nobody had told her any secrets, but things were
allowed to occur before her from which she might guess and put them
together. Nobody had watched this disinterested, ancient lady; she
worked like a machine; her thoughts, when she noted a quarrel or anxiety
or disagreement or joy, were indifferent to all concerned, and so she
discovered a great deal that was kept secret from more important
persons. This simple story is very significant--we are not to pay
attention to gossips but to keep in mind that the information of persons
is in the rule more important and more reliable when the question under
consideration is indifferent to them than when it is important. We need
only glance at our own situation in this matter--what do we know about
our servants? What their Christian names are, because we have to call
them; where they come from, because we hear their pronunciation; how old
they are, because we see them; and those of their qualities that we make
use of. But what do we know of their family relationships, their past,
their plans, their joys or sorrows? The lady of the house knows perhaps
a little more because of her daily intercourse with them, but her
husband learns of it only in exceptional cases when he bothers about
things that are none of his business. Nor does madam know much, as
examination shows us daily. But what on the other hand do the servants
know about us? The relation between husband and wife, the bringing-up of
the children, the financial situation, the relation with cousins, the
house-friends, the especial pleasures, each joy, each trouble that
occurs, each hope, everything from the least bodily pain to the very
simplest secret of the toilette--they know it all. What can be kept from
them? The most restricted of them are aware of it, and if they do not
see more, it is not because of our skill at hiding, but because of their
stupidity. We observe that in these cases there is not much that can be
kept secret and hence do not trouble to do so.

There is besides another reason for allowing subordinate or indifferent
people to see one’s weaknesses. The reason is that we hate those who
are witnesses of a great weakness. Partly it is shame, partly vexation
at oneself, partly pure egoism, but it is a fact that one’s anger turns
instinctively upon those who have observed one’s degradation through
one’s own weakness. This is so frequently the case that the witness is
to be the more relied on the more the accused would seem to have
preferred that the witness had not seen him. Insignificant people are
not taken as real witnesses; they were there but they haven’t perceived
anything; and by the time it comes to light that they see at least as
well as anybody else, it is too late. One will not go far wrong in
explaining the situation with the much varied epigram of Tacitus:
“Figulus odit figulum.” It is, at least, through business-jealousy that
one porter hates another, and the reason for it lies in the fact that
two of a trade know each other’s weaknesses, that one always knows how
the other tries to hide his lack of knowledge, how deceitful
fundamentally every human activity is, and how much trouble everybody
takes to make his own trade appear to the other as fine as possible. If
you know, however, that your neighbor is as wise as you are, the latter
becomes a troublesome witness in any disagreeable matter, and if he is
often thought of in this way, he comes to be hated. Hence you must never
be more cautious than when one “figulus” gives evidence about another.
Esprit de corps and jealousy pull the truth with frightful force, this
way and that, and the picture becomes the more distorted because
so-called esprit de corps is nothing more than generalized selfishness.
Kant[86] is not saying enough when he says that the egoist is a person
who always tries to push his own _I_ forward and to make it the chief
object of his own and of everybody else’s attention. For the person who
merely seeks attention is only conceited; the egoist, however, seeks his
own advantage alone, even at the cost of other people, and when he shows
esprit de corps he desires the advantage of his corps because he also
has a share in that. In this sense one of a trade has much to say about
his fellow craftsmen, but because of jealousy, says too little--in what
direction, however, he is most likely to turn depends on the nature of
the case and the character of the witness.

In most instances it will be possible to make certain distinctions as to
when objectively too much and subjectively too little is said. That is
to say, the craftsman will exaggerate with regard to all general
questions, but with regard to his special fellow jealousy will establish
her rights. An absolute distinction may never be drawn, not even
subjectively. Suppose that A has something to say about his fellow
craftsman B, and suppose that certain achievements of B are to be
valued. If now A has been working in the same field as B he must not
depreciate too much the value of B’s work, since otherwise his own work
is in danger of the same low valuation. Objectively the converse is
true: for if A bulls the general efficiency of his trade, it doesn’t
serve his conceit, since we find simply that the competitor is in this
way given too high a value. It would be inadvisable to give particular
examples from special trades, but everybody who has before him one
“figulus” after another, from the lowest to the highest professions, and
who considers the statements they make about each other, will grant the
correctness of our contention. I do not, at this point, either, assert
that the matter is the same in each and every case, but that it is
generally so is indubitable.

There is still another thing to be observed. A good many people who are
especially efficient in their trades desire to be known as especially
efficient in some other and remote circle. It is historic that a certain
regent was happy when his very modest flute-playing was praised; a poet
was pleased when his miserable drawings were admired; a marshal wanted
to hear no praise of his victories but much of his very doubtful
declamation. The case is the same among lesser men. A craftsman wants to
shine with some foolishness in another craft, and “the philistine is
happiest when he is considered a devil of a fellow.” The importance of
this fact lies in the possibility of error in conclusions drawn from
what the subject himself tries to present about his knowledge and power.
With regard to the past it leads even fundamentally honest persons to
deception and lying.

So for example a student who might have been the most solid and harmless
in his class later makes suggestions that he was the wildest sport; the
artist who tried to make his way during his cubhood most bravely with
the hard-earned money of his mother is glad to have it known that he was
guilty as a young man of unmitigated nonsense; and the ancient dame who
was once the most modest of girls is tickled with the flattery of a
story concerning her magnificent flirtations. When such a matter is
important for us it must be received with great caution.

To this class of people who want to appear rather more interesting than
they are, either in their past or present, belong also those who
declare that everything is possible and who have led many a judge into
vexatious mistakes. This happens especially when an accused person tries
to explain away the suspicions against him by daring statements
concerning his great achievements (e.g.: in going back to a certain
place, or his feats of strength, etc.), and when witnesses are asked if
these are conceivable. One gets the impression in these cases that the
witnesses under consideration suppose that they belittle themselves and
their point of view if they think anything to be impossible. They are
easily recognized. They belong to the worst class of promoters and
inventors or their relations. If a man is studying how to pay the
national debt or to solve the social question or to irrigate Sahara, or
is inclined to discover a dirigible air-ship, a perpetual-motion
machine, or a panacea, or if he shows sympathy for people so inclined,
he is likely to consider everything possible--and men of this sort are
surprisingly numerous. They do not, as a rule, carry their plans about
in public, and hence have the status of prudent persons, but they betray
themselves by their propensity for the impossible in all conceivable
directions. If a man is suspected to be one of them, and the matter is
important enough, he may be brought during the conversation to talk
about some project or invention. He will then show how his class begins
to deal with it, with what I might call a suspicious warmth. By that
token you know the class. They belong to that large group of people who,
without being abnormal, still have passed the line which divides the
perfectly trustworthy from those unreliable persons who, with the best
inclination to tell the truth, can render it only as it is distorted by
their clouded minds.

These people are not to be confused with those specific men of power
who, in the attempt to show what they can do, go further than in truth
they should. There are indeed persons of talent who are efficient, and
know it, whether for good or evil, and they happen to belong both to the
class of the accused and of the witness. The former show this quality in
confessing to more than they are guilty of, or tell their story in such
a way as to more clearly demonstrate both their power and their conceit.
So that it may happen that a man takes upon himself a crime that he
shares with three accomplices or that he describes a simple larceny as
one in which force had to be used with regard to its object and even
with regard to the object’s owner; or perhaps he describes his flight or
his opponents’ as much more troublesome than these actually were or need
have been. The witness behaves in a similar fashion and shows his
defense against an attack for example, or his skill in discovery of his
goods, or his detection of the criminal in a much brighter light than
really belongs to it; he even may describe situations that were
superfluous in order to show what he can do. In this way the simplest
fact is often distorted. As suspects such people are particularly
difficult to deal with. Aside from the fact that they do more and
actually have done more than was necessary, they become unmanageable and
hard-mouthed through unjust accusations. Concerning these people the
statement made a hundred years ago by Ben David[87] still holds:
“Persecution turns wise people raw and foolish, and kindly and well
disposed ones cruel and evil-intentioned.” There are often well disposed
natures who, after troubles, express themselves in the manner described.
It very frequently happens that suspects, especially those under arrest,
alter completely in the course of time, become sullen, coarse,
passionate, ill-natured, show themselves defiant and resentful to even
the best-willed approach, and exhibit even a kind of courage in not
offering any defense and in keeping silent. Such phenomena require the
most obvious caution, for one is now dealing apparently with powerful
fellows who have received injustice. Whether they are quite guiltless,
whether they are being improperly dealt with, or for whatever reason the
proper approach has not been made, we must go back, to proceed in
another fashion, and absolutely keep in mind the possibility of their
being innocent in spite of serious evidence against them.

These people are mainly recognizable by their mode of life, their
habitual appearance, and its expression. Once that is known their
conduct in court is known. In the matter of individual features of
character, the form of life, the way of doing things is especially to be
observed. Many an effort, many a quality can be explained in no other
way. The simple declaration of Volkmar, “There are some things that we
want only because we had them once,” explains to the criminalist long
series of phenomena that might otherwise have remained unintelligible.
Many a larceny, robbery, possibly murder, many a crime springing from
jealousy, many sexual offenses become intelligible when one learns that
the criminal had at one time possessed the object for the sake of which
he committed the crime, and having lost it had tried with irresistible
vigor to regain it. What is extraordinary in the matter is the fact that
considerable time passes between the loss and the desire for recovery.
It seems as if the isolated moments of desire sum themselves up in the
course of time and then break out as the crime. In such cases the
explaining motive of the deed is never to be found except in the
criminal’s past.

The same relationship exists in the cases of countless criminals whose
crimes seem at bottom due to apparently inconceivable brutality. In all
such cases, especially when the facts do not otherwise make apparent the
possible guilt of the suspect, the story of the crime’s development has
to be studied. Gustav Struve asserts that it is demonstrable that young
men become surgeons out of pure cruelty, out of desire to see people
suffer pain and to cause pain. A student of pharmacy became a hangman
for the same reason and a rich Dutchman paid the butchers for allowing
him to kill oxen. If, then, one is dealing with a crime which points to
_extraordinary_ cruelty, how can one be certain about its motive and
history without knowing the history of the criminal?

This is the more necessary inasmuch as we may be easily deceived through
apparent motives. “Inasmuch as in most capital crimes two or more
motives work together, an ostensible and a concealed one,” says
Kraus,[88] “each criminal has at his command apparent motives which
encourage the crime.” We know well enough how frequently the thief
excuses himself on the ground of his need, how the criminal wants to
appear as merely acting in self-defense during robberies, and how often
the sensualist, even when he has misbehaved with a little child, still
asserts that the child had seduced him. In murder cases even, when the
murderer has confessed, we frequently find that he tries to excuse
himself. The woman who poisons her husband, really because she wants to
marry another, tells her story in such a way as to make it appear that
she killed him because he was extraordinarily bad and that her deed
simply freed the world of a disgusting object. As a rule the
psychological aspect of such cases is made more difficult, by the reason
that the subject has in a greater or lesser degree convinced himself of
the truth of his statements and finally believes his reasons for excuse
altogether or in part. And if a man believes what he says, the proof
that the story is false is much harder to make, because psychological
arguments that might be used to prove falsehood are then of no use. This
is an important fact which compels us to draw a sharp line between a
person who is obviously lying and one who does believe what he says. We
have to discover the difference, inasmuch as the self-developed
conviction of the truth of a story is never so deep rooted as the real
conviction of truth. For that reason, the person who has convinced
himself of his truth artificially, watches all doubts and objections
with much greater care than a man who has no doubt whatever in what he
says. The former, moreover, does not have a good conscience, and the
proverb says truly, “a bad conscience has a fine ear.” The man knows
that he is not dealing correctly with the thing and hence he observes
all objections, and the fact that he does so observe, can not be easily
overlooked by the examining officer.

Once this fine hearing distinguishes the individual who really believes
in the motive he plausibly offers the court, there is another indication
(obviously quite apart from the general signs of deceit) that marks him
further, and this comes to light when one has him speak about similar
crimes of others in which the ostensible motive actually was present. It
is said rightly, that not he is old who no longer commits youthful
follies but he that no longer forgives them, and so not merely he is bad
who himself commits evil but also he who excuses them in others. Of
course, that an accused person should defend the naked deed as it is
described in the criminal law is not likely for conceivable
reasons--since certainly no robbery-suspect will sing a paean about
robbers, but certainly almost anybody who has a better or a
better-appearing motive for his crime, will protect those who have been
guided by a similar motive in other cases. Every experiment shows this
to be the case and then apparent motives are easily enough recognized as
such.


(d) Somatic Character-Units.

Section 14. (1) _General Considerations._

When we say that the inner condition of men implies some outer
expression, it must follow that there are series of phenomena which
especially mold the body in terms of the influence of a state of mind on
external appearance, or conversely, which are significant of the
influence of some physical uniqueness on the psychical state, or of some
other psycho physical condition. As an example of the first kind one may
cite the well known phenomenon that devotees always make an impression
rather specifically feminine. As an example of the second kind is the
fact demonstrated by Gyurkovechky[89] that impotents exhibit
disagreeable characteristics. Such conditions find their universalizing
expression in the cruel but true maxim “Beware of the marked one.” The
Bible was the first of all to make mention of these evil stigmata. No
one of course asserts that the bearer of any bodily malformation is for
that reason invested with one or more evil qualities--“Non cum hoc, sed
propter hoc.” It is a general quality of the untrained, and hence the
majority of men, that they shall greet the unfortunate who suffers from
some bodily malformation not with care and protection, but with scorn
and maltreatment. Such propensities belong, alas, not only to adults,
but also to children, who annoy their deformed playfellows (whether
expressly or whether because they are inconsiderate), and continually
call the unhappy child’s attention to his deformity. Hence, there
follows in most cases from earliest youth, at first a certain
bitterness, then envy, unkindness, stifled rage against the fortunate,
joy in destruction, and all the other hateful similar qualities however
they may be named. In the course of time all of these retained bitter
impressions summate, and the qualities arising from them become more
acute, become habitual, and at last you have a ready-made person “marked
for evil.” Add to this the indubitable fact that the marked persons are
considerably wiser and better-instructed than the others. Whether this
is so by accident or is causally established is difficult to say; but
inasmuch as most of them are compelled just by their deformities to
deprive themselves of all common pleasures and to concern themselves
with their own affairs, once they have been fed to satiety with abuse,
scorn and heckling, the latter is the more likely. Under such
circumstances they have to think more, they learn more than the others
to train their wits, largely as means of defense against physical
attack. They often succeed by wit, but then, they can never be brought
into a state of good temper and lovableness when they are required to
defend themselves by means of sharp, biting and destructive wit.
Moreover, if the deformed is naturally not well-disposed, other dormant
evil tendencies develop in him, which might never have realized
themselves if he had had no need of them for purposes of
self-defense--lying, slander, intrigue, persecution by means of
unpermitted instruments, etc. All this finally forms a determinate
complex of phenomena which is undivorceably bound in the eyes of the
expert with every species of deformity: the mistrusting of the deaf man,
the menacing expression of the blind, the indescribable and therefore
extremely characteristic smiling of the hump-back are not the only
typical phenomena of this kind.

All this is popularly known and is abnormally believed in, so that we
often discover that the deformed are more frequently suspected of crime
than normal people. Suspicion turns to them especially when an unknown
criminal has committed a crime the accomplishment of which required a
particularly evil nature and where the deed of itself called forth
general indignation. In that case, once a deformed person is suspected,
grounds of suspicion are not difficult to find; a few collect more as a
rolling ball does snow. After that the sweet proverb: “Vox populi, vox
dei,” drives the unfortunate fellow into a chaos of evidential grounds
of suspicion which may all be reduced to the fact that he has red hair
or a hump. Such events are frightfully frequent.[90]


Section 15. (2) _Causes of Irritation._

Just as important as these phenomena are the somatic results of psychic
irritation. These latter clear up processes not to be explained by words
alone and often over-valued and falsely interpreted. Irritations are
important for two reasons: (1) as causes of crime, and (2) as signs of
identification in examination.

In regard to the first it is not necessary to show what crimes are
committed because of anger, jealousy, or rage, and how frequently terror
and fear lead to extremes otherwise inexplicable--these facts are partly
so well known, partly so very numerous and various, that an exposition
would be either superfluous or impossible. Only those phenomena will be
indicated which lie to some degree on the borderland of the observed and
hence may be overlooked. To this class belong, for example, anger
against the object, which serves as explanation of a group of so-called
malicious damages, such as arson, etc. Everybody, even though not
particularly lively, remembers instances in which he fell into great and
inexplicable rage against an object when the latter set in his way some
special difficulties or caused him pain; and he remembers how he created
considerable ease for himself by flinging it aside, tearing it or
smashing it to pieces. When I was a student I owned a very old, thick
Latin lexicon, “Kirschii cornu copia,” bound in wood covered with
pig-skin. This respectable book flew to the ground whenever its master
was vexed, and never failed profoundly to reduce the inner stress. This
“Kirschius” was inherited from my great-grandfather and it did not
suffer much damage. When, however, some poor apprentice tears the fence,
on a nail of which his only coat got a bad tear, or when a young
peasant kills the dog that barks at him menacingly and tries to get at
his calf, then we come along with our “damages according to so and so
much,” and the fellow hasn’t done any more than I have with my
“Kirschius.”[91] In the magnificent novel, “Auch Einer,” by F. T.
Vischer, there is an excellent portrait of the perversity of things; the
author asserts that things rather frequently hold ecumenical councils
with the devil for the molestation of mankind.

How far the perversity of the inanimate can lead I saw in a criminal
case in which a big isolated hay-stack was set on fire. A traveler was
going across the country and sought shelter against oncoming bad
weather. The very last minute before a heavy shower he reached a
hay-stack with a solid straw cover, crept into it, made himself
comfortable in the hay and enjoyed his good fortune. Then he fell
asleep, but soon woke again inasmuch as he, his clothes, and all the hay
around him was thoroughly soaked, for the roof just above him was
leaking. In frightful rage over this “evil perversity,” he set the stack
on fire and it burned to the ground.

It may be said that the fact of the man’s anger is as much a motive as
any other and should have no influence on the legal side of the
incident. Though this is quite true, we are bound to consider the crime
and the criminal as a unit and to judge them so. If under such
circumstances we can say that this unit is an outcome natural to the
character of mankind, and even if we say, perhaps, that we might have
behaved similarly under like circumstances, if we really cannot find
something absolutely evil in the deed, the criminal quality of it is
throughout reduced. Also, in such smaller cases the fundamental concept
of modern criminology comes clearly into the foreground: “not the crime
but the criminal is the object of punishment, not the concept but the
man is punished.” (Liszt).

The fact of the presence of a significant irritation is important for
passing judgment, and renders it necessary to observe with the most
thorough certainty how this irritation comes about. This is the more
important inasmuch as it becomes possible to decide whether the
irritation is real or artificial and imitated. Otherwise, however, the
meaning of the irritation can be properly valued only when its
development can be held together step by step with its causes. Suppose I
let the suspect know the reason of suspicion brought by his enemies,
then if his anger sensibly increases with the presentation of each new
ground, it appears much more natural and real than if the anger
increased in inexplicable fashion with regard to less important reasons
for suspicion and developed more slowly with regard to the more
important ones.

The collective nature of somatic phenomena in the case of great
excitement has been much studied, especially among animals, these being
simpler and less artificial and therefore easier to understand, and in
the long run comparatively like men in the expression of their emotions.
Very many animals, according to Darwin, erect their hair or feathers or
quills in cases of anxiety, fear, or horror, and nowadays, indeed,
involuntarily, in order to exhibit themselves as larger and more
terrible. The same rising of the hair even to-day plays a greater role
among men than is generally supposed. Everybody has either seen in
others or discovered in himself that fear and terror visibly raise the
hair. I saw it with especial clearness during an examination when the
person under arrest suddenly perceived with clearness, though he was
otherwise altogether innocent, in what great danger he stood of being
taken for the real criminal. That our hair rises in cases of fear and
horror without being visible is shown, I believe, in the well known
movement of the hand from forehead to crown. It may be supposed that the
hair rises at the roots invisibly but sensibly and thus causes a mild
tickling and pricking of the scalp which is reduced by smoothing the
head with the hand. This movement, then, is a form of involuntary
scratching to remove irritation. That such a characteristic movement is
made during examination may therefore be very significant under certain
circumstances. Inasmuch as the process is indubitably an influence of
the nerves upon the finer and thinner muscle-fibers, it must have a
certain resemblance to the process by which, as a consequence of fear,
horror, anxiety, or care, the hair more or less suddenly turns white.
Such occurrences are in comparatively large numbers historical; G.
Pouchet[92] counts up cases in which hair turned white suddenly, (among
them one where it happened while the poor sinner was being led to
execution). Such cases do not interest us because, even if the accused
himself turned grey over night, no evidence is afforded of guilt or
innocence. Such an occurrence can be evidential only when the hair
changes color demonstrably in the case of a witness. It may then be
certainly believed that he had experienced something terrible and aging.
But whether he had really experienced this, or merely believed that he
had experienced it, can as yet not be discovered, since the belief and
the actual event have the same mental and physical result.

Properly to understand the other phenomena that are the result of
significant irritation, their matrix, their aboriginal source must be
studied. Spencer says that fear expresses itself in cries, in hiding,
sobbing and trembling, all of which accompany the discovery of the
really terrible; while the destructive passions manifest themselves in
tension of the muscles, gritting of the teeth, extending the claws: all
weaker forms of the activity of killing. All this, aboriginally
inherited from the animals, occurs in rather less intense degrees in
man, inclusive of baring the claws, for exactly this movement may often
be noticed when somebody is speaking with anger and vexation about
another person and at the same time extends and contracts his fingers.
Anybody who does this even mildly and unnoticeably means harm to the
person he is talking about. Darwin indeed, in his acutely observing
fashion, has also called attention to this. He suggests that a man may
hate another intensely, but that so long as his anatomy is not affected
he may not be said to be enraged. This means clearly that the somatic
manifestations of inner excitement are so closely bound up with the
latter that we require the former whenever we want to say anything about
the latter. And it is true that we never say that a man was enraged or
only angry, if he remained physically calm, no matter how noisy and
explicit he might have been with words. This is evidence enough of the
importance of noticing bodily expression. “How characteristic,” says
Volkmar[93] “is the trembling and heavy breathing of fear, the glowering
glance of anger, the choking down of suppressed vexation, the stifling
of helpless rage, the leering glance and jumping heart of envy.” Darwin
completes the description of fear: The heart beats fast, the features
pale, he feels cold but sweats, the hair rises, the secretion of saliva
stops, hence follows frequent swallowing, the voice becomes hoarse,
yawning begins, the nostrils tremble, the pupils widen, the constrictor
muscles relax. Wild and very primitive people show this much more
clearly and tremble quite uncontrolled. The last may often be seen and
may indeed be established as a standard of culture and even of character
and may help to determine how far a man may prevent the inner irritation
from becoming externally noticeable. Especially he who has much to do
with Gypsies is aware how little these people can control themselves.
From this fact also spring the numerous anecdotes concerning the wild
rulers of uncultivated people, who simply read the guilt of the suspect
from his external behavior, or even more frequently were able to select
the criminal with undeceivable acuteness from a number brought before
them. Bain[94] narrates that in India criminals are required to take
rice in the mouth and after awhile to spit it out. If it is dry the
accused is held to be guilty--fear has stopped the secretion of
saliva--obstupui, stetetuntque comae, et vox faucibus haesit.

Concerning the characteristic influence of timidity see Paul
Hartenberg.[95]

Especially self-revealing are the outbreaks of anger against oneself,
the more so because I believe them always to be evidence of
consciousness of guilt. At least, I have never yet seen an innocent man
fall into a paroxysm of rage against himself, nor have I ever heard that
others have observed it, and I would not be able psychologically to
explain such a thing should it happen. Inasmuch as scenes of this kind
can occur perceivably only in the most externalized forms of anger, so
such an explosion is elementary and cannot possibly be confused with
another. If a man wrings his hands until they bleed, or digs his
finger-nails into his forehead, nobody will say that this is anger
against himself; it is only an attempt to do something to release
stored-up energy, to bring it to bear against somebody. People are
visibly angry against themselves only when they do such things to
themselves as they might do to other people; for example, beating,
smashing, pulling the hair, etc. This is particularly frequent among
Orientals who are more emotional than Europeans. So I saw a Gypsy run
his head against a wall, and a Jew throw himself on his knees, extend
his arms and box his ears with both hands so forcibly that the next day
his cheeks were swollen. But other races, if only they are passionate
enough, behave in a similar manner. I saw a woman, for example, tear
whole handfuls of hair from her head, a murdering thief, guilty of more
or fewer crimes, smash his head on the corner of a window, and a
seventeen year old murderer throw himself into a ditch in the street,
beat his head fiercely on the earth, and yell, “Hang me! Pull my head
off!”

The events in all these cases were significantly similar: the crime was
so skilfully committed as conceivably to prevent the discovery of the
criminal; the criminal denied the deed with the most glaring impudence
and fought with all his power against conviction--in the moment,
however, he realized that all was lost, he exerted his boundless rage
against himself who had been unable to oppose any obstacle to conviction
and who had not been cautious and sly enough in the commission of the
crime. Hence the development of the fearful self-punishment, which could
have no meaning if the victim had felt innocent.

Such expressions of anger against oneself often finish with fainting.
The reason of the latter is much less exhaustion through paroxysms of
rage than the recognition and consciousness of one’s own helplessness.
Reichenbach[96] once examined the reason for the fainting of people in
difficult situations. It is nowadays explained as the effect of the
excretion of carbonic acid gas and of the generated anthropotoxin;
another explanation makes it a nervous phenomenon in which the mere
recognition that release is impossible causes fainting, the loss of
consciousness. For our needs either account of this phenomenon will do
equally. It is indifferent whether a man notices that he cannot
voluntarily change his condition in a physical sense, or whether he
notices that the evidence is so convincing that he can not dodge it. The
point is that if for one reason or another he finds himself physically
or legally in a bad hole, he faints, just as people in novels or on the
stage faint when there is no other solution of the dramatic situation.

When anger does not lead to rage against oneself, the next lower stage
is laughter.[97] With regard to this point, Darwin calls attention to
the fact that laughter often conceals other mental conditions than those
it essentially stands for--anger, rage, pain, perplexity, modesty and
shame; when it conceals anger it is anger against oneself, a form of
scorn. This same wooden, dry laughter is significant, and when it arises
from the perception that the accused no longer sees his way out, it is
not easily to be confused with another form of laughter. One gets the
impression that the laughter is trying to tell himself, “That is what
you get for being bad and foolish!”


Section 16. (3) _Cruelty._

Under this caption must be placed certain conditions that may under
given circumstances be important. Although apparently without any
relations to each other they have the common property of being external
manifestations of mental processes.

In many cases they are explanations which may arise from the observation
of the mutative relations between cruelty, bloodthirstiness, and
sensuality. With regard to this older authors like Mitchell,[98]
Blumröder,[99] Friedreich,[100] have brought examples which are still of
no little worth. They speak of cases in which many people, not alone
men, use the irritation developed by greater or lesser cruelty for
sexual purposes: the torturing of animals, biting, pinching, choking the
partner, etc. Nowadays this is called sadism.[101] Certain girls narrate
their fear of some of their visitors who make them suffer unendurably,
especially at the point of extreme passion, by biting, pressing, and
choking. This fact may have some value in criminology. On the one hand,
certain crimes can be explained only by means of sexual cruelty, and on
the other, knowledge of his habits with this regard may, again, help
toward the conviction of a criminal. I recall only the case of
Ballogh-Steiner in Vienna, a case in which a prostitute was stifled. The
police were at that time hunting a man who was known in the quarter as
“chicken-man,” because he would always bring with him two fowls which he
would choke during the orgasm. It was rightly inferred that a man who
did that sort of thing was capable under similar circumstances of
killing a human being. Therefore it will be well, in the examination of
a person accused of a cruel crime, not to neglect the question of his
sexual habits; or better still, to be sure to inquire particularly
whether the whole situation of the crime was not sexual in nature.[102]

In this connection, deeds that lead to cruelty and murder often involve
forms of epilepsy. It ought therefore always to be a practice to consult
a physician concerning the accused, for cruelty, lust, and psychic
disorders are often enough closely related. About this matter Lombroso
is famous for the wealth of material he presents.


Section 17. (4) _Nostalgia._

The question of home-sickness is of essential significance and must not
be undervalued. It has been much studied and the notion has been reached
that children mainly (in particular during the period of puberty), and
idiotic and weak persons, suffer much from home-sickness, and try to
combat the oppressive feeling of dejection with powerful sense stimuli.
Hence they are easily led to crime, especially to arson. It is asserted
that uneducated people in lonesome, very isolated regions, such as
mountain tops, great moors, coast country, are particularly subject to
nostalgia. This seems to be true and is explained by the fact that
educated people easily find diversion from their sad thoughts and in
some degree take a piece of home with them in their more or less
international culture. In the same way it is conceivable that
inhabitants of a region not particularly individualized do not so easily
notice differences. Especially he who passes from one city to another
readily finds himself, but mountain and plain contain so much that is
contrary that the feeling of strangeness is overmastering. So then, if
the home-sick person is able, he tries to destroy his nostalgia through
the noisiest and most exciting pleasures; if he is not, he sets fire to
a house or in case of need, kills somebody--in short what he needs is
explosive relief. Such events are so numerous that they ought to have
considerable attention. Nostalgia should be kept in mind where no proper
motive for violence is to be found and where the suspect is a person
with the above-mentioned qualities. Then again, if one discovers that
the suspect is really suffering from home-sickness, from great
home-sickness for his local relations, one has a point from which the
criminal may be reached. As a rule such very pitiful individuals are so
less likely to deny their crime in the degree in which they feel unhappy
that their sorrow is not perceivably increased through arrest. Besides
that, the legal procedure to which they are subjected is a not
undesired, new and powerful stimulus to them.

When such nostalgiacs confess their deed they never, so far as I know,
confess its motive. Apparently they do not know the motive and hence
cannot explain the deed. As a rule one hears, “I don’t know why, I had
to do it.” Just where this begins to be abnormal, must be decided by the
physician, who must always be consulted when nostalgia is the ground for
a crime. Of course it is not impossible that a criminal in order to
excite pity should explain his crime as the result of unconquerable
home-sickness--but that must always be untrue because, as we have shown,
anybody who acts out of home-sickness, does not know it and can not tell
it.


Section 18. (5) _Reflex Movements._

Reflex actions are also of greater significance than as a rule they are
supposed to be. According to Lotze,[103] “reflex actions are not
limited to habitual and insignificant affairs of the daily life. Even
compounded series of actions which enclose the content even of a crime
may come to actuality in this way ... in a single moment in which the
sufficient opposition of some other emotional condition, the enduring
intensity of emotion directed against an obstacle, or the clearness of a
moving series of ideas is lacking. The deed may emerge from the image of
itself without being caused or accompanied by any resolve of the doer.
Hearings of criminals are full of statements which point to such a
realization of their crimes, and these are often considered
self-exculpating inventions, inasmuch as people fear from their truth a
disturbance or upsetting of the notions concerning adjudication and
actionability. The mere recognition of that psychological fact alters
the conventional judgment but little; the failure in these cases
consists in not having prevented that automatic transition of images
into actions, a transition essentially natural to our organism which
ought, however, like so many other things, to be subjected to power of
the will.” Reflex movements require closer study.[104] The most numerous
and generally known are: dropping the eyelids, coughing, sneezing,
swallowing, all involuntary actions against approaching or falling
bodies; then again the patellar reflex and the kremaster reflex, etc.
Other movements of the same kind were once known and so often practised
that they became involuntary.[105] Hence, for example, the foolish
question how a person believed to be disguised can be recognized as man
or woman. The well known answer is: let some small object fall on his
lap; the woman will spread her limbs apart because she is accustomed to
wear a dress in which she catches the object; the man will bring his
limbs together because he wears trousers and is able to catch the object
only in this way. There are so many such habitual actions that it is
difficult to say where actual reflexes end and habits begin. They will
be properly distinguished when the first are understood as single
detached movements and the last as a continuous, perhaps even
unconscious and long-enduring action. When I, for example, while
working, take a cigar, cut off the end, light it, smoke, and later am
absolutely unaware that I have done this, what has occurred is certainly
not a reflex but a habitual action. The latter does not belong to this
class in which are to be grouped only such as practically bear a
defensive character. As examples of how such movements may have
criminological significance only one’s own experience may be cited
because it is so difficult to put oneself at the point of view of
another. I want to consider two such examples. One evening I passed
through an unfrequented street and came upon an inn just at the moment
that an intoxicated fellow was thrown out, and directly upon me. At the
very instant I hit the poor fellow a hard blow on the ear. I regretted
the deed immediately, the more so as the assaulted man bemoaned his
misfortune, “inside they throw him out, outside they box his ears.”
Suppose that I had at that time burst the man’s ear-drum or otherwise
damaged him heavily. It would have been a criminal matter and I doubt
whether anybody would have believed that it was a “reflex action,”
though I was then, as to-day, convinced that the action was reflex. I
didn’t in the least know what was going to happen to me and what I
should do. I simply noticed that something unfriendly was approaching
and I met it with a defensive action in the form of an upper-cut on the
ear. What properly occurred I knew only when I heard the blow and felt
the concussion of my hand. Something similar happened to me when I was a
student. I had gone into the country hunting before dawn, when some one
hundred paces from the house, right opposite me a great ball rolled down
a narrow way. Without knowing what it was or why I did it I hit at the
ball heavily with an alpenstock I carried in my hand, and the thing
emerged as two fighting tomcats with teeth fixed in each other. One of
them was my beloved possession, so that I keenly regretted the deed, but
even here I had not acted consciously; I had simply smashed away because
something unknown was approaching me. If I had then done the greatest
damage I could not have been held responsible--_if_ my explanation were
allowed; but _that_ it would have been allowed I do not believe in this
case, either.

A closer examination of reflex action requires consideration of certain
properties, which in themselves cannot easily have criminal
significance, but which tend to make that significance clearer. One is
the circumstance that there are reflexes which work while you sleep.
That we do not excrete during sleep depends on the fact that the faeces
pressing in the large intestine generates a reflexive action of the
constrictors of the rectum. They can be brought to relax only through
especially powerful pressure or through the voluntary relaxation of
one’s own constrictors.

The second suggestive circumstance is the fact that even habitual
reflexes may under certain conditions, especially when a particularly
weighty different impression comes at the same time, not take place. It
is a reflex, for example, to withdraw the hand when it feels pain, in
spite of the fact that one is so absorbed with another matter as to be
unaware of the whole process; but if interest in this other matter is so
sufficiently fixed as to make one forget, as the saying goes, the whole
outer world, the outer impression of pain must have been very intense in
order to awaken its proper reflex. The attention may, however, not be
disturbed at all and yet the reflex may fail. If we suppose that a
reflex action is one brought about through the excitement of an afferent
sensory nerve which receives the stimulation and brings it to the center
from which the excitement is transferred to the motor series
(Landois[106]), we exclude the activity of the brain. But this exclusion
deals only with conscious activity and the direct transition through the
reflex center can happen successfully only because the brain has been
consciously at work innumerable times, so that it is coöperating in the
later cases also without our knowing it. When, however, the brain is
brought into play through some other particularly intense stimuli, it is
unable to contribute that unconscious cöoperation and hence the reflex
action is not performed. On this point I have, I believe, an instructive
and evidential example. One of my maids opened a match-box pasted with
paper at the corner by tearing the paper along the length of the box
with her thumb-nail. Apparently the box was over-filled or the action
was too rapidly made, for the matches flamed up explosively and the
whole box was set on fire. What was notable was the fact that the girl
threw the box away neither consciously nor instinctively; she shrieked
with fright and kept the box in her hand. At her cry my son rushed in
from another room, and only after he had shouted as loudly as possible,
“Throw it away, drop it,” did she do so. She had kept the burning thing
in her hand long enough to permit my son to pass from one room into
another, and her wound was so serious that it needed medical treatment
for weeks. When asked why she kept the burning box in her hand in spite
of really very terrible pain she simply declared that “she didn’t think
of it,” though she added that when she was told to throw the thing away
it just occurred to her that that would be the wisest of all things to
do. What happened then was obviously this: fear and pain so completely
absorbed the activity of the brain that it was not only impossible for
it consciously to do the right thing, it was even unable to assist in
the unconscious execution of the reflex.

This fact suggests that the sole activity of the spinal cord does not
suffice for reflexes, since if it did, those would occur even when the
brain is otherwise profoundly engaged. As they do not so occur the brain
also must be in play. Now this distinction is not indifferent for us;
for if we hold that the brain acts during reflexes we have to grant the
possibility of degrees in its action. Thus where brain activity is in
question, the problem of responsibility also arises, and we must hold
that wherever a reflex may be accepted as the cause of a crime the
subject of the degree of punishment must be taken exceptionally into
account. It is further to be noted that as a matter of official
consideration the problem of the presence of reflexes ought to be
studied, since it rarely occurs that a man says, “It was purely a reflex
action.” He says, perhaps, “I don’t know how it happened,” or, “I
couldn’t do otherwise,” or he denies the whole event because he really
was not aware how it happened. That the questions are here difficult,
both with regard to the taking of evidence, and with regard to the
judgment of guilt, is obvious,--and it is therefore indifferent whether
we speak of deficiency in inhibition-centers or of ill-will[107] and
malice.


Section 19. (6) _Dress._

It is easy to write a book on the significance of a man’s clothes as the
expression of his inner state. It is said that the character of a woman
is to be known from her shoe, but actually the matter reaches far beyond
the shoe, to every bit of clothing, whether of one sex or the other. The
penologist has more opportunity than any one else to observe how people
dress, to take notes concerning the wearer, and finally to correct his
impressions by means of the examination. In this matter one may lay down
certain axioms. If we see a man whose coat is so patched that the
original material is no longer visible but the coat nowhere shows a
hole; if his shirt is made of the very coarsest and equally patched
material but is clean; and if his shoes are very bad but are whole and
well polished, we should consider him and his wife as honest people,
without ever making an error. We certainly see very little wisdom in our
modern painfully attired “sports,” we suspect the suggestively dressed
woman of some little disloyalty to her husband, and we certainly expect
no low inclinations from the lady dressed with intelligent, simple
respectability. If a man’s general appearance is correct it indicates
refinement and attention to particular things. Anybody who considers
this question finds daily new information and new and reliable
inferences. Anyway, everybody has a different viewpoint in this matter,
a single specific detail being convincing to one, to another only when
taken in connection with something else, and to a third when connected
with still a third phenomenon. It may be objected that at least detailed
and prolonged observations are necessary before inferences should be
drawn from the way of dressing, inasmuch as a passing inclination,
economic conditions, etc., may exert no little influence by compelling
an individual to a specific choice in dress. Such influence is not
particularly deep. A person subject to a particular inclination may be
sufficiently self-exhibiting under given circumstances, and that he was
compelled by his situation to dress in one way rather than another is
equally self-evident. Has anybody seen an honest farm hand wearing a
worn-out evening coat? He may wear a most threadbare, out-worn
sheep-skin, but a dress-coat he certainly would not buy, even if he
could get it cheap, nor would he take it as a gift. He leaves such
clothes to others whose shabby elegance shows at a glance what they are.
Consider how characteristic are the clothes of discharged soldiers, of
hunters, of officials, etc. Who fails to recognize the dress of a real
clerical, of democrats, of conservative-aristocrats? Their dress is
everywhere as well defined as the clothing of Englishmen, Frenchmen,
Germans, and Americans, formed not by climatic conditions but by
national character in a specific and quite unalterable way. Conceit,
carelessness, cleanliness, greasiness, anxiety, indifference,
respectability, the desire to attract attention and to be original, all
these and innumerable similar and related qualities express themselves
nowhere so powerfully and indubitably as in the way people wear their
clothes. And not all the clothes together; many a time a single item of
dress betrays a character.


Section 20. (7) _Physiognomy and Related Subjects._

The science of physiognomy belongs to those disciplines which show a
decided variability in their value. In classical times it was set much
store by, and Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and Pythagoras were keenly
interested in its doctrines. Later on it was forgotten, was studied in
passing when Baptista Porta wrote a book about human physiognomy, and
finally, when the works of Lavater and the closely related ones of Gall
appeared, the science came for a short time into the foreground.
Lavater’s well known monograph[108] excited great attention in his day
and brought its author enthusiastic admiration. How much Goethe was
interested in it is indicated in the popular book by Von der Hellen and
the exchange of letters between Goethe and Lavater. If Lavater had not
brought the matter into relation with his mystical and apodictic manner,
if he had made more observations and fewer assertions, his fame would
have endured longer and he would have been of some use to the science;
as it was it soon slipped from people’s minds and they turned to the
notorious phrenology of Gall. Gall, who to some degree had worked with
his friend Spurzheim, committed the same error in his works[109] as
Lavater, inasmuch as he lost himself in theories without scientific
basis, so that much that was indubitably correct and indicative in his
teaching was simply overlooked. His meaning was twice validated, once
when B. v. Cotta[110] and R. R. Noel[111] studied it intensively and
justly assigned him a considerable worth; the second tune when Lombroso
and his school invented the doctrine of criminal stigmata, the best of
which rests on the postulates of the much-scorned and only now studied
Dr. Gall. The great physiologist J. Müller declared: “Concerning the
general possibility of the principles of Gall’s system no a priori
objections can be made.” Only recently were the important problems of
physiognomy, if we except the remarkable work by Schack,[112]
scientifically dealt with. The most important and significant book is
Darwin’s,[113] then the system of Piderit[114] and Carus’s
“Symbolik,”[115] all of them being based upon the earlier fundamental
work of the excellent English anatomist and surgeon, Bell.[116] Other
works of importance are those of LeBrun, Reich, Mantegazza, Dr.
Duchenne, Skraup, Magnus, Gessmann, Schebest, Engel, Schneider, K.
Michel, Wundt, C. Lange, Giraudet, A. Mosso, A. Baer, Wiener, Lotze,
Waitz, Lelut, Monro, Heusinger, Herbart, Comte, Meynert, Goltz, Hughes,
Borée,[117] etc. The present status of physiognomics is, we must say, a
very subordinate one. Phrenology is related to physiognomics as the bony
support of the skull to its softer ones, and as a man’s physiognomy
depends especially upon the conformation of his skull, so physiognomics
must deal with the forms of the skull. The doctrine of the movement of
physiognomy is mimicry. But physiognomics concerns itself with the
features of the face taken in themselves and with the changes which
accompany the alterations of consciousness, whereas mimicry deals with
the voluntary alterations of expression and gesture which are supposed
to externalize internal conditions. Hence, mimicry interests primarily
actors, orators, and the ordinary comedians of life. Phrenology remains
the research of physicians, anthropologists and psychologists, so that
the science of physiognomy as important in itself is left to us lawyers.
Its value as a discipline is variously set. Generally it is asserted
that much, indeed, fails to be expressed by the face; that what does
show, shows according to no fixed rules; that hence, whatever may be
read in a face is derivable either instinctively by oneself or not at
all. Or, it may be urged, the matter can not be learned. Such
statements, as ways of disposing of things, occur regularly wherever
there is a good deal of work to do; people do not like to bother with
troublesome problems and therefore call them worthless. But whoever is
in earnest and is not averse to a little study will get much benefit
from intensive application to this discipline in relation to his
profession.

The right of physiognomies to the status of an independent science is to
some degree established in the oft-repeated dictum that whatever is
valid in its simplest outline must be capable of extension and
development. No man doubts that there are intelligent faces and foolish
ones, kind ones and cruel ones, and if this assertion is admitted as it
stands it must follow that still other faces may be distinguished so
that it is possible to read a certain number of spiritual qualities from
the face. And inasmuch as nobody can indicate the point at which this
reading of features must cease, the door is opened to examination,
observation and the collection of material. Then, if one bewares of
voluntary mistakes, of exaggeration and unfounded assertion, if one
builds only upon actual and carefully observed facts, an important and
well-grounded discipline must ensue.

The exceptionally acute psychiatrist Meynert shows[118] how
physiognomics depends on irradiation and parallel images. He shows what
a large amount of material having physiognomical contents we keep in
mind. Completely valueless as are the fixed forms by which mankind
judges the voluntary acts of its individual members, they point to the
universal conclusion that it is proper to infer from the voluntary acts
of a person whose features correspond to those of another the voluntary
acts of the other. One of Hans Virchow’s very detailed physiognomical
observations concerning the expression of interest in the eyes by means
of the pupil, has very considerable physiognomical value. The pupil, he
believes, is the gate through which our glance passes into the inner
life of our neighbor; the psychical is already close at hand with the
word “inner.” How this occurs, why rather this and not another muscle is
innervated in the development of a certain process, we do not know, but
our ignorance does not matter, since ultimately a man might split his
head thinking why we do not hear with our eyes and see with our ears.
But to some extent we have made observable progress in this matter. As
far back as 1840 J. Müller[119] wrote: “The reasons are unknown why
various psychoses make use of different groups of nerves or why certain
facial muscles are related to certain passions.” Gratiolet[120] thought
it necessary forty years ago to deny that muscles were developed merely
for the purpose of expression. Almost contemporaneously Piderit knew
that expressive muscular movements refer partly to imaginary objects and
partly to imaginary sense impressions. In this fact lies the key to the
meaning of all expressive muscular movements. Darwin’s epoch-making book
on the expressions of the emotions finally established the matter so
completely and firmly, that we may declare ourselves in possession of
enough material for our purpose to make it possible to carry our studies
further. The study of this book of Darwin’s I believe absolutely
necessary to each criminalist--for he meets in every direction,
expositions and explanations that are related to cases he has already
experienced in practice or is sure to experience. I present here only a
few of Darwin’s most important notes and observations in order to
demonstrate their utility for our purpose.

As subjects for study he recommends children because they permit forms
of expression to appear vigorously and without constraint; lunatics,
because they are subject to strong passions without control; galvanized
persons, in order to facilitate the muscles involved, and finally, to
establish the identity of expression among all races of men and beasts.
Of these objects only children are important for our purpose. The others
either are far removed from our sphere of activity, or have only
theoretic value. I should, however, like to add to the subjects of
observation another, viz., the simple unstudied persons, peasants and
such otherwise unspoiled individuals whom we may believe innocent of all
intention to play a comedy with us. We can learn much from such people
and from children. And it is to be believed that in studying them we are
studying not a special class but are establishing a generally valid
paradigm of the whole of mankind. Children have the same features as
adults, only clearer and simpler. For, suppose we consider any one of
Darwin’s dicta,--e.g., that in the expression of anger and indignation
the eyes shine, respiration becomes more rapid and intense, the nostrils
are somewhat raised, the look misses the opponent,--these so intensely
characteristic indices occur equally in the child and the adult. Neither
shows more or fewer, and once we have defined them in the child we have
done it for the adult also. Once the physiognomy of children and simple
people has been studied, the further study of different kinds of people
is no longer difficult; there is only the intentional and customary
masking of expression to look out for; for the rest, the already
acquired principles, mutandis mutatis, are to be used.

Darwin posits three general principles on which most expressions and
gestures are to be explained. They are briefly:

I. The principle of purposeful associated habits.

II. The principle of contradication.

III. The principle of the direct activity of the nervous system.

With regard to the first. When, in the course of a long series of
generations, any desire, experience, or disinclination, etc., has led to
some voluntary action, then, as often as the same or any analogous
associated experience is undergone, there will arise a tendency to the
realization of a similar action. This action may no longer have any use
but is inherited and generally becomes a mere reflex.

This becomes clearer when one notices how often habit facilitates very
complex action:--the habits of animals; the high steps of horses; the
pointing of pointers; the sucking of calves, etc. It is difficult for us
in falling to make opposite movements to stretching out the arms, even
in bed; we draw on our gloves unconsciously. Gratiolet says: “Whoever
energetically denies some point, etc., shuts his eyes; if he assents he
nods and opens his eyes wide. Whoever describes a terrible thing shuts
his eyes and shakes his head; whoever looks closely raises his
eye-brows. In the attempt to think the same thing is done or the
eye-brows are contracted--both make the glance keener. Thence follows
the reflex activity.”

With regard to the second. Dogs who are quarrelling with cats assume the
appearance of battle--if they are kindly-minded they do the opposite,
although this serves no purpose. M. Taylor[121] says, that the gesture
language of the Cistercians depends considerably on antithesis; e.g.,
shrugging the shoulders is the opposite of firmness, immovability.

With regard to the direct activity of the nervous system, examples are
paling, trembling (fear, terror, pain, cold, fever, horror, joy),
palpitation of the heart, blushing, perspiring, exertion of strength,
tears, pulling the hair, urinating, etc. With these subdivisions it will
be possible to find some thoroughfare and to classify every phenomenon.

We want to discuss a few more particulars in the light of Darwin’s
examples. He warns us, first of all, against seeing[122] certain muscle
movements as the result of emotional excitement, because they were
looked for. There are countless habits, especially among the movements
of the features, which happen accidentally or as the result of some
passing pain and which have no significance. Such movements are often of
the greatest clearness, and do not permit the unexperienced observer to
doubt that they have important meanings, although they have no relation
whatever to any emotional condition. Even if it is agreed only to depend
on changes of the whole face, already established as having a definite
meaning, there is still danger of making mistakes, because well
accredited facial conditions may occur in another way (as matters of
habit, nervous disturbances, wounds, etc.). Hence in this matter, too,
care and attention are required; for if we make use of any one of the
Darwinian norms, as, for example, that the eyes are closed when we do
not want to see a thing or when we dislike it, we still must grant that
there are people to whom it has become habitual to close their eyes
under other and even opposed conditions.

We must grant that, with the exception of such cases, the phenomena are
significant during examinations, as when we show the accused a very
effective piece of evidence, (e.g.: a comparison of hand-writings which
is evidential,) and he closes his eyes. The act is then characteristic
and of importance, particularly when his words are intended to contest
the meaning of the object in question. The contradiction between the
movement of his eyes and his words is then suggestive enough. The same
occurs when the accused is shown the various possibilities that lie
before him--the movement of the examination, the correlations and
consequences. If he finds them dangerous, he closes his eyes. So with
witnesses also; when one of them, e.g., deposes to more, and more
harmfully, than according to our own notion he can explain, he will
close his eyes, though perhaps for an instant only, if the inevitable
consequences of his deposition are expounded to him. If he closes his
eyes he has probably said too much, and the proper moment must not be
missed to appeal to his conscience and to prevent more exaggerated and
irresponsible assertions.

This form of closing the eyes is not to be confused with the
performances of persons who want to understand the importance of their
depositions and to collect their senses, or who desire to review the
story mentally and consider its certainty. These two forms of closing
the eyes are different: the first, which wants to shut out the
consequences of testimony, is much shorter; the latter longer, because
it requires a good deal of time to collect one’s senses and to consider
a problem. The first, moreover, is accompanied by a perceivable
expression of fear, while the latter is manifest only by its duration;
what is most important is a characteristic contemporary and perceivable
defensive movement of the hand, and this occurs only in the cases where
the desire is to exclude. This movement occurs even among very
phlegmatic persons, and hence is comparatively reliable; it is not made
by people who want undisturbedly to study a question and to that end
shut their eyes.

In a similar way there is significance in the sudden closing of the
mouth by either the accused or the witness. Resolution and the shutting
of the mouth are inseparable; it is as impossible to imagine a
vacillating, doubting person with lips closely pressed together, as a
firm and resolute person with open mouth. The reason implies Darwin’s
first law: that of purposeful associated habits. When a man firmly
resolves upon some deed the resolution begins immediately to express
itself in movements which are closely dependent upon bodily actions.
Even when I suddenly resolve to face some correctly-supposed
disagreeable matter, or to think about some joyless thing, a bodily
movement, and indeed quite an energetic one, will ensue upon the
resolution--I may push my chair back, raise my elbows, perhaps put my
head quickly between my hands, push the chair back again, and then begin
to look or to think. Such actions, however, require comparatively little
bodily exertion; much more follows on different types of resolutions--in
short, a firm resolution requires a series of movements immediately to
follow its being made. And if we are to move the muscles must be
contracted. And it is, of course, obvious that only those muscles can be
set in action which are, according to the immediate situation of the
body, free to move. If we are sitting down, for example, we can not
easily make our feet conform to the movement of a march forward; nor can
we do much with the thighs, hence the only muscles we can use are those
of the face and of the upper limbs. So then, the mouth is closed because
its muscles are contracted, and with equal significance the arms are
thrust outward sharply, the fist clenched, and the forearm bent. Anybody
may try the experiment for himself by going through the actions
enumerated and seeing whether he does not become filled with a sense of
resolution. It is to be especially observed, as has already been
indicated, that not only are mental states succeeded by external
movements, but imitated external movements of any kind awaken, or at
least plainly suggest, their correlated mental states.

If, then, we observe in any person before us the signs of resolution we
may certainly suppose that they indicate a turn in what he has said and
what he is going to say. If they be observed in the accused, then he has
certainly resolved to pass from denial to confession, or to stick to his
denial, or to confess or keep back the names of his accomplices, the
rendezvous, etc. Inasmuch as in action there is no other alternative
than saying or not saying so, it might be supposed that there is nothing
important in the foregoing statement; the point of importance lies,
however, in the fact that a _definite_ resolution has been reached of
which the court is aware and from which a departure will hardly be made.
Therefore, what follows upon the resolution so betrayed, we cannot
properly perceive; we know only that it in all likelihood consists of
what succeeds it, i.e. the accused either confesses to something, or has
resolved to say nothing. And that observation saves us additional labor,
for he will not easily depart from his resolution.

The case is analogous with regard to the witness who tells no truth or
only a part of the truth. He reveals the marks of resolution upon
deciding finally to tell the truth or to persist in his lying, and so,
whatever he does after the marks of resolution are noted, we are saved
unnecessary effort to make the man speak one way or another.

It is particularly interesting to watch for such expressions of
resolution in jurymen, especially when the decision of guilt or
innocence is as difficult as it is full of serious consequences. This
happens not rarely and means that the juryman observed is clear in his
own mind as to how he is going to vote. Whatever testimony may succeed
this resolution is then indifferent. The resolved juryman is so much the
less to be converted, as he usually either pays no more attention to the
subsequent testimony, or hears it in such prejudiced fashion that he
sees everything in his own way. In this case, however, it is not
difficult to tell what the person in question has decided upon. If the
action we now know follows a very damaging piece of testimony, the
defendant is condemned thereby; if it follows excusive testimony he is
declared innocent. Anybody who studies the matter may observe that these
manifestations are made by a very large number of jurymen with
sufficient clearness to make it possible to count the votes and predict
the verdict. I remember vividly in this regard a case that occurred many
years ago. Three men, a peasant and his two sons, were accused of having
killed an imbecile who was supposed to have boarded in their house. The
jury unanimously declared them guiltless, really because of failure, in
spite of much effort, to find the body of the victim. Later a new
witness appeared, the case was taken up again, and about a year after
the first trial, a second took place. The trial consumed a good many
days, in which the three defendants received a flood of anonymous
letters which called attention mostly to the fact that there was in such
and such a place an unknown imbecile woman who might be identical with
the ostensible murdered person. For that reason the defendant appealed
for a postponement of the trial or immediate liberation. The prosecutor
of the time fought the appeal but held that so far as the case went (and
it was pretty bad for the prosecution), the action taken with regard to
the appeal was indifferent. “The mills of the gods grind slowly,” he
concluded in his oration; “a year from now I shall appear before the
jury.” The expression of this rock-bound conviction that the defendants
were guilty, on the part of a man who, because of his great talent, had
tremendous influence on juries, caused an astounding impression. The
instant he said it one could see in most of the jurymen clearest signs
of absolute resolution and the defendants were condemned from that
moment.

Correlated with the signs of resolution are those of astonishment. “The
hands are raised in the air,” says Darwin, “and the palm is laid on the
mouth.” In addition the eyebrows are regularly raised, and people of not
too great refinement beat their foreheads and in many cases there occurs
a slight, winding movement of the trunk, generally toward the left. The
reason is not difficult to find. We are astonished when we learn
something which causes an inevitable change in the familiar course of
events. When this occurs the hearer finds it necessary, if events are
simple, properly to get hold of it. When I hear that a new Niebelungen
manuscript has been discovered, or a cure for leprosy, or that the South
Pole has been reached, I am astonished, but immediate conception on my
part is altogether superfluous. But that ancient time in which our
habitual movements came into being, and which has endured longer,
incomparably longer than our present civilization, knew nothing whatever
of these interests of the modern civilized human being. What astonished
people in those days were simple, external, and absolutely direct
novelties: that a flood was coming, that game was near the camp, that
inimical tribes had been observed, etc.--in short, events that required
immediate action. From this fact spring our significant movements which
must hence be perceivably related to the beginning of some necessary
action. We raise our hands when we want to jump up; we elevate our
eyebrows when we look up, to see further into the distance; we slap our
foreheads in order to stimulate the muscles of our legs, dormant because
of long sitting; we lay the palms of our hands on our mouths and turn
the trunk because we discover in the course of life rather more
disagreeable than pleasant things and hence we try to keep them out and
to turn away from them. And astonishment is expressed by any and all of
these contradictory movements.

In law these stigmata are significant when the person under examination
ought to be astonished at what is told him but for one reason or another
does not want to show his astonishment. This he may hide in words, but
at least one significant gesture will betray him and therefore be of
considerable importance in the case. So, suppose that we present some
piece of evidence from which we expect great results; if they do not
come we may perhaps have to take quite another view of the whole case.
It is hence important not to be fooled about the effect, and that can be
accomplished only through the observation of the witnesses’ gestures,
these being much more rarely deceptive than words.

Scorn manifests itself in certain nasal and oral movements. The nose is
contracted and shows creases. In addition you may count the so-called
sniffing, spitting, blowing as if to drive something away; folding the
arms, and raising the shoulders. The action seems to be related to the
fact that among savage people, at least, the representation of a
worthless, low and despicable person is brought into relation with the
spread of a nasty odor: the Hindoo still says of a man he scorns, “He is
malodorous.” That our ancestors thought similarly, the movement of the
nose, especially raising it and blowing and sniffing, makes evident. In
addition there is the raising of the shoulders as if one wanted to carry
the whole body out of a disgusting atmosphere--the conduct, here, is
briefly the conduct of the proud. If something of the sort is observable
in the behavior of a witness it will, as a rule, imply something good
about him: the accused denies thereby his identity with the criminal, or
he has no other way of indicating the testimony of some damaging
witness as slander, or he marks the whole body of testimony, with this
gesture, as a web of lies.

The case is similar when a witness so conducts himself and expresses
scorn. He will do the latter when the defendant or a false witness for
the defense accuses him of slander, when indelicate motives are ascribed
to him, or earlier complicity with the criminal, etc. The situations
which give a man opportunity to show that he despises anybody are
generally such as are to the advantage of the scorner. They are
important legally because they not only show the scorner in a good light
but also indicate that the scorn must be studied more closely. It is, of
course, naturally true that scorn is to a great degree simulated, and
for that reason the gestures in question must be attentively observed.
Real scorn is to be distinguished from artificial scorn almost always by
the fact that the latter is attended by unnecessary smiling. It is
popularly and correctly held that the smile is the weapon of the silent.
That kind of smile appears, however, only as defense against the less
serious accusations, or perhaps even more serious ones, but obviously
never when evil consequences attendant on serious accusations are
involved. If indubitable evil is in question, no really innocent person
smiles, for he scorns the person he knows to be lying and manifests
other gestures than the smile. Even the most confused individual who is
trying to conceal his stupidity behind a flat sort of laughter gives
this up when he is so slandered that he is compelled to scorn the liar;
only the simulator continues to smile. If, however, anybody has
practised the manifestation of scorn he knows that he is not to smile,
but then his pose becomes theatrical and betrays itself through its
exaggeration.

Not far from scorn are defiance and spite. They are characterized by
baring the canine teeth and drawing together the face in a frown when
turning toward the person upon whom the defiance or spite is directed. I
believe that this image has got to be variously filled out by the
additional fact that the mouth is closed and the breath several times
forced sharply through the nostrils. This arises from the combination of
resolution and scorn, these being the probable sources of defiance and
spite. As was explained in the discussion of resolution, the mouth is
bound to close; spite and defiance are not thinkable with open mouth.
Scorn, moreover, demands, as we have shown, this blowing, and if the
blowing is to be done while the mouth is closed it must be done through
the nose.

Derision and depreciation show the same expressions as defiance and
spite, but in a lesser degree. They all give the penologist a good deal
to do, and those defendants who show defiance and spite are not unjustly
counted as the most difficult we have to deal with. They require, above
all, conscientious care and patience, just indeed because not rarely
there are innocents among them. This is especially so when a person many
times punished is accused another time, perhaps principally because of
his record. Then the bitterest defiance and almost childish spite takes
possession of him against “persecuting” mankind, particularly if, for
the nonce, he is innocent. Such persons turn their spite upon the judge
as the representative of this injustice and believe they are doing their
best by conducting themselves in an insulting manner and speaking only a
few defiant words with the grimmest spite. Under such circumstances it
is not surprising that the inexperienced judge considers these
expressions as the consequences of a guilty conscience, and that the
spiteful person may blame himself for the results of his defiant
conduct. He therefore pays no more attention to the unfortunate. How
this situation may lead to an unjust sentence is obvious. But whether
the person in question is guilty or not guilty, it is the undeniable
duty of the judge to make especial efforts with such persons, for
defiance and spite are in most cases the result of embitterment, and
this again comes from the disgusting treatment received at the hands of
one’s fellows. And it is the judge’s duty at least not to increase this
guilt if he can not wipe it away. The only, and apparently the simplest,
way of dealing with such people is the patient and earnest discussion of
the case, the demonstration that the judge is ready carefully to study
all damaging facts, and even a tendency to refer to evidence of
innocence in hand, and a not over-energetic discussion of the man’s
possible guilt. In most cases this will not be useful at the beginning.
The man must have time to think the thing over, to conceive in the
lonely night that it is not altogether the world’s plan to ruin him.
Then when he begins to recognize that he will only hurt himself by his
spiteful silence if he is again and again examined he will finally be
amenable. Once the ice is broken, even those accused who at the
beginning showed only spite and defiance, show themselves the most
tractable and honest. The thing needful above all is patience.

Real rage, unfortunately, is frequent. The body is carried erect or
thrown forward, the limbs become stiff, mouth and teeth closely press
together, the voice becomes very loud or dies away or grows hoarse, the
forehead is wrinkled and the pupil of the eye contracted; in addition
one should count the change of color, the flush or deep pallor. An
opportunity to simulate real rage is rare, and anyway the
characteristics are so significant that a mistake in recognition can
hardly be made. Darwin says that the conviction of one’s own guilt is
from time to time expressed through a sparkling of the eyes, and through
an undefinable affectation. The last is well known to every penologist
and explicable in general psychological terms. Whoever knows himself to
be guiltless behaves according to his condition, naturally and without
constraint: hence the notion that naïve people are such as represent
matters as they are. They do not find anything suspicious in them
because they do not know about suspicious matters. But persons who know
themselves guilty and try not to show it, must attain their end through
artifice and imitation, and when this is not well done the affectation
is obvious.

There is also something in the guilty sparkle of the eye. The sparkle in
the eyes of beauty, the glance of joy, of enthusiasm, of rapture, is not
so poetical as it seems, inasmuch as it is no more than intensified
secretion of tears. The latter gets its increase through nervous
excitation, so that the guilty sparkle should also be of the same
nature. This may be considered as in some degree a flow of tears in its
first stages.

An important gesture is that of resignation, which expresses itself
especially as folding the hands in one’s lap. This is one of the most
obvious gestures, for “folding the hands in the lap” is proverbial and
means there is no more to be done. The gesture signifies, therefore,
“I’m not going to do any more, I can’t, I won’t.” Hence it must be
granted that the condition of resignation and its gesture can have no
significance for our own important problem, the problem of guilt,
inasmuch as the innocent as well as the guilty may become resigned, or
may reach the limit at which he permits everything to pass without his
interference. In the essence and expression of resignation there is the
abandonment of everything or of some particular thing, and in court,
what is abandoned is the hope to show innocence, and as the latter may
be real as well as merely pleaded, this gesture is a definite sign in
certain cases. It is to be noted among the relations and friends of a
defendant who, having done everything to save him, recognize that the
evidence of guilt is irrefutable. It is again to be noticed among
courageous lawyers who, having exerted all their art to save their
clients, perceive the failure of their efforts. And finally, the
defendants show it, who have clearly recognized the danger of their
case. I believe that it is not an empirical accident that the gesture of
resignation is made regularly by innocent persons. The guilty man who
finds himself caught catches at his head perhaps, looks toward heaven
gritting his teeth, rages against himself, or sinks into a dull apathy,
but the essential in resignation and all its accompanying movements is
foreign to him. Only that conforms to the idea of resignation which
indicates a surrender, the cession of some value that one has a claim
on--if a man has no claim to any given thing he can not resign it. In
the same way, a person without right to guiltlessness and recognition,
will instinctively not surrender it with the emotion of resignation, but
at most with despair or anger or rage. And it is for this reason that
the guilty do not exhibit gestures of resignation.

The contraction of the brow occurs in other cases besides those
mentioned. Before all it occurs when anything is dealt with intensively,
increasing with the increase of the difficulty of the subject. The
aboriginal source of this gesture lies in the fact that intensive
activities involve the need of acuter vision, and this is in some degree
acquired by the contraction of the skin of the forehead above the
eyebrows; for vision is clarified in this way. Intensive consideration
on the part of a defendant or a witness, and the establishment of its
reality or simulation, are significant in determining whether he himself
believes the truth of what is about to be explained. Let us suppose that
the issue involves proving an alibi on a certain definite, rather remote
day, and the defendant is required to think over his whereabouts on that
day. If he is in earnest with regard to the establishment of his alibi,
i.e. if he really was not there and did not do the thing, it will be
important for him to remember the day in question and to be able to name
the witnesses of his whereabouts then. Hence he will think intensively.
But if he has claimed an alibi dishonestly, as is frequent with
criminals, in order to make people conclude that nobody has the right to
demand where and for how long a time he was on such and such a day, then
there is no need of thinking closely about something that has not
happened. He exhibits in such cases a kind of thoughtfulness, which is
not, however, earnest and profound: and these two adjectives describe
_real_ consideration. The same observations are to be made in regard to
dishonest witnesses who, when pressed to think hard, only simulate doing
so. One is compelled at the very least to look closely after the witness
who simply imitates intensive thinking without showing the signs proper
to it. The suspicion of false testimony is then justifiable.

A rather different matter is that blank expression of the eyes which
only shows that its possessor is completely lost in his thoughts--this
has nothing to do with sharp recollection and demands above all things
being let alone or the belief of being so. In this case no
distinguishing gestures are made, though the forehead, mouth or chin may
be handled, only, however, when embarrassment occurs--i.e. when the man
observes that he is being watched, or when he discovers that he has
forgotten the presence of other people. It is supposed that this does
not occur in court, but it does happen not infrequently when, for
example, the judge, after some long discussion with the accused, is
about to dictate what has been said. If this takes rather a long time,
it may chance that the witness is no longer listening but is staring
vacantly into the distance. He is then reviewing his whole life or the
development and consequences of his deed. He is absorbed in a so-called
intuitive thought, in the reproduction of events. Intensive
consideration requires the combination of particulars and the making of
inferences; hence the form of thinking we have just been speaking of is
merely spiritual sight-seeing. It is when this takes place that
confessions are most easy to get, if only the judge keeps his eyes
properly open.

That contraction of the brow signifies a condition of disgust is well
known, but there is yet, as I believe, a still other use of this
contraction--i.e. its combination with a smile, indicating disbelief.
How this union occurred seems comparatively undiscoverable--perhaps it
results from the combination of the smile of denial with the frown of
sharp observation. But the gesture is, in any event, reliable, and may
not easily stand for anything but disbelief and doubt. Hence it is
always a mistake to believe that anybody who makes that expression
believes what he has heard. If you test it experimentally you will find
that when you make it you say involuntarily to yourself: “Well now, that
can’t be true,” or “Look here, that’s a whopper!” or something like
that. The expression occurs most frequently in confronting witnesses
with defendants and especially witnesses with each other.

The close relation of the contraction of the brow with its early stage,
a slight elevation of the eyebrows, is manifest in the fact that it
occurs under embarrassment--not very regularly but almost always upon
the perception of something foreign and inexplicable, or upon getting
twisted in one’s talk; in fact, upon all such conditions which require
greater physical and psychical clearness of vision, and hence the
shutting out of superfluous light. The expression may be important on
the face of a defendant who asserts,--e.g.--that he does not understand
an argument intended to prove his guilt. If he is guilty he obviously
knows what happened in the commission of the crime and thereby the
argument which reproduces it, and even if he assures the court a hundred
times that he does not understand it, he is either trying to show
himself innocent or wants to gain time for his answer. If he is innocent
it may be that he really does not understand the argument because he is
unaware of the actual situation. Hence he will frown and listen
attentively at the very beginning of the argument. The guilty person
perhaps also aims to appear enormously attentive, but he does not
contract his brow, because he does not need to sharpen his glance; he
knows the facts accurately enough without it. It is important for the
penologist to know whether a man has in the course of his life undergone
much anxiety and trouble, or whether he has lived through it carelessly.
Concerning these matters Darwin points out that when the inner ends of
the eyebrows are raised certain muscles have to be contracted (i.e. the
circular ones which contract the eyebrows and the pyramidal muscle of
the nose, which serve both to pull down and contract the eyelids). The
contraction is accomplished through the vigorous drawing together of the
central bundle of muscles at the brow. These muscles, by contracting,
raise the inner ends of the brow, and since the muscles which contract
the eyebrows bring them together at the same time, their inner ends are
folded in great lumpy creases. In this way short oblique, and short
perpendicular furrows are made. Now this, few people can do without
practice; many can never perform it voluntarily, and it is more frequent
among women and children than among men. It is important to note that it
is always a sign of spiritual pain, not physical. And curiously enough
it is as a rule related with drawing down the corners of the mouth.

Further to study the movements of the features will require an
examination into the reasons for the action of these, and not other
muscles, as accompaniments of the psychical states. Piderit holds it is
due to the fact that the motor nerves which supply these muscles rise
right next to the purely psychical centers and hence these muscles are
the supports of the organs of sense. The latter is no doubt correct, but
the first statement is rather doubtful. In any event it is evident that
the features contain an exceptionally large number of fine muscles with
especially rich motor capacity, and hence move together and in
accordance with the psychical conditions. It may be that the other
muscles of the body have also a share in this but that we fail to
perceive the fact. Such movements, however, have not been essential.

We may take it as a general rule that all joyous and uplifting emotions
(even astonishment) are succeeded by the raising of the skin of the
forehead, the nostrils, the eyes, the eyelids, while sad and oppressing
emotions have the contrary effect. This simple and easy rule renders
immediately intelligible many an otherwise obscure expression which we
find important but concerning the meaning of which we are in doubt. The
development of a movement in any face goes, according to Harless,[123]
in this fashion: “The superior motor nerve is the oculomotorius. The
stimulation reaches this one first--the mildest alteration of emotion
betrays itself most rapidly in the look, the movement and condition of
the pupil of the eye. If the impulse is stronger it strikes the roots of
the motor end of the trigeminus and the movement of the muscles of
mastication occur; then the intensified affection spreads through the
other features.” Nobody will, of course, assert that even a completely
developed physiognomical science will help us over all our difficulties,
but with a little attention it can help us to a considerable degree.
This help we do need, as La Rochefoucauld points out, with even
contemporary correctness, “It is easier to know men than to know a
particular man.”


Section 21. (8) _The Hand._

The physiognomy of the hand stands close to that of the face in
significance and is in some relations of even greater importance,
because the expression of the hand permits of no, or very slight,
simulation. A hand may be rendered finer or coarser, may be rendered
light or dark, the nails may be cared for or allowed to develop into
claws. The appearance of the hand may be altered, but not its
physiognomy or character. Whoever creases his face in the same way for a
thousand times finally retains the creases and receives from them a
determinate expression even if this does not reveal his inner state; but
whoever does the same thing a thousand times with his hand does not
thereby impress on it a means of identification. The frequent Tartuffian
rolling of the eyes finally gives the face a pious or at least pietistic
expression, but fold your hands in daily prayer for years and nobody
would discover it from them. It seems, however, of little use to know
that human hands can not be disguised, if they are little or not at all
differentiated; but as it happens they are, next to the face, the most
extremely and profoundly differentiated of human organs; and a general
law teaches us that different effects are produced by different causes,
and that from the former the latter may be inferred. If then we observe
the infinite variety of the human hand we have to infer an equally
infinite variety of influences, and inasmuch as we cannot trace these
influences any further we must conclude that they are to be explained
causally by the infinite variety of psychical states.

Whoever studies the hand psychologically gains in the course of time a
great deal of faith in what the hand tells him. And finally he doubts it
only when chirognomy conflicts with physiognomy. If in such cases it is
observed that the hand is more likely to be correct than the face, and
that inferences from the hand more rarely show themselves to be false,
one is reminded of the dictum of Aristotle, “The hand is the organ of
organs, the instrument of instruments in the human body.” If this is
correct, the favored instrument must be in the closest kind of relation
with the psyche of the owner, but if this relation exists there must be
an interaction also. If the hand contained merely its physical
structure, Newton would never have said, “Other evidence lacking, the
thumb would convince me of God’s existence.”

How far one ought to establish fundamental propositions in this matter,
I can not easily say. Perhaps it would be scientifically most correct to
be satisfied for the time with collecting the carefully and keenly
observed material and getting the anatomists, who are already in need of
material for professional investigations, to take the matter up; in
collecting photographs of hands belonging to persons whose characters
are well known and in getting a sufficient number of properly equipped
persons to make the collection. If we had enough material to draw
fundamental principles from, much that has been asserted by Bell, Carus,
D’Arpentigny, Allen, Gessmann, Liersch, Landsberg,[124] etc., might be
proved and tested. But their statements are still subject to
contradiction because their fundamental principles are not sufficient
for the development of a system. Probably nobody will doubt some of the
more common statements; all will grant with Winkelmann that a beautiful
hand is in keeping with a beautiful soul; or with Balzac that people of
considerable intellect have handsome hands, or in calling the hand man’s
second face. But when specific co-ordinations of the hand are made these
meet with much doubt. So for example, Esser[125] calls the _elementary_
hand essentially a work hand, the _motor_ essentially a masculine hand,
having less soul and refinement of character than will and
purposefulness. So again the _sensitive_ hand implies generally a
sanguine character, and the _psychic_ hand presents itself as the
possession of beautiful souls and noble spirits.

However true this classification may be, the establishment and
description of the various significatory signs is very difficult,
especially because the forms named rarely appear in clear and sharply
defined subdivisions. The boundaries are fluid, like the characters
themselves, and where the properties of one group pass almost directly
into the other, both description and recognition are difficult. If,
then, we can not depend upon a systematic, and at present remote
treatment, we still may depend on well-founded observations which appear
as reliable presuppositions in the light of their frequent repetition.

Not essentially psychological but of importance for the criminalist are
the inferences we may draw from Herbert Spencer’s assertion that people
whose ancestors have worked with their hands possess heavy hands.
Conversely, people whose ancestors have not worked hard with their hands
possess small and fine hands. Hence the small delicate hands of Jews,
the frequent perfection of form and invariable smallness of the hands of
Gypsies, who have inherited their hands from high-cast Hindoos, and the
so-called racial hands of real aristocrats. That hard work, even
tumbling, piano playing, etc., should alter the form of a hand is
self-evident, since muscles grow stronger with practice and the skin
becomes coarser and drawn through friction, sharp wind and insufficient
care. As is well known, physical properties are hereditary and
observable in any study of races; is it any wonder that a skilled glance
at a man’s hand may uncover a number of facts concerning the
circumstances of his life? Nobody doubts that there are raw, low,
sensual, fat hands. And who does not know the suffering, spiritual,
refined, and delicate hand? Hands cannot of course be described and
distinguished according to fixed classification, and no doubt Hellenbach
was right when he said, “Who can discover the cause of the magic charm
which lies in one out of a hundred thousand equally beautiful hands?”

And this is remarkable because we are not fooled through a well cared
for, fine and elegant hand. Everybody, I might say, knows the convincing
quality that may lie in the enormous leathery fist of a peasant. For
that, too, is often harmoniously constructed, nicely articulated,
appears peaceful and trustworthy. We feel that we have here to do with a
man who is honest, who presents himself and his business as they are,
who holds fast to whatever he once gets hold of, and who understands and
is accustomed to make his words impressive. And we gain this conviction,
not only through the evidence of honest labor, performed through years,
but also through the stability and determination of the form of his
hands. On the other hand, how often are we filled with distrust at the
sight of a carefully tended, pink and white hand of an elegant
gentleman--whether because we dislike its condition or its shape, or
because the form of the nails recalls an unpleasant memory, or because
there is something wrong about the arrangement of the fingers, or
because of some unknown reason. We are warned, and without being
hypnotised, regularly discover that the warning is justified. Certain
properties are sure to express themselves: coldness, prudence, hardness,
calm consideration, greed, are just as indubitable in the hand as
kindness, frankness, gentleness, and honesty.

The enchantment of many a feminine hand is easily felt. The surrender,
the softness, the concession, the refinement and honesty of many a woman
is so clear and open that it streams out, so to speak, and is
perceivable by the senses.

To explain all this, to classify it scientifically and to arrange it
serially, would be, nowadays at least, an unscientific enterprise. These
phenomena pass from body to body and are as reliable as inexplicable.
Who has never observed them, and although his attention has been called
to them, still has failed to notice them, need not consider them, but
persons believing in them must be warned against exaggeration and haste.
The one advice that can be given is to study the language of the hand
before officially ignoring it; not to decide immediately upon the value
of the observations one is supposed to have made, but to handle them
cautiously and to test them with later experiences. It is of especial
interest to trace the movement of the hand, especially the fingers. I
do not mean those movements which are external, and co-ordinate with the
movements of the arm; those belong to mimicry. I mean those that begin
at the wrist and therefore occur in the hand only. For the study of
those movements the hand of childhood is of little use, being altogether
too untrained, unskilled, and neutral. It shows most clearly the
movement of the desire to possess, of catching hold and drawing toward
oneself, generally toward the mouth, as does the suckling child its
mother’s breast. This movement, Darwin has observed even among kittens.

The masculine hand is generally too heavy and slow, clearly to exhibit
the more refined movements; these are fully developed only in the
feminine, particularly in the hands of vivacious, nervous, and
spiritually excitable women. The justice who observes them may read more
than he can in their owner’s words. The hand lies in the lap apparently
inert, but the otherwise well concealed anger slowly makes a fist of it,
or the fingers bend characteristically forward as if they wished to
scratch somebody’s eyes out. Or they cramp together in deep pain, or the
balls of the four other fingers pass with pleasure over the ball of the
thumb, or they move spasmodically, nervously, impatiently and fearfully,
or they open and close with characteristic enjoyment like the paws of
cats when the latter feel quite spry.

Closer observation will show that toes reveal a great deal, particularly
among women who wear rather fine shoes and hence can move their feet
with greater ease. In anger, when they cannot, because it would be
suggestive, stamp their feet, the women press their toes closely to the
ground. If they are embarrassed they turn the sole of their shoe
slightly inwards and make small curves with the point on the ground.
Impatience shows itself through alternating and swinging pressure of
heel and toe, repeated with increasing rapidity; defiance and demand
through raising the toes in such a way that the sole is directly forward
and the foot rests only on the heel. Sensuality is always indicated when
the foot is put forward and the shin bone lightly stretched out, when
all the toes are drawn in toward the sole just as the cat does when she
feels good. What women do not say in words and do not express in their
features and do not indicate in the movement of their hands, they say
with their feet; the inner experience _must_ express itself externally
and the foot most betrays it.

In conclusion it ought to be kept in mind that the hands of all those
people who claim to be hard workers but who really try to live without
work, i.e. thieves, gamblers, etc., ought to be carefully examined.
Concerning the value of graphology see my “Manual for Examining Judges.”


Title B. The Conditions for Defining Theories.

Topic I. THE MAKING OF INFERENCES.

Section 22.

The study of the human soul as psychology, has for its subject the whole
stream of conscious life and for its aim the discovery of the occurrence
and relation of the laws of human thought. Now whether these relations
imply the coherence of the objects thought about or not, so long as
logic is dealing with the laws according to which thoughts must be
correlated in order to attain to objectively valid knowledge, all
questions that deal with the formal aspect of thinking do not enter the
field of psychological investigation. The general psychological problem
is to describe the actual psychic events as they occur, to analyze them
into their simplest elements, and inasmuch as it is this purely
pragmatic application of psychology to the problem of inference that
concerns us, we need to deal only with that law which defines the
combination of images and with the question,--how the spirit achieves
this combination. The material aspect of this question is therefore
psychological. The legal importance of the problem lies in the very
potent fact that inferences and theories are often constructed which are
formally or logically absolutely free of error, yet psychologically full
of errors that no logic whatever could correct. We have, therefore, to
consider at least the most important conditions which determine the
manner of our inferences.

The right which lawyers possess of studying these questions, so far as
they lie in our field, is of modern establishment. According to
Hillebrand[126] the theory of knowledge has to-day broken up into
individual theories, involving the certain needs of special fields of
knowledge. The place of the epistomologists, who are professionals and
beyond the pale of individual disciplines, is now taken by the
representatives of those disciplines and each works expressly on his own
epistomological problem. Our especial problem is the drawing of
inferences from the material presented to us or brought together by our
efforts, just as in other disciplines. If we set ourselves the task of
determining the procedure when subjecting the fundamental principles of
our work to revision and examining their utility, we merely ask whether
the process is voluntary or according to fixed laws; and having cleared
up that point we ask what influence psychological conditions exercise on
the situation. It is, indeed, said that thinking is a congenital
endowment, not to be learned from rules. But the problem is not teaching
the inferrer to think; the problem is the examination of how inferences
have been made by another and what value his inferences may have for our
own conclusions. And our own time, which has been bold enough to lay
this final conclusion in even the most important criminal cases, in the
hands of laymen, this time is doubly bound at least to prepare all
possible control for this work, to measure what is finally taken as
evidence with the finest instruments possible, and to present to the
jury only what has been proved and repeatedly examined.

It might almost seem as if the task the jury trial sets the judge has
not been clearly perceived. A judge who thinks he has performed it when
he has cast before the jury the largest possible mass of testimony, more
or less reviewed, and who sees how people, who perhaps for the first
time in their lives, are involved in a court of law, who perhaps see a
criminal for the first time, and are under these circumstances the
arbiters of a man’s fate,--a judge who sees all this and is satisfied,
is not effective in his work. Nowadays more than ever, it is for the
judge to test all evidence psychologically, to review what is only
apparently clear, to fill out lacunae, and to surmount difficulties,
before he permits the material brought together in a very few hours to
pass into the jury’s hands. According to Hillebrand, much that seems
“self-evident” shows itself dependent on definite experience attained in
the process of hundreds of repetitions in the daily life; the very
impression of self-evidence is frequently produced by a mere chance
instinct about what should be held for true. Hume has already shown how
the most complex and abstract concepts are derived from sensation. Their
relation must be studied, and only when we can account for every psychic
process with which we have to concern ourselves, is our duty properly
fulfilled.


Section 23. (2) Proof.

Mittermaier[127] holds that “as a means of testimony in the legal sense
of that term every possible source must be examined which may suffice
the judge according to law. And from such examination only may the
requisite certainties be attained from which the judge is to assume as
determined, facts relevant to his judgment.” Only the phrase “according
to law” needs explanation, inasmuch as the “source” of reasons and
certainties must satisfy the legal demands not only formally but must
sustain materially every possible test, whether circumstantial or
logico-psychologic. If, for example, the fundamental sources should be a
combination of (1) a judicial examination of premises
(lokalaugenschein), (2) testimony of witnesses, and (3) a partial
confession, the requirements of the law would be satisfied if the
protocol, (1), were written or made according to prescribed forms, if a
sufficient number of properly summoned witnesses unanimously confirmed
the point in question, and if finally the confession were made and
protocoled according to law. Yet, though the law be satisfied, not only
may the conclusion be wholly false but every particular part of the
evidence may be perfectly useless, without the presence anywhere of
intentional untruth. The personal examination may have been made by a
judge who half the time, for some sufficiently cogent reason, had a
different conception of the case than the one which later appeared to be
true. It need not have been necessary that there should be mixed
therewith false information of witnesses, incorrect observation, or such
other mistakes. There need only have been a presupposition, accepted at
the beginning of the examination, when the examination of the premises
took place, as to the visible condition of things; and this might have
given apparent justification to doubtful material and have rendered it
intelligible, only to be shown later as false. The so-called “local
examination” however, is generally supposed to be “objective.” It is
supposed to deal only with circumstantial events, and it does not occur
to anybody to modify and alter it when it is certainly known that at
another point the situation has taken an altogether different form. The
objectivity of the local examination is simply non-existent, and if it
were really objective, i.e., contained merely dry description with so
and so many notations of distances and other figures, it would be of no
use. Every local examination, to be of use, must give an accurate
picture of the mental process of him who made it. On the one hand it
must bring vividly to the mind of the reader, even of the sentencing
judge, what the situation was; on the other, it must demonstrate what
the examiner thought and represented to himself in order that the
reader, who may have different opinions, may have a chance to make
corrections. If I, for example, get the impression that a fire was made
through carelessness, and that somebody lost his life on account of it,
and if I made my local examination with this presupposition in mind, the
description will certainly seem different from that made under the
knowledge that the fire was intentional and made to kill. At trial the
description of local conditions will be read and entered as important
testimony. It satisfies the law if it is taken according to form, has
the correct content, and is read as prescribed. But for our conscience
and in truth this manuscript can be correct only when it is logically
and psychologically presented revised according to the viewpoint its
writer would have had if he had been in possession of all the facts in
possession of the reader. This work of reconstruction belongs to the
most difficult of our psychological tasks--but it must be performed
unless we want to go on superficially and without conscience.

The judgment and interpretation of the testimony of witnesses, (2),
demand similar treatment. I am legally right if I base my judgment on
the testimony of witnesses (provided there are enough of them and they
are properly subpoenaed) if nothing suggestive is offered against their
testimony, if they do not contradict each other, and especially if there
are no contradictions in the testimony of any single individual. This
inner contradiction is rather frequent, and the inattention with which
the protocols, as a rule, are read, and the scanty degree in which the
testimony is tested logically and psychologically, are shown clearly by
the fact that the inner contradictions are not observed and worked over
more frequently. As evidence of this, let us consider a few cases that
are generally told as extravagant jokes. Suppose that a man dreamed that
his head was cut off and that that dream so affected him that he died of
apoplexy--yet not everybody asks how the dream was discovered. In a like
manner people hear with disgust that somebody who has lost his arm, in
despair cut off his other arm with an axe in order more easily to get
assistance, and yet they do not ask “how.” Or again when somebody is
asked if he knows the romance “The Emperor Joseph and The Beautiful
Railway-signal-man’s Daughter,” the anachronism of the title does not
occur to him, and nobody thinks of the impossibilities of the vivid
description of a man walking back and forth, with his hands behind his
back, reading a newspaper.

Much testimony contains similar, if not so thorough-going
contradictions. If they are credited in spite of this fact the silly
believer may be blamed, but he is justified in the eyes of the law if
the above-mentioned legal conditions were satisfied. Hence, the
frightfully frequent result: “Whether the witness’s deposition is true,
is a matter for his own conscience; eventually he may be arrested for
perjury, but he has made his statements and I judge accordingly.” What
is intended with such a statement is this: “I hide behind the law, I am
permitted to judge in such a case in such a way, and nobody can blame
me.” But it is correct to assert that in such cases there is really no
evidence, there is only a form of evidence. It can be actually
evidential only when the testimony is tested logically and
psychologically, and the ability and willingness of the witness to tell
the truth is made clear. Of course it is true, as Mittermaier says, that
the utterance of witnesses is tested by its consistency with other
evidence, but that is neither the only test nor the most valid, for
there is always the more important internal test, in the first place;
and in the second place, it is not conclusive because the comparison may
reveal only inconsistency, but can not establish which of the
conflicting statements is correct. Correctness can be determined only
through testing the single statements, the willingness and ability of
each witness, both in themselves and in relation to all the presented
material.

Let us take now the third condition of our suppositions case, i.e.
partial confession. It is generally self-evident that the value of the
latter is to be judged according to its own nature. The confession must
be accepted as a means of proof, not as proof, and this demands that it
shall be consistent with the rest of the evidence, for in that way only
can it become proof. But it is most essential that the confession shall
be internally tested, i.e. examined for logical and psychological
consistency. This procedure is especially necessary with regard to
certain definite confessions.

(a) Confessions given without motive.

(b) Partial confessions.

(c) Confessions implying the guilt of another.

(a) Logic is, according to Schiel[128] the science of evidence--not of
finding evidence but of rendering evidence evidential. This is
particularly true with regard to confessions, if we substitute
psychology for logic. It is generally true that many propositions hold
so long only as they are not doubted, and such is the case with many
confessions. The crime is confessed; he who confesses to it is always a
criminal, and no man doubts it, and so the confession stands. But as
soon as doubt, justified or unjustified, occurs, the question takes
quite a different form. The confession has first served as proof, but
now psychological examination alone will show whether it can continue to
serve as proof.

The most certain foundation for the truth of confession in any case is
the establishment of a clear motive for it--and that is rarely present.
Of course the motive is not always absent because we do not immediately
recognize it, but it is not enough to suppose that the confession does
not occur without a reason. That supposition would be approximately
true, but it need not be true. If a confession is to serve evidentially
the motive must be clear and indubitable. Proof of its mere existence is
insufficient; we must understand the confession in terms of all the
factors that caused it. The process of discovering these factors is
purely logical and generally established indirectly by means of an
apagogue. This is essentially the proof by negation, but it may serve in
connection with a disjunctive judgment which combines possible
alternatives as a means of confirmation. We are, then, to bring together
all conceivable motives and study the confession with regard to them. If
all, or most of them, are shown to be impossible or insufficient, we
have left only the judgment of one or more conclusions, and with this we
have an essentially psychological problem. Such a problem is seldom
simple and easy, and as there is no possibility of contradiction, the
danger is nowhere so great of making light of the matter. “What is
reasserted is half proved.” That is a comfortable assertion, and leads
to considerable incorrectness. A confession is only established in truth
when it is construed psychologically, when the whole inner life of the
confessor and his external conditions are brought into relation with it,
and the remaining motives established as at least possible. And this
must be done to avoid the reproach of having condemned some confessor
without evidence, for a confession having no motive may be untrue, and
therefore not evidential.

(b) _Partial confessions_ are difficult, not only because they make it
harder to prove the evidence for what is not confessed, but also because
what is confessed appears doubtful in the light of what is not. Even in
the simplest cases where the reason for confession and silence seems to
be clear, mistakes are possible. If, for example, a thief confesses to
having stolen only what has been found in his possession but denies the
rest, it is fairly probable that he hopes some gain from the evidence in
which there appears to be no proof of his having stolen what has not
been found upon him. But though this is generally the case, it might
occur that the thief wants to assume the guilt of another person, and
hence naturally can confess only to what he is accused of, inasmuch as
he either has insufficient or no evidence whatever of his guilt for the
rest of the crime.

Another fairly clear reason for partial confession, is shown in the
confession to a certain degree of malicious intent, as the denial of the
intent to kill. If this is made by a person who may be supposed to know
the legal situation, either because of earlier experience or for other
reasons, there is sufficient justification for doubting the honesty of
his confession. Most of such cases belong to the numerous class in which
the defendant confesses to a series of facts or a number of things, and
denies a few of them without any apparent reason; he may confess to a
dozen objects used in an assault and simply refuse to discuss two
probably quite insignificant ones. If such a case comes up for judgment
to the full bench, half the judges say that since he has stolen twelve
he must have taken the other two, and the other half say that since he
has confessed to twelve he would have confessed to the other two if he
had taken them. Generally speaking, both sides are right; one inference
is as justified as the other. As a rule, such cases do not repay a great
deal of troublesome examination, inasmuch as the question of A’s having
stolen twelve or fourteen objects can little affect either his guilt or
his sentence. But it is to be remembered that it is never indifferent
whether a man pleads guilty or not guilty, and later on, especially in
another case, it may be quite the reverse of indifferent whether a man
is condemned because of a matter indifferent to-day. Suppose that the
denied theft was of a worthless but characteristic thing, e.g. an old
prayer-book. If now the thief is again suspected of a robbery which he
denies and the theft is again that of an old prayer-book, then it is not
indifferent as a matter of proof whether the man was condemned for
stealing a prayer-book or not. If he was so condemned, there will
already be remarks about, “a certain passion for old prayer-books,” and
the man will be suspected of the second theft.

In regard to the possession of stolen goods, such a sentence may have
similar significance. I recall a case in which several people were
sentenced for the theft of a so-called fokos (a Hungarian cane with a
head like an ax). Later a fokos was used in murder in the same region
and the first suspicion of the crime was attached to the thief, who
might, because of his early crime, have been in possession of a fokos.
Now suppose that the man had confessed to theft of everything but the
fokos, and that he had been condemned on the basis of the confession,
the fact would be of far-reaching significance in the present case. Of
course it is not intended that the old case is to be tried again before
the new. That would be a difficult job after the lapse of some time, and
in addition, would be of little use, for everybody recalls the old
judgment anyway and supposes that the circumstances must have been such
as to show the man guilty. If a man is once sentenced for something he
has not confessed to, the stigma remains no matter how the facts may be
against it.

Experience has shown that the victims of theft count everything stolen
that they do not discover at the first glance. And it might have been
lost long before the theft, or have been stolen at an earlier or a later
time. For this reason it often happens that servants, and even the
children of the house or other frequenters, take the robbery as an
opportunity for explaining the disappearance of things they are
responsible for or steal afresh and blame it upon “the thief.” The
quantity stolen is generally exaggerated, moreover, in order to excite
universal sympathy and perhaps to invoke help. In general, we must hold
that there is no psychological reason that a confessor should deny
anything the confession of which can bring him no additional harm. The
last point must be carefully treated, for it requires taking the
attitude of the accused and not of the examiner. It is the former’s
information and view-point that must be studied, and it often contains
the most perverted view-points; e.g., one man denies out of mere
obstinacy because he believes that his guilt is increased by this or
that fact. The proposition: who has stolen one thing, has also stolen
the rest, has slight justification.

(c) If a denying fellow-criminal is accused by a confession, the
interpretation of the latter becomes difficult. First of all, the pure
kernel of the confession must be brought to light, and everything set
aside that might serve to free the confessor and involve the other in
guilt. This portion of the work is comparatively the easiest, inasmuch
as it depends upon the circumstances of the crime. It is more difficult
to determine what degree of crime the confessor attached to himself by
accusing also the other man, because clearness can be reached in such a
case only by working out the situation from beginning to end in two
directions; first, by studying it without reference to the
fellow-criminal, second, with such reference. The complete elimination
of the additional circumstance is exceedingly troublesome because it
requires the complete control of the material and because it is always
psychologically difficult so to exclude an event already known in its
development and inference as to be able to formulate a theory quite
without reference to it.

If this is really accomplished and some positive fact is established in
the self-accusation, the question becomes one of finding the value seen
by the confessor in blaming himself together with his fellow. Revenge,
hatred, jealousy, envy, anger, suspicion, and other passions will be the
forces in which this value will be found. One man brings his ancient
comrade into jeopardy in revenge for the latter’s injustice in the
division of the booty, or in deliberate anger at the commission of some
dangerous stupidity in a burglary. Again, it often happens that he or
she, through jealousy, accuses her or him in order that the other may be
also imprisoned, and so not become disloyal. Business jealousy, again,
is as influential as the attempt to prevent another from disposing of
some hidden booty, or from carrying out by himself some robbery planned
in partnership. These motives are not always easy to discover but are
conceivable. There are also cases, not at all rare, in which the
ordinary man is fully lacking in comprehension of “the substitute
value,” which makes him confess the complicity of his fellow. I am going
to offer just one example, and inasmuch as the persons concerned are
long since dead, will, by way of exception, mention their names and the
improbability of their stories. In 1879 an old man, Blasius Kern, was
found one morning completely snowed over and with a serious wound in the
head. There was no possible suspicion of robbery as motive of the
murder, inasmuch as the man was on his way home drunk, as usual, and it
was supposed that he had fallen down and had smashed his skull. In 1881
a young fellow, Peter Seyfried, came to court and announced that he had
been hired by Blasius Kern’s daughter, Julia Hauck, and her husband
August Hauck, to kill the old fellow, who had become unendurable through
his love of drink and his endless quarrelsomeness; and accordingly he
had done the deed. He had been promised an old pair of trousers and
three gulden, but they had given him the trousers, not the money, and as
all his attempts to collect payment had failed he divulged the secret of
the Hauck people. When I asked him if he were unaware that he himself
was subject to the law he said, “I don’t care; the others at least will
also be punished;--why haven’t they kept their word.” And this lad was
very stupid and microcephalic, but according to medico-legal opinion,
capable of distinguishing between right and wrong. His statements proved
themselves true to the very last point.

So significantly weak as this in fundamental reliability, very few
confessions will appear to be, but the reasons for confessions,
difficult both to find and to judge, are many indeed. The only way to
attain certainty is through complete and thorough-going knowledge of all
the external conditions, but primarily through sound psychological
insight into the nature of both the confessor and those he accuses.
Evidently the first is by far the more important: what he is beneath the
surface, his capacities, passions, intentions, and purposes, must all be
settled if any decision is to be arrived at as to the advantage accruing
to a man by the accusation of others. For example, the passionate
character of some persons may indicate beyond a doubt that they might
find pleasure in suffering provided they could cause suffering to others
at that price. Passion is almost always what impels men, and what
passion in particular lies behind a confession will be revealed partly
by the crime, partly by the relation of the criminals one to the other,
partly by the personality of the new victim. If this passion was strong
enough to deal, if I may use the term, anti-egoistically, it can be
discovered only through the study of its possessor. It may be
presupposed that everybody acts according to his own advantage--the
question asks merely what this advantage is in the concrete, and whether
he who seeks it, seeks it prudently. Even the satisfaction of revenge
may be felt as an advantage if it is more pleasurable than the pain
which follows confession--the matter is one of relative weight and is
prudently sought as the substitution of an immediate and petty advantage
for a later and greater one.

Another series of procedures is of importance in determining proof,
where circumstances are denied which have no essential relation to the
crime. They bring the presentation of proof into a bypath so that the
essential problem of evidence is left behind. Then if the denied
circumstance is established as a fact it is falsely supposed that the
guilt is so established. And in this direction many mistakes are
frequently made. There are two suggestive examples. Some years ago there
lived in Vienna a very pretty bachelor girl, a sales-person in a very
respectable shop. One day she was found dead in her room. Inasmuch as
the judicial investigation showed acute arsenic poisoning, and as a
tumbler half full of sweetened water and a considerable quantity of
finely powdered arsenic was found on her table, these two conditions
were naturally correlated. From the neighbors it was learned that the
dead girl had for some time been intimate with an unknown gentleman who
visited her frequently, but whose presence was kept as secret as
possible by both. This gentleman, it was said, had called on the girl on
the evening before her death. The police inferred that the man was a
very rich merchant, residing in a rather distant region, who lived
peaceably with his much older wife and therefore kept his illicit
relations with the girl secret. It was further established at the
autopsy that the girl was pregnant, and so the theory was formed that
the merchant had poisoned his mistress and in the examination this deed
was set down against him. Now, if the man had immediately confessed that
he knew the dead girl, and stood in intimate relation with her and that
he had called on her the last evening; if he had asserted perhaps that
she was in despair about her condition, had quarreled with him and had
spoken of suicide, etc., then suicide would unconditionally have had to
be the verdict. In any event, he never could have been accused, inasmuch
as there was no additional evidence of poisoning. But the man conceived
the unfortunate notion of denying that he knew the dead girl or had any
relations with her, or that he had ever, even on that last evening,
called on her. He did this clearly because he did not want to confess a
culpable relation to public opinion, especially to his wife. And the
whole question turned upon this denied circumstance. The problem of
evidence was no longer, “Has he killed her,” but “Did he carry on an
intimacy with her.” Then it was proved beyond reasonable doubt through a
long series of witnesses that his visits to the girl were frequent, that
he had been there on the evening before her death, and that there could
be no possible doubt as to his identity. That settled his fate and he
was sentenced to death. If we consider the case psychologically we have
to grant that his denial of having been present might have for motive as
much the fact that he had poisoned the girl, as that he did not want to
admit the relation at the beginning. Later on, when he completely
understood the seriousness of his situation, he thought a change of
front too daring and hoped to get on better by sticking to his story.
Now, as we have seen, what was proved was the fact that he knew and
visited the girl; what he was sentenced for was the murder of the girl.

A similar case, particularly instructive in its development, and
especially interesting because of the significant study (of the
suggestibility of witnesses) of Dr. Von Schrenck-Notzing and Prof.
Grashey, kept the whole of Munich in excitement some years ago. A widow,
her grown-up daughter, and an old servant were stifled and robbed in
their home. The suspicion of the crime fell upon a brick-layer who had
once before made a confession concerning another murder and of whom it
was known that some time before the deed was done he had been building a
closet into the house of the three murdered women. Through various
combinations of the facts the supposition was reached that the mason got
entry into the house on the pretense of examining whether or not the
work he had done on the closet had caused any damage, and had then
committed the thieving murder. Now here again, if the mason had said:
“Yes, I was without a job, wanted to get work, entered the house under
the assigned pretense, and appeared to see about the closet and had
myself paid for the apparently repaired improvement, left the three
women unharmed, and they must only after that have been killed,”--if he
had said this, his condemnation would have been impossible, for all the
other testimony was of subordinate importance. Now suppose the man was
innocent, what could he have thought: “I have already been examined once
in a murder case, I found myself in financial difficulties, I still am
in such difficulties--if I admit that I was at the place of the crime at
the time the crime was committed, I will get into serious trouble, which
I won’t, if I deny my presence.” So he really denied having been in the
house or in the street for some time, and inasmuch as this was shown by
many witnesses to be untrue, his presence at the place where the crime
was committed was identified with the unproved fact that he had
committed it, and he was condemned.

I do not assert that either one or the other of these persons was
condemned guiltlessly, or that such “side issues” have no value and
ought not to be proved. I merely point out that caution is necessary in
two directions. First of all, these side issues must not be identified
with the central issue. Their demonstration is only preparatory work,
the value of which must be established cautiously and without prejudice.
It may be said that the feeling of satisfaction with what has been done
causes jurists frequently to forget what must yet be done, or to
undervalue it. Further, a psychological examination must seek out the
motives which led or might have led the accused to deny some point not
particularly dangerous to him. In most cases an intelligible ground for
such action can be discovered, and if the psychologically prior
conditions are conceived with sufficient narrowness to keep us from
assuming unconditional guilt, we are at least called upon to be
careful.

This curious danger of identification of different issues as the aim of
presentation of evidence, occurs much more frequently and with
comparatively greater degree in the cases of individual witnesses who
are convinced of the principal issue when a side issue is proved.
Suppose a witness is called on to identify a man as somebody who had
stabbed him in a serious assault, and that he has also to explain
whether the quarrel he had had with this man a short time ago was of
importance. If the suspect is desirous of having the quarrel appear as
harmless, and the wounded person asserts that the quarrel was serious,
the latter will be convinced, the moment his contention may be viewed as
true, that his opponent was really the person who had stabbed him. There
is, of course, a certain logical justification for this supposition, but
the psychological difficulty with it is the fact that this case, like
many others, involves the identification of what is inferred with what
is perceived. It is for this reason that the mere fact of arrest is to
most people a conviction of guilt. The witness who had first identified
A as only the probable criminal becomes absolutely convinced of it when
A is presented to him in stripes, even though he knows that A has been
arrested on his own testimony alone. The appearance and the surroundings
of the prisoner influence many, and not merely uneducated people,
against the prisoner, and they think, involuntarily, “If he were not the
one, they would not have him here.”


Section 24. (b) Causation.[129]

If we understand by the term cause the axiom that every change has an
occasion, hence that every event is bound up with a number of conditions
which when lacking in whole or in part would prevent the appearance of
the event, while their presence would compel its appearance, then the
whole business of the criminalist is the study of causes. He must indeed
study not only whether and how crime and criminal are causally related,
but also how their individual elements are bound to each other and to
the criminal; and finally, what causation in the criminal, considered
with regard to his individual characteristics, inevitably led to the
commission of the crime. The fact that we deal with the problem of cause
brings us close to other sciences which have the same task in their own
researches; and this is one of the reasons for the criminalist’s
necessary concern with other disciplines. Of course no earnest
criminalist can pursue other studies for their own sake, he has no time;
but he must look about him and study the methods used in other sciences.
In the other sciences we learn method, but not as method, and that is
all that we need. And we observe that the whole problem of method is
grounded on causation. Whether empirically or aprioristically does not
matter. We are concerned solely with causation.

In certain directions our task is next to the historians’ who aim to
bring men and events into definite causal sequence. The causal law is
indubitably the ideal and only instructive instrument in the task of
writing convincing history, and it is likewise without question that the
same method is specifically required in the presentation of evidence.
Thus: “This is the causal chain of which the last link is the crime
committed by A. Now I present the fact of the crime and include only
those events which may be exclusively bound up with A’s criminality--and
the crime appears as committed. Now again, I present the fact of the
crime and exclude all those events which can without exception be
included only if A is not a criminal--and there is no crime.”[130]

Evidently the finding of causes involves, according to the complexities
of the case, a varying number of subordinate tasks which have to be
accomplished for each particular incident, inasmuch as each suspicion,
each statement _pro_ or _con_ has to be tested. The job is a big one but
it is the only way to absolute and certain success, provided there is no
mistake in the work of correlating events. As Schell says: “Of all the
observed identities of effect in natural phenomena only one has the
complete strength of mathematical law--the general law of causation. The
fact that everything that has a beginning has a cause is as old as human
experience.” The application of this proposition to our own problem
shows that we are not to turn the issue in any unnecessary direction,
once we are convinced that every phenomenon has its occasion. We are, on
the contrary, to demonstrate this occasion and to bring it into
connection with every problem set by the testimony at any moment. In
most cases the task, though not rigidly divided, is double and its
quality depends upon the question whether the criminal was known from
the beginning or not. The duality is foremost, and lasts longest if
only the deed itself is known, and if the judge must limit himself
entirely to its sole study in order to derive from it its objective
situation.

The greatest mistakes in a trial occur when this derivation of the
objective situation of the crime is made unintelligently, hastily or
carelessly, and conversely the greatest successes are due to its correct
rendering. But such a correct rendering is no more than the
thorough-going use of the principle of causality. Suppose a great crime
has been committed and the personality of the criminal is not revealed
by the character of the crime. The mistake regularly made in such a case
is the immediate and superficial search for the personality of the
criminal instead of what should properly proceed--the study of the
causal conditions of the crime. For the causal law does not say that
everything which occurs, taken as a whole and in its elements, has one
ground--that would be simply categorical emptiness. What is really
required is an efficient and satisfying cause. And this is required not
merely for the deed as a whole but for every single detail. When causes
are found for all of these they must be brought together and correlated
with the crime as described, and then integrated with the whole series
of events.

The second part of the work turns upon the suspicion of a definite
person when his own activity is interpolated as a cause of the crime.
Under some conditions again, the effect of the crime on the criminal has
to be examined, i.e., enrichment, deformation, emotional state, etc. But
the evidence of guilt is established only when the crime is accurately
and explicitly described as the inevitable result of the activity of the
criminal and his activity only. This systematic work of observing and
correlating every instant of the supposed activities of the accused
(once the situation of the crime is defined as certainly as possible),
is as instructive as it is promising of success. It is the one activity
which brings us into touch with bare perception and its reproduction.
“All inference with regard to facts appears to depend upon the relation
of cause to effect; by virtue of this relation alone may we rely upon
the evidence of our memories and our senses.”[131] Hume illustrates this
remark with the following example: If a clock or some other machine is
found on a desert island, the conclusion is drawn that men are or were
on the island. The application is easy enough. The presence of a clock,
the presence of a three-cornered wound is perceived by the senses--that
men were there, that the wound was made with a specific kind of
instrument, is a causal inference. Simple as this proposition of Hume’s
is, it is of utmost importance in the law because of the permanent and
continually renewed problems: What is the effect in _this_ case? What is
the cause? Do they belong together? Remembering that these questions
make our greatest tasks and putting them, even beyond the limit of
disgust, will save us from grave errors.

There is another important condition to which Hume calls attention and
which is interpreted by his clever disciple Meinong. It is a fact that
without the help of previous experience no causal nexus can be referred
to an observation, nor can the presence of such be discovered in
individual instances. It may be postulated only. A cause is essentially
a complex in which every element is of identical value. And this
circumstance is more complicated than it appears to be, inasmuch as it
requires reflection to distinguish whether only one or more observations
have been made. Strict self-control alone and accurate enumeration and
supervision will lead to a correct decision as to whether one or ten
observations have been made, or whether the notion of additional
observations is not altogether illusory.

This task involves a number of important circumstances. First of all
must be considered the manner in which the man on the street conceives
the causal relation between different objects. The notion of causality,
as Schwarz[132] shows, is essentially foreign to the man on the street.
He is led mainly by the analogy of natural causality with that of human
activity and passivity, e.g., the fire is active with regard to water,
which simply must sizzle passively. This observation is indubitably
correct and significant, but I think Schwarz wrong to have limited his
description to ordinary people; it is true also of very complex natures.
It is conceivable that external phenomena shall be judged in analogy
with the self, and inasmuch as the latter often appears to be purely
active, it is also supposed that those natural phenomena which appear to
be especially active are really so.

In addition, many objects in the external world with which we have a
good deal to do, and are hence important, do as a matter of fact really
appear to be active--the sun, light, warmth, cold, the weather, etc., so
that we assign activity and passivity only according to the values the
objects have for us. The ensuing mistake is the fact that we overlook
the alternations between activity and passivity, or simply do not make
the study such alternations require; yet the correct apportionment of
action and reaction is, for us, of greatest importance. In this regard,
moreover, there is always the empty problem as to whether two things may
stand in causal relation,--empty, because the answer is always yes. The
scientific and practical problem is as to whether there exists an actual
causal nexus. The same relation occurs in the problem of reciprocal
influences. No one will say, for example, that any event exercises a
reciprocal influence on the sun, but apart from such relatively few
cases it would not only be supposed that A is the cause of the effect B,
but also that B might have reciprocally influenced A. Regard for this
possibility may save one from many mistakes.

One important source of error with regard to cause and effect lies in
the general and profound supposition that the cause must have a certain
similarity to the effect. So Ovid, according to J. S. Mill, has Medea
brew a broth of long-lived animals; and popular superstitions are full
of such doctrine. The lung of a long-winded fox is used as a cure for
asthma, the yarrow is used to cure jaundice, agaricos is used for
blisters, aristolochia (the fruit of which has the form of a uterus) is
used for the pains of child-birth, and nettle-tea for nettle-rash. This
series may be voluntarily increased when related to the holy patron
saints of the Catholic Church, who are chosen as protectors against some
especial condition or some specific difficulty because they at one time
had some connection with that particular matter. So the holy Odilia is
the patron saint for diseases of the eye, not because she knew how to
cure the eyes, but because her eyes were put out with needles. The thief
Dismas is the patron of the dying because we know nothing about him save
that he died with Christ. St. Barbara, who is pictured together with a
tower in which she was imprisoned, and which was supposed to be a powder
house, has become the patron saint of artillery. In the same manner St.
Nicholas is, according to Simrock, the patron of sailors because his
name resembles Nichus, Nicor, Nicker, which is the name of the
unforgotten old German sea-deity.

Against such combinations, external and unjustified, not even the most
educated and skilful is safe. Nobody will doubt that he is required to
make considerable effort in his causal interpretation because of the
sub-conscious influence of such similarities. The matter would not be so
dangerous, all in all, because such mistakes may be easily corrected and
the attention of people may be called to the inadequacy of such
causation--but the reason for this kind of correlations is rarely
discovered. Either people do not want to tell it because they
instinctively perceive that their causal interpretation cannot be
justified, or they cannot even express it because the causal relation
had been assumed only subconsciously, and they are hence unaware of the
reasons for it and all the more convinced that they are right. So for
example, an intelligent man told me that he suspected another of a
murder because the latter’s mother died a violent death. The witness
stuck to his statement: “the man who had once had something to do with
killing must have had something to do with this killing.” In a similar
manner, a whole village accused a man of arson because he was born on
the night on which a neighboring village burned down. Here, however,
there was no additional argument in the belief that his mother had
absorbed the influence of the fire inasmuch as the latter was told that
there had been a fire only after the child was born. “He once had
something to do with fire,” was the basis of the judgment, also in this
case.

There are innumerable similar examples which, with a large number of
habitual superstitious presuppositions, make only false causality.
Pearls mean tears because they have similar form; inasmuch as the cuckoo
may not without a purpose have only two calls at one time and ten or
twenty at another, the calls must mean the number of years before death,
before marriage, or of a certain amount of money, or any other countable
thing. Such notions are so firmly rooted in the peasantry and in all of
us, that they come to the surface, whether consciously or unconsciously,
and influence us more than we are accustomed to suppose they do.
Whenever anybody assures us that he is able to assert absolutely, though
not altogether prove a thing, this assurance may be variously grounded,
but not rarely it is no more than one of these false correlations.
Schopenhauer has said, that “motivation is causality seen from
within,”--and one may add conversely that causality is motivation seen
from without. What is asserted must be motivated, and that is done by
means of causality--if no real ultimate cause is found a false,
superficial and insufficient one is adopted, inasmuch as we ever strive
to relate things causally, in the knowledge that, otherwise, the world
would be topsy-turvy. “Everywhere,” says Stricker, “we learn that men
who do not associate their experiences according to right cause are
badly adapted to their environment; the pictures of artists are
disliked, the laborer’s work does not succeed; the tradesman loses his
money, and the general his battle.” And we may add, “The criminalist his
case.” For whoever seeks the reason for a lost case certainly will find
it in the ignorance of the real fact and in the incorrect coördination
of cause and effect. The most difficult thing in such coördination is
not that it has to be tested according to the notion one has for himself
of the chain of events; the difficulty lies in the fact that the point
of view and mental habits of the man who is suspected of the effects
must be adopted. Without this the causal relations as they are arrived
at by the other can never be reached, or different results most likely
ensue.

The frequency of mistakes like those just mentioned is well known. They
affect history. Even La Rochefoucauld was of the opinion that the great
and splendid deeds which are presented by statesmen as the outcome of
far-reaching plans are, as a rule, merely the result of inclination and
passion. This opinion concerns the lawyer’s task also, for the lawyer is
almost always trying to discover the moving, great, and unified plan of
each crime, and in order to sustain such a notion, prefers to perfect a
large and difficult theoretic construction, rather than to suppose that
there never was a plan, but that the whole crime sprang from accident,
inclination, and sudden impulse. The easiest victims in this respect are
the most logical and systematic lawyers; they merely presuppose, “I
would not have done this” and forget that the criminal was not at all so
logical and systematic, that he did not even work according to plan, but
simply followed straying impulses.

Moreover, a man may have determined his causal connections correctly,
yet have omitted many things, or finally have made a voluntary stop at
some point in his work, or may have carried the causal chain
unnecessarily far. This possibility has been made especially clear by J.
S. Mill, who showed that the immediately preceding condition is never
taken as cause. When we throw a stone into the water we call the cause
of its sinking its gravity, and not the fact that it has been thrown
into the water. So again, when a man falls down stairs and breaks his
foot, in the story of the fall the law of gravity is not mentioned; it
is taken for granted. When the matter is not so clear as in the
preceding examples, such facts are often the cause of important
misunderstandings. In the first case, where the immediately preceding
condition is _not_ mentioned, it is the inaccuracy of the expression
that is at fault, for we see that at least in scientific form, the
efficient cause is always the immediately preceding condition. So the
physician says, “The cause of death was congestion of the brain in
consequence of pressure resulting from extravasation of the blood.” And
he indicates only in the second line that the latter event resulted from
a blow on the head. In a similar manner the physicist says that the
board was sprung as a consequence of the uneven tension of the fibers;
he adds only later that this resulted from the warmth, which again is
the consequence of the direct sunlight that fell on the board. Now the
layman had in both cases omitted the proximate causes and would have
said in case 1, “The man died because he was beaten on the head,” and in
case 2, “The board was sprung because it lay in the sun.” We have,
therefore, to agree to the surprising fact that the layman skips more
intermediaries than the professional, but only because either he is
ignorant of or ignores the intervening conditions. Hence, he is also in
greater danger of making a mistake through omission.

Inasmuch as the question deals only with the scarcity of correct
knowledge of proximate causes, we shall set aside the fact that lawyers
themselves make such mistakes, which may be avoided only by careful
self-training and cautious attention to one’s own thoughts. But we have
at the same time to recognize how important the matter is when we
receive long series of inferences from witnesses who give expression
only to the first and the last deduction. If we do not then examine and
investigate the intermediary links and their justification, we deserve
to hear extravagant things, and what is worse, to make them, as we do,
the foundation of further inference. And once this is done no man can
discover where the mistake lies.

If again an inference is omitted as self-evident (cf. the case of
gravity, in falling down stairs) the source of error and the difficulty
lies in the fact that, on the one hand, not everything is as
self-evident as it seems; on the other, that two people rarely
understand the same thing by “self-evident,” so that what is
self-evident to one is far from so to the other. This difference becomes
especially clear when a lawyer examines professional people who can
imagine offhand what is in no sense self-evident to persons in other
walks of life. I might cite out of my own experience, that the physicist
Boltzmann, one of the foremost of living mathematicians, was told once
upon a time that his demonstrations were not sufficiently detailed to be
intelligible to his class of non-professionals, so that his hearers
could not follow him. As a result, he carefully counted the simplest
additions or interpolations on the blackboard, but at the same time
integrated them, etc., in his head, a thing which very few people on
earth can do. It was simply an off-hand matter for this genius to do
that which ungenial mortals can not.

This appears in a small way in every second criminal case. We have only
to substitute the professionals who appear as witnesses. Suppose, e.g.,
that a hunter is giving testimony. He will omit to state a group of
correlations; with regard to things which are involved in his trade, he
will reach his conclusion with a single jump. Then we reach the fatal
circle that the witness supposes that we can follow him and his
deductions, and are able to call his attention to any significant error,
while we, on the other hand, depend on his professional knowledge, and
agree to his leaping inferences and allow his conclusions to pass as
valid without knowing or being able to test them.

The notion of “specialist” or “professional” must be applied in such
instances not only to especial proficients in some particular trade, but
also to such people as have by accident merely, any form of specialized
knowledge, e.g., knowledge of the place in which some case had occurred.
People with such knowledge present many a thing as self-evident that can
not be so to people who do not possess the knowledge. Hence, peasants
who are asked about some road in their own well known country reply that
it is “straight ahead and impossible to miss” even when the road may
turn ten times, right and left.

Human estimates are reliable only when tested and reviewed at each
instant; complicated deductions are so only when deduction after
deduction has been tested, each in itself. Lawyers must, therefore,
inevitably follow the rule of requiring explication of each step in an
inference--such a requirement will at least narrow the limits of error.

The task would be much easier if we were fortunate enough to be able to
help ourselves with experiments. As Bernard[133] says, “There is an
absolute determinism in the existential conditions of natural phenomena,
as much in living as in non-living bodies. If the condition of any
phenomenon is recognized and fulfilled the phenomenon must occur
whenever the experimenter desires it.” But such determination can be
made by lawyers in rare cases only, and to-day the criminalist who can
test experimentally the generally asserted circumstance attested by
witnesses, accused, or experts, is a rarissima avis. In most cases we
have to depend on our experience, which frequently leaves us in
difficulties if we fail thoroughly to test it. Even the general law of
causation, that every effect has its cause, is formulated, as Hume
points out, only as a matter of habit. Hume’s important discovery that
we do not observe causality in the external world, demonstrates only the
difficulty of the interpretation of causality. The weakness of his
doctrine lies in his assertion that the knowledge of causality may be
obtained through habit because we perceive the connection of similars,
and the understanding, through habit, deduces the appearance of the one
from that of the other. These assertions of the great thinker are
certainly correct, but he did not know how to ground them. Hume teaches
the following doctrine:

The proposition that causes and effects are recognized, not by the
understanding but because of experience, will be readily granted if we
think of such things as we may recollect we were once altogether
unacquainted with. Suppose we give a man who has no knowledge of physics
two smooth marble plates. He will never discover that when laid one upon
the other they are hard to separate. Here it is easily observed that
such properties can be discovered only through experience. Nobody,
again, has the desire to deceive himself into believing that the force
of burning powder or the attraction of a magnet could have been
discovered a priori. But this truth does not seem to have the same
validity with regard to such processes as we observed almost since
breath began. With regard to them, it is supposed that the
understanding, by its own activity, without the help of experience can
discover causal connections. It is supposed that anybody who is suddenly
sent into the world will be able at once to deduce that a billiard ball
will pass its motion on to another by a push.

But that this is impossible to derive a priori is shown through the fact
that elasticity is not an externally recognizable quality, so that we
may indeed say that perhaps no effect can be recognized unless it is
experienced at least once. It can not be deduced a priori that contact
with water makes one wet, or that an object responds to gravity when
held in the hand, or that it is painful to keep a finger in the fire.
These facts have first to be experienced either by ourselves or some
other person. Every cause, Hume argues therefore, is different from its
effect and hence can not be found in the latter, and every discovery or
representation of it a priori must remain voluntary. All that the
understanding can do is to simplify the fundamental causes of natural
phenomena and to deduce the individual effects from a few general
sources, and that, indeed, only with the aid of analogy, experience, and
observation.

But then, what is meant by trusting the inference of another person, and
what in the other person’s narrative is free from inference? Such trust
means, to be convinced that the other has made the correct analogy, has
made the right use of experience, and has observed events without
prejudice. That is a great deal to presuppose, and whoever takes the
trouble of examining however simple and short a statement of a witness
with regard to analogy, experience, and observation, must finally
perceive with fear how blindly the witness has been trusted. Whoever
believes in knowledge a priori will have an easy job: “The man has
perceived it with his mind and reproduced it therewith; no objection may
be raised to the soundness of his understanding; ergo, everything may be
relied upon just as he has testified to it.” But he who believes in the
more uncomfortable, but at least more conscientious, skeptical doctrine,
has, at the minimum, some fair reason for believing himself able to
trust the intelligence of a witness. Yet he neither is spared the task
of testing the correctness of the witness’s analogy, experience and
observation.

Apriorism and skepticism define the great difference in the attitude
toward the witness. Both skeptic and apriorist have to test the desire
of the witness to lie, but only the skeptic needs to test the witness’s
ability to tell the truth and his possession of sufficient understanding
to reproduce correctly; to examine closely his innumerable inferences
from analogy, experience and observation. That only the skeptic can be
right everybody knows who has at all noticed how various people differ
in regard to analogies, how very different the experiences of a single
man are, both in their observation and interpretation. To distinguish
these differences clearly is the main task of our investigation.

There are two conditions to consider. One is the strict difference
between what is causally related and its accidental concomitants,--a
difference with regard to which experience is so often misleading, for
two phenomena may occur together at the same time without being causally
connected. When a man is ninety years old and has observed, every week
in his life, that in his part of the country there is invariably a
rainfall every Tuesday, this observation is richly and often tested, yet
nobody will get the notion of causally connecting Tuesday and rain--but
only because such connection would be regarded as generally foolish. If
the thing, however, may be attributed to coincidence with a little more
difficulty, then it becomes easier to suppose a causal connection; e.g.,
as when it rains on All-souls day, or at the new moon. If the accidental
nature of the connection is still less obvious, the observation becomes
a much-trusted and energetically defended meteorological law. This
happens in all possible fields, and not only our witnesses but we
ourselves often find it very difficult to distinguish between causation
and accident. The only useful rule to follow is to presuppose accident
wherever it is not indubitably and from the first excluded, and
carefully to examine the problem for whatever causal connection it may
possibly reveal. “Whatever is united in any perception must be united
according to a general rule, but a great deal more may be present
without having any causal relation.”

The second important condition was mentioned by Schopenhauer:[134] “As
soon as we have assigned causal force to any great influence and thereby
recognized that it is efficacious, then its intensification in the face
of any resistance according to the intensity of the resistance will
produce finally the appropriate effect. Whoever cannot be bribed by ten
dollars, but vacillates, will be bribed by twenty-five or fifty.”

This simple example may be generalized into a golden rule for lawyers
and requires them to test the effect of any force on the accused at an
earlier time in the latter’s life or in other cases,--i.e., the early
life of the latter can never be studied with sufficient care. This study
is of especial importance when the question is one of determining the
culpability of the accused with regard to a certain crime. We have then
to ask whether he had the motive in question, or whether the crime could
have been of interest to him. In this investigation the problem of the
necessary intensity of the influence in question need not, for the time,
be considered; only its presence needs to be determined. That it may
have disappeared without any demonstrable special reason is not
supposable, for inclinations, qualities, and passions are rarely lost;
they need not become obvious so long as opportunity and stimulus are
absent, and they may be in some degree suppressed, but they manifest
themselves as soon as--Schopenhauer’s twenty-five or fifty dollars
appear. The problem is most difficult when it requires the conversion of
certain related properties, e.g., when the problem is one of suspecting
a person of murderous inclination, and all that can be shown in his
past life is the maltreatment of animals. Or again, when cruelty has to
be shown and all that is established is great sensuality. Or when there
is no doubt about cruelty and the problem is one of supposing intense
avarice. These questions of conversion are not especially difficult, but
when it must be explained to what such qualities as very exquisite
egoism, declared envy, abnormal desire for honor, exaggerated conceit,
and great idleness may lead to, the problem requires great caution and
intensive study.


Section 25. (c) Skepticism.

Hume’s skepticism is directly connected with the subject of the
preceding chapter, but wants still a few words for itself. Though it is
not the lawyer’s problem to take an attitude with regard to
philosophical skepticism, his work becomes essentially easier through
the study of Hume’s doctrines.

According to these, all we know and infer, in so far as it is
unmathematical, results from experience, and our conviction of it and
our reasoning about it, means by which we pass the bounds of
sense-perception, depend on sensation, memory and inference from
causation. Our knowledge of the relation of cause and effect results
also from experience, and the doctrine, applied to the work of the
criminalist, may be formulated as follows: “Whatever we take as true is
not an intellectual deduction, but an empirical proposition.” In other
words, our presuppositions and inferential knowledge depend only upon
those innumerable repetitions of events from which we postulate that the
event recurred in the place in question. This sets us the problem of
determining whether the similar cases with which we compare the present
one really are similar and if they are known in sufficiently large
numbers to exclude everything else.

Consider a simple example. Suppose somebody who had traveled all through
Europe, but had never seen or heard of a negro, thought about the
pigmentation of human beings: neither all his thinking nor the
assistance of all possible scientific means can lead him to the
conclusion that there are also black people--that fact he can only
discover, not think out. If he depends only on experience, he must
conclude from the millions of examples he has observed that all human
beings are white. His mistake consists in the fact that the immense
number of people he has seen belong to the inhabitants of a single zone,
and that he has _failed to observe_ the inhabitants of other regions.

In our own cases we need no examples, for I know of no inference which
was not made in the following fashion: “The situation was so in a
hundred cases, it must be so in this case.” We rarely ask whether we
know enough examples, whether they were the correct ones, and whether
they were exhaustive. It will be no mistake to assert that we lawyers do
this more or less consciously on the supposition that we have an immense
collection of suggestive a priori inferences which the human
understanding has brought together for thousands of years, and hence
believe them to be indubitably certain. If we recognize that all these
presuppositions are compounds of experience, and that every experience
may finally show itself to be deceptive and false; if we recognize how
the actual progress of human knowledge consists in the addition of one
hundred new experiences to a thousand old ones, and if we recognize that
many of the new ones contradict the old ones: if we recognize the
consequence that there is no reason for the mathematical deduction from
the first to the hundred-and-first case, we shall make fewer mistakes
and do less harm. In this regard, Hume[135] is very illuminative.

According to Masaryk,[136] the fundamental doctrine of Humian skepticism
is as follows: “If I have had one and the same experience ever so often,
i.e., if I have seen the sun go up 100 times, I expect to see it go up
the 101st time the next day, but I have no guarantee, no certainty, no
evidence for this belief. Experience looks only to the past, not to the
future. How can I then discover the 101st sunrise in the first 100
sunrises? Experience reveals in me the habit to expect similar effects
from similar circumstances, but the intellect has no share in this
expectation.”

All the sciences based on experience are uncertain and without logical
foundation, even though their results, as a whole and in the mass, are
predictable. Only mathematics offers certainty and evidence. Therefore,
according to Hume, sciences based on experience are unsafe because the
recognition of causal connection depends on the facts of experience and
we can attain to certain knowledge of the facts of experience only on
the ground of the evident relation of cause and effect.

This view was first opposed by Reid, who tried to demonstrate that we
have a clear notion of necessary connection. He grants that this notion
is not directly attained either from external or internal experience,
but asserts its clearness and certainty in spite of that fact. Our mind
has the power to make its own concepts and one such concept is that of
necessary connection. Kant goes further and says that Hume failed to
recognize the full consequences of his own analysis, for the notion of
causality is not the only one which the understanding uses to represent
a priori the connection of objects. And hence, Kant defines
psychologically and logically a whole system of similar concepts. His
“Critique of Pure Reason” is intended historically and logically as the
refutation of Hume’s skepticism. It aims to show that not only
metaphysics and natural science have for their basis “synthetic
judgments a priori,” but that mathematics also rests on the same
foundation.

Be that as it may, our task is to discover the application of Hume’s
skepticism to our own problems in some clear example. Let us suppose
that there are a dozen instances of people who grew to be from 120 to
140 years old. These instances occur among countless millions of cases
in which such an age was not reached. If this small proportion is
recognized, it justifies the postulate that nobody on earth may attain
to 150 years. But now it is known that the Englishman Thomas Parr got to
be 152 years old, and his countryman Jenkins was shown, according to the
indubitable proofs of the Royal Society, to be 157 years old at least
(according to his portrait in a copper etching he was 169 years old).
Yet as this is the most that has been scientifically proved I am
justified in saying that nobody can grow to be 200 years old.
Nevertheless because there are people who have attained the age of 180
to 190 years, nobody would care to assert that it is absolutely
impossible to grow so old. The names and histories of these people are
recorded and their existence removes the great reason against this
possibility.

We have to deal, then, only with greater or lesser possibilities and
agree with the Humian idea that under similar conditions frequency of
occurrence implies repetition in the next instance. Contrary evidence
may be derived from several so-called phenomena of alternation. E. g.,
it is a well known fact that a number in the so-called Little Lottery,
which has not been drawn for a long time, is sure finally to be drawn.
If among 90 numbers the number 27 has not turned up for a long time its
appearance becomes more probable with every successive drawing. All the
so-called mathematical combinations of players depend on this
experience, which, generalized, might be held to read: the oftener any
event occurs (as the failure of the number 27 to be drawn) the less is
the probability of its recurrence (i.e., it becomes more probable that
27 will be drawn)--and this seems the contrary of Hume’s proposition.

It may at first be said that the example ought to be put in a different
form, i.e., as follows: If I know that a bag contains marbles, the color
of which I do not know, and if I draw them one by one and always find
the marble I have drawn to be white, the probability that the bag
contains only white ones grows with every new drawing that brings a
white marble to light. If the bag contains 100 marbles and 99 have been
drawn out, nobody would suppose that the last one would be red--for the
repetition of any event increases the probability of its occurrence.

This formulation proves nothing, inasmuch as a different example does
not contradict the one it is intended to substitute. The explanation is
rather as follows: In the first case there is involved the norm of equal
possibilities, and if we apply the Humian principle of increase of
probability through repetition, we find it effective in explaining the
example. We have known until now always that the numbers in the Little
Lottery are drawn equally, and with approximate regularity,--i.e., none
of the single numbers is drawn for a disproportionately long time. And
as this fact is invariable, we may suppose that every individual number
would appear with comparative regularity. But this explanation is in
accord with Hume’s doctrine.

The doctrine clarifies even astonishing statistical miracles. We know,
e.g., that every year there come together in a certain region a large
number of suicides, fractures of arms and legs, assaults, unaddressed
letters, etc. When, now, we discover that the number of suicides in a
certain semester is significantly less than the number in the same
semester of another year, we will postulate that in the next half-year a
comparatively larger number of suicides will take place so that the
number for the whole year will become approximately equal. Suppose we
say: “There were in the months of January, February, March, April, May
and June an average of x cases. Because we have observed the average to
happen six times, we conclude that it will not happen in the other
months but that instead, x+y cases will occur in those months, since
otherwise the average annual count will not be attained.” This would be
a mistaken abstraction of the principle of equal distribution from the
general Humian law, for the Humian law applied to this case indicates:
“For a long series of years we have observed that in this region there
occur annually so and so many suicides; we conclude therefore that in
this year also there will occur a similar number of suicides.”

The principle of equal distribution presents itself therefore as a
subordinate rule which must not be separated from the principal law. It
is, indeed, valid for the simplest events. When I resolve to walk in x
street, which I know well, and when I recall whether to-day is Sunday or
a week day, what time it is and what the weather is like, I know quite
accurately how the street will look with regard to the people that may
be met there, although a large number of these people have chosen the
time accidentally and might as well have passed through another street.
If, for once, there were more people in the street, I should immediately
ask myself what unusual event had taken place.

One of my cousins who had a good deal of free time to dispose of, spent
it for several months, with the assistance of his comrade, in counting
the number of horses that passed daily, in the course of two hours, by a
café they frequented. The conscientious and controlled count indicated
that every day there came one bay horse to every four. If then, on any
given day, an incommensurably large number of brown, black, and tawny
horses came in the course of the first hour, the counters were forced to
infer that in the next 60 minutes horses of a different color must come
and that a greater number of bays must appear in order to restore the
disturbed equilibrium. Such an inference is not contradictory to the
Humian proposition. At the end of a series of examinations the counters
were compelled to say, “Through so many days we have counted one bay to
every four horses; we must therefore suppose that a similar relationship
will be maintained the next day.”

So, the lawyer, too, must suppose, although we lawyers have nothing to
do with figures, that he knows nothing a priori, and must construct his
inferences entirely from experience. And hence we must agree that our
premises for such inferences are uncertain, and often subject to
revision, and often likely, in their application to new facts, to lead
to serious mistakes, particularly if the number of experiences from
which the next moment is deduced, are too few; or if an unknown, but
very important condition is omitted.

These facts must carefully be kept in mind with reference to the
testimony of experts. Without showing ourselves suspicious, or desirous
of confusing the professional in his own work, we must consider that the
progress of knowledge consists in the collection of instances, and
anything that might have been normal in 100 cases, need not in any sense
be so when 1000 cases are in question. Yesterday the norm may have been
subject to no exception; to-day exceptions are noted; and to-morrow the
exception has become the rule.

Hence, rules which have no exceptions grow progressively rarer, and
wherever a single exception is discovered the rule can no longer be held
as normative. Thus, before New Holland was discovered, all swans were
supposed to be white, all mammals incapable of laying eggs; now we know
that there are black swans and that the duck-bill lays eggs. Who would
have dared to assert before the discovery of the X-ray that light can
penetrate wood, and who, especially, has dared to make generalizations
with regard to the great inventions of our time which were not
afterwards contradicted by the facts? It may be that the time is not too
far away in which great, tenable and unexceptionable principles may be
posited, but the present tendency is to beware of generalizations, even
so far as to regard it a sign of scientific insight when the composition
of generally valid propositions is made with great caution. In this
regard the great physicians of our time are excellent examples. They
hold: “whether the phenomenon A is caused by B we do not know, but
nobody has ever yet seen a case of A in which the precedence of B could
not be demonstrated.” Our experts should take the same attitude in most
cases. It might be more uncomfortable for us, but certainly will be
safer; for if they do not take that attitude we are in duty bound to
presuppose in our conclusions that they have taken it. Only in this
wise, by protecting ourselves against apparently exceptionless general
rules, can our work be safely carried on.

This becomes especially our duty where, believing ourselves to have
discovered some generally valid rule, we are compelled to draw
conclusions without the assistance of experts. How often have we
depended upon our understanding and our “correct” a priori method of
inference, where that was only experience,--and such poor experience! We
lawyers have not yet brought our science so far as to be able to make
use of the experience of our comrades with material they have reviewed
and defined in writing. We have bothered a great deal about the
exposition of some legal difficulty, the definition of some judicial
concept, but we have received little instruction or tradition concerning
mankind and its passions. Hence, each one has to depend on his own
experience, and that is supposed to be considerable if it has a score
of years to its back, and is somewhat supplemented by the experience, of
others. In this regard there are no indubitable rules; everybody must
tell himself, “I have perhaps never experienced this fact, but it may be
that a thousand other people have seen it, and seen it in a thousand
different ways. How then, and whence, my right to exclude every
exception?”

We must never forget that every rule is shattered whenever any single
element of the situation is unknown, and that happens very easily and
frequently. Suppose that I did not have full knowledge of the nature of
water, and walked on terra firma to the edge of some quiet, calm pool.
When now I presume: water has a body, it has a definite density, it has
consistency, weight, etc., I will also presume that I may go on walking
over its surface just as over the surface of the earth,--and that,
simply because I am ignorant of its fluidity and its specific gravity.
Liebman[137] summarizes the situation as follows. The causal nexus, the
existential and objective relation between lightning and thunder, the
firing of powder and the explosion, are altogether different from the
logical nexus, i.e. the mere conceptual connection between antecedent
and consequent in deduction. This constitutes the well known kernel of
Humian skepticism. We must keep in mind clearly that we never can know
with certainty whether we are in possession of all the determining
factors of a phenomenon, and hence we must adhere to the only
unexceptionable rule: _Be careful about making rules that admit of no
exceptions_. There is still another objection to discuss, i.e. the
mathematical exception to Humian skepticism. It might be held that
inasmuch as the science of justice is closely related in many ways to
mathematics, it may permit of propositions a priori. Leibnitz already
had said, “The mathematicians count with numbers, the lawyers with
ideas,--fundamentally both do the same thing.” If the relationship were
really so close, general skepticism about phenomenal sciences could not
be applied to the legal disciplines. But we nowadays deal not with
concepts merely, and in spite of all obstruction, Leibnitz’s time has
passed and the realities of our profession, indeed its most important
object, the human being itself, constitute an integrating part of our
studies. And the question may be still further raised whether
mathematics is really so exempt from skepticism. The work of Gauss,
Lobatschewski, Bolyai, Lambert, would make the answer negative.

Let us, for once, consider what significance mathematical postulates
have. When Pythagoras discovered his proposition in such a way that he
first drew a right-angled triangle and then built a square on each of
the sides, and finally measured the area of each and compared them, he
must at first have got the notion that that also might be merely
accidental. If he had made the construction 10 or 100 times with various
triangles and these had resulted always identically, only then might he
have been justified in saying that he had apparently discovered a
theorem. But then his process was just as thoroughly experiential as
that of a scientist who says that a bird has never yet been observed to
give birth to living young, and that hence all birds lay eggs.

But Pythagoras did not proceed in this experiential manner in the
discovery of his theorem. He constructed and he counted, and when he did
that he acted on postulates: “If this is a right-angled triangle and if
that be a square, so,”--and this is just what is done in every science.
The general propositions are, “If the relations remain the same as
formerly the moon must rise to-morrow at such and such a time.” “If this
step in a deduction is not false, if it is well grounded at this point,
if it really refers to x, it follows....” In his procedures the
criminalist does exactly the same thing. What he must be skeptical about
is the postulates from which he starts.


Section 26. (d) The Empirical Method in the Study of Cases.

Properly to bound our discussion of Humian skepticism, a few words have
to be said concerning the empirical method of the sciences. We will call
those laws purely empirical which, in the study of nature, yield
regularities that are demonstrated by observation and experiment, but
upon which little or no reliance is placed with regard to cases which
differ considerably from the observed. The latter is done because no
reason is seen for the existence of such laws. The empirical rule is,
therefore, no final law, but is capable of explaining, especially when
true, e.g., the succession of a certain condition of weather from
certain meteorological signs, the improvement of species through
crossing, the fact that some alloys are harder than their components,
and so on. Or, to choose examples from our own field, jurisprudence may
assert as empirical law that a murderer is a criminal who has gone
unpunished for his earlier crimes; that all gamblers show such
significant resemblances; that the criminal who has soiled his hands
with blood in some violent crime was accustomed to wipe them on the
underside of a table; that the slyest person generally perpetrates some
gross stupidity after committing a serious crime, and so renders
discovery simpler; that lust and cruelty have a certain relation; that
superstition plays a great rôle in crime, etc.

It is of exceeding importance to establish such purely empiric laws in
our science, which has done little with such matters because, owing to
scanty research into most of them, we need these laws. We know
approximately that this and that have come to light so and so often, but
we have not reduced to order and studied systematically the cases before
us, and we dare not call this knowledge natural law because we have
subjected it to no inductive procedure. “The reference of any fact
discovered by experience to general laws or rules we call induction. It
embraces both observation and deduction.” Again, it may be defined as
“the generalization or universalization of our experiences; and
inference that a phenomenon occurring x times will invariably occur when
the essential circumstances remain identical. The earliest investigators
started with the simplest inductions,--that fire burns, that water flows
downward,--so that new, simple truths were continually discovered. This
is the type of scientific induction and it requires further, the
addition of certainty and accuracy.”[138]

The foregoing might have been written expressly for us lawyers, but we
have to bear in mind that we have not proceeded in our own
generalizations beyond “fire burns, water flows downward.” And such
propositions we have only derived from other disciplines. Those derived
from our own are very few indeed, and to get more we have very far to
go. Moreover, the laws of experience are in no way so certain as they
are supposed to be, even when mathematically conceived. The empirical
law is established that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is
equal to two right angles. And yet nobody, ever since the science of
surveying has been invented, has succeeded in discovering 180 degrees in
any triangle. Now then, when even such things, supposed ever since our
youth to be valid, are not at all true, or true theoretically only, how
much more careful must we be in making inferences from much less certain
rules, even though we have succeeded in using them before in many
analogous cases? The activity of a criminalist is of far too short
duration to permit him to experience any more than a very small portion
of the possibilities of life, and suggestions from foreign sources are
very rare. The situation is different in other disciplines. “Our
experience,” says James Sully,[139] “enables us to express a number of
additional convictions. We can predict political changes and scientific
developments, and can conceive of the geographical conditions at the
north pole.” Other disciplines are justified to assert such additional
propositions, but is ours? A man may have dealt for years with thieves
and swindlers, but is he justified in deducing from the inductions made
in his experience, the situation of the first murderer he deals with? Is
he right in translating things learned by dealing with educated people
to cases where only peasants appear? In all these cases what is needed
in making deductions is great caution and continual reminder to be very
careful, for our work here still lacks the proper material. In addition
we have to bear in mind that induction is intimately related to analogy.
According to Lipps[140] the ground of one is the ground of the other;
they both rest on the same foundation. “If I am still in doubt whether
the fact on which a moment ago I depended as the sufficient condition
for a judgment may still be so regarded, the induction is uncertain. It
is unjustified when I take for sufficiently valid something that as a
matter of fact ought not to be so taken.” If we bear in mind how much we
are warned against the use of analogy, how it is expressly excluded in
the application of certain criminal laws, and how dangerous the use of
every analogy is, we must be convinced that the use for our cases of
both induction and analogy, is always menace. We have at the same time
to bear in mind how much use we actually make of both; even our general
rules--e.g., concerning false testimony,--bias, revertibility, special
inclinations, etc.--and our doctrines concerning the composition and
indirection of testimony, even our rules concerning the value of
witnesses and confessions, all these depend upon induction and analogy.
We pass by their use in every trial from case to case. A means so
frequently and universally used must, however, be altogether reliable,
or be handled with the greatest care. As it is not the first it must be
handled in the second way.

We have yet to indicate the various ways in which induction may be used.
Fick has already called attention to the astounding question concluding
Mill’s system of logic: Why, in many cases, is a single example
sufficient to complete induction, while in other cases myriads of
unanimous instances admitting of no single known or suspected exception,
make only a small step toward the establishment of a generally valid
judgment?

This question is of enormous significance in criminal cases because it
is not easy to determine in any particular trial whether we have to deal
with a situation of the first sort where a single example is evidential,
or a situation of the second sort where a great many examples fail to be
evidential. On this difficulty great mistakes depend, particularly
mistakes of substitution of the first for the second. We are satisfied
in such cases with a few examples and suppose ourselves to have proved
the case although nothing whatever has been established.

We must see first of all if it is of any use to refer the difficulty of
the matter to the form in which the question is put, and to say: The
difficulty results from the question itself. If it be asked, “Are any of
the thousand marbles in the bag white marbles?” the question is
determined by the first handful, if the latter brings to light a single
white marble. If, however, the problem is phrased so: Does the bag
contain white marbles _only_? then, although 999 marbles might already
have been drawn from the receptacle, it can not be determined that the
last marble of the 1000 is white. In the same way, if people assert that
the form of the question determines the answer, it does not follow that
the form of the question is itself determined or distinguished inasmuch
as the object belongs to the first or the second of the above named
categories.

A safe method of distinction consists in calling the first form of the
question positive and the second negative. The positive refers to a
single unit; the negative to a boundless unit. If then I ask: Are there
any white marbles whatever in the bag? the answer is rendered
affirmative by the discovery of a single white marble. But if the
question is phrased: Are there _only_ white marbles in the bag? merely
its form is positive but its intent is negative. To conform the manner
of the question to its intent, it would be necessary to ask: Are there
no other colors than white among the marbles in the bag? And inasmuch as
the negative under given circumstances is in many ways boundless, the
question admits of no answer until the last marble has been brought to
light. If the total number of marbles is unlimited the question can
receive no complete inductive answer in mathematical form; it can be
solved only approximately. So again, if one asks: Are there any purely
blue birds? the answer is affirmative as soon as a single completely
blue bird is brought to light. But if the question is: Do not also
striped birds exist? no answer is possible until the very last bird on
earth is exhibited. In that way only could the possibility be excluded
that not one of the terrestrial fowls is striped. As a matter of fact we
are satisfied with a much less complete induction. So we say: Almost the
whole earth has been covered by naturalists and not one of them reports
having observed a striped bird; hence there would be none such even in
the unexplored parts of the earth. This is an inductive inference and
its justification is quite another question.

The above mentioned distinction may be made still clearer if instead of
looking back to the form of the question, we study only the answer. We
have then to say that positive statements are justified by the existence
of a single instance, negative assertions only by the complete
enumeration of all possible instances and never at all if the instances
be boundless. That the negative proof always requires a series of
demonstrations is well known; the one thing which may be firmly believed
is the fact that the problem, whether a single example is sufficient, or
a million are insufficient, is only a form of the problem of affirmative
and negative assertions.

So then, if I ask: Has A ever stolen anything? it is enough to record
one judgment against him, or to bring one witness on the matter in order
to establish that A committed theft at least once in his life. If,
however, it is to be proved that the man has never committed a theft,
his whole life must be reviewed point by point, and it must be shown
that at no instant of it did he commit larceny. In such cases we are
content with much less. We say first of all: We will not inquire whether
the man has never stolen. We will see merely whether he was never
punished for theft. But here, too, we must beware and not commit
ourselves to inquiring of all the authorities in the world, but only of
a single authority, who, we assume, ought to know whether A was punished
or not. If we go still further, we say that inasmuch as we have not
heard from any authorities that the man was ever punished for stealing,
we suppose that the man was never punished on that ground; and inasmuch
as we have not examined anybody who had seen A steal, we preferably
suppose that he has never stolen. This is what we call satisfactory
evidence, and with the poor means at our disposal it must suffice.

In most cases we have to deal with mixed evidence, and frequently it has
become habitual to change the problem to be solved according to our
convenience, or at least to set aside some one thing. Suppose that the
issue deals with a discovered, well-retained footprint of a man. We then
suspect somebody and compare the sole of his shoe with the impression.
They fit in length and width, in the number of nails and in all the
other possible indices, and we therefore assert: It is the footprint of
the suspect, for “whose footprint?” is the problem we are troubling
ourselves to solve. In truth we have only shown that the particular
relations, in the matter of length, breadth, number of nails, etc.,
agree, and hence we regard the positive part of the evidence as
sufficient and neglect the whole troublesome negative part, which might
establish the fact that at the time and in the region in question,
nobody was or could be whose foot could accurately fit that particular
footprint. Therefore we have not proved but have only calculated the
probability that at the time there might possibly not have been another
person with a shoe of similar length, breadth and number of nails. The
probability becomes naturally less as fewer details come to hand. The
difficulty lies in finding where such probability, which stands for at
least an assumption, must no longer be considered. Suppose, now, that
neither shoe-nails nor patches, nor other clear clews can be proved and
only length and width agree. If the agreement of the clews were really a
substantiation of the proof by evidence, it would have to suffice as
positive evidence; but as has been explained, the thing proved is not
the point at issue, but another point.

The negative portion of the evidence will naturally be developed with
less accuracy. The proof is limited to the assertion that such shoes as
were indicated in the evidence were very rarely or never worn in that
region, also that no native could have been present, that the form of
the nails allowed inference of somebody from foreign regions, one of
which might be the home of the suspect, etc. Such an examination shows
that what we call evidence is only probability or possibility.

Another form which seems to contradict the assertion that negative
propositions are infinite is positive evidence in the shape of negation.
If we give an expert a stain to examine and ask him whether it is a
blood stain, and he tells us: “It is not a blood stain,” then this
single scientifically established assertion proves that we do not have
to deal with blood, and hence “negative” proof seems brought in a single
instance. But as a matter of fact we deal here with an actually positive
proof, for the expert has given us the deduced proposition, not the
essential assertion. He has found the stain to be a rust stain or a
tobacco stain, and hence he may assert and deduce that it is not blood.
Even were he a skeptic, he would say, “We have not yet seen the blood of
a mammal in which the characteristic signs for recognition were not
present, and we have never yet recognized a body without the blood
pertaining to it, and hence we may say, we are not dealing with blood
because all of us found the characteristics of the stain to be what we
have been until now accustomed to call the characteristics of rust
stain.”

We have still to touch upon the difference between logical connection
and experience. If I say, “This mineral tastes salty, therefore it is
soluble in water,” the inference depends upon logical relationships, for
my intent is: “If I perceive a salty taste, it has to be brought to the
nerves of taste, which can be done only by the combination of the
mineral with the saliva, hence by its solution in the saliva. But if it
is soluble in saliva it must also be soluble in water.” If I say on the
other hand, “This mineral tastes salty, has a hardness of 2, a specific
gravity of 2.2, and consequently it crystallizes hexagonally,”--this
statement depends on experience, for what I really say is: “I know first
of all, that a mineral which has the qualities mentioned must be rock
salt; for at the least, we know of no mineral which has these qualities
and is not rock salt, and which in the second place crystallizes
hexagonally as rock salt does,--a way which, at least, we find rock salt
never to have missed.” If we examine the matter still more closely we
become convinced that in the first case only the formal and logical
side, in the second the experiential aspect predominates. The premises
of both cases are purely matters of experience and the formal question
of inference is a matter of logic. Only,--at one time the first
question, at another the second comes more obviously into the
foreground. Although this matter appears self-evident it is not
indifferent. It is well known that whenever we are powerfully influenced
by one thing, things of little intensity are either not experienced at
all or only to a very small degree, and are therefore neglected. This is
a fact which may indeed be shown mathematically, for infinity plus one
equals infinity. When, therefore, we undergo great pain or great joy,
any accompanying insignificant pain or any pleasure will be barely felt,
just as the horses who drag a very heavy wagon will not notice whether
the driver walking beside them adds his coat to the load (cf. Weber’s
law). Hence, when we criminalists study a difficult case with regard to
the question of proof, there are two things to do in order to test the
premises for correctness according to the standards of our other
experiences, and to draw logically correct inferences from these
premises. If it happens that there are especial difficulties in one
direction while by some chance those in the other are easily removed, it
becomes surprising how often the latter are entirely ignored. And hence,
the adjustment of inferences is naturally false even when the great
difficulties of the first type are removed correctly. Therefore, if the
establishment of a fact costs a good deal of pains and means the
expenditure of much time, the business of logical connection appears so
comparatively easy that it is made swiftly and--wrongly.

Mistakes become, at least according to my experience, still more
frequent when the difficulty is logical and not empirical. As a matter
of honesty, let me say that we criminalists are not trained logicians,
however necessary it is that we shall be such, and most of us are
satisfied with the barren remainder of what we learned long ago in the
Gymnasium and have since forgotten. The difficulties which occur in the
more important logical tasks are intelligible when compared with the
lesser difficulties; and when one of these larger problems is by good
fortune rightly solved, the effort and the work required by the solution
make it easy to forget asking whether the premises are correct; they are
assumed as self-evident. Hence, in the review of the basis for judgment,
it is often discovered that the logical task has been performed with
care, with the expenditure of much time, etc., only to be based upon
some apparently unessential presupposition which contradicts all
experience and is hence materially incorrect. Consequence,--the
inference is wrong since the premise was wrong, and the whole work has
gone for nothing. Such occurrences convince one that no judge would have
been guilty of them if the few difficulties concerning the fact in
question were not, because treated in the light of the effort required
by the logical work, quite neglected. Nor does this occur unconsciously,
or as a consequence of a sort of lapse of memory concerning the meaning
or the importance of an empirical problem, it also happens at least half
consciously by way of a characteristic psychic process which everybody
may identify in his own experience: i.e., the idea occurs, in some
degree subconsciously, that the overgreatness of the work done in one
direction ought to be corrected by the inadequacy of the work done in
the other direction. And this happens in lawyer’s work often, and being
frequently justifiable, becomes habitual. If I, for example, have
examined ten unanimous witnesses concerning the same event and have
completely demonstrated the status of the case, I ought, in examining
the last two witnesses, who are perhaps no longer needed but have been
summoned and appear, certainly to proceed in a rapid manner. This
justifiable neglect is then half unconsciously transferred to other
procedures where there is possible no equalization of the hypertrophy of
work in one direction with the dwarfing of it in another, and where the
mistake causes the result to be wrong. However I may have been bothered
by the multiplication of ten groups of factors and whatever accuracy I
may have applied to a task can not permit me to relax my attention in
the addition of the individual results. If I do I am likely to commit an
error and the error renders all the previous labor worthless.

Indeed, it may be asserted that all logic is futile where the premises
or a single premise may be wrong. I expect, in truth, that the
procedures here described will be doubted to be even possible, but
doubters are recommended to examine a few cases for the presence of this
sort of thing.


Section 27. (e) Analogy.

Analogy is the least negligible of all methods of induction because it
rests at bottom on the postulate that one thing which has a number of
qualities in common with another will agree with that other in one or
more _additional_ qualities. In cases of analogy, identity is never
asserted; indeed, it is excluded, while a certain parallelism and
agreement in specific points are assumed, i.e., introduced tacitly as a
mutatis mutandis. Consider Lipps’s examples. He calls analogy the
transfer of judgment or the transition from similar to similar, and he
adds that the value of such a process is very variable. If I have
perceived x times that flowers of a certain color have perfume, I am
inclined to expect perfume from flowers of the same color in x+1 cases.
If I have observed x times that clouds of a certain structure are
followed by rain I shall expect rain in the x+1st case. The first
analogy is worthless because there is no relation between color and
perfume; the second is of great value because such a relation does exist
between rain and clouds.

Simply stated, the difference between these two examples does not
consist in the existence of a relationship in the one case and the
absence of a relationship in the other; it consists in the fact that in
the case of the flowers the relationship occurs now and then but is not
permanently knowable. It is possible that there is a natural law
controlling the relation between color and odor, and if that law were
known there would be no question of accident or of analogy, but of law.
Our ignorance of such a law, in spite of the multiplicity of instances,
lies in the fact that we are concerned only with the converse
relationships and not with the common cause of perfume and color.
Suppose I see on the street a large number of people with winter
over-coats and a large number of people with skates in their hands, I
would hardly ask whether the coats are conditioned or brought out by the
skates or the skates by the coats. If I do not conclude that the cold
weather is the condition both of the need of over-coats and the utility
of skates, I will suppose that there is some unintelligible reflexive
relation between over-coats and skates. If I observe that on a certain
day every week there regularly appear many well-dressed people and no
workingmen on the street, if I am ignorant of the fact that Sunday is
the cause of the appearance of the one and the disappearance of the
other, I shall try in vain to find out how it happens that the working
people are crowded out by the well-dressed ones or conversely.

The danger of analogy lies in the fact that we prefer naturally to
depend on something already known, and that the preference is the
greater in proportion to our feeling of the strangeness and ominousness
of the particular intellectual or natural regions in which we find
ourselves. I have already once demonstrated[141] how disquieting it is
to notice, during the examination of the jury, that the jurymen who ask
questions try to find some relation to their own trades even though this
requires great effort, and seek to bring the case they are asking about
under the light of their particular profession. So, however irrelevant
the statement of a witness may be, the merchant juryman will use it to
explain Saldo-Conti, the carpenter juryman to explain carpentry, the
agriculturist to notice the farming of cattle, and then having set the
problem in his own field construct the most daring analogies, for use in
determining the guilt of the accused. And we lawyers are no better. The
more difficult and newer a case is the more are we inclined to seek
analogies. We want supports, for we do not find firm natural laws, and
in our fear we reach out after analogies, not of course in law, because
that is not permitted, but certainly in matters of fact. Witness X has
given difficult testimony in a certain case. We seek an analogy in
witness Y of an older case, and we observe the present issue thus
analogically, without the least justification. We have never yet seen
drops of blood on colored carpets, yet we believe in applying our
experience of blood stains on clothes and boots analogically. We have
before us a perfectly novel deed rising from perverted sexual
impulse--and we presuppose that the accused is to be treated altogether
analogously to another in a different case, although indeed the whole
event was different.

Moreover the procedure, where the analogy is justified, is complex.
“With insight,” says Trendelenburg, “did the ancients regard analogy as
important. The power of analogy lies in the construction and induction
of a general term which binds the subconcept with regard to which a
conclusion is desired, together with the individual object which is
compared with the first, and which is to appear as a mediating concept
but can not. This new general term is not, however, the highest concept
among the three termini of the conclusion; it is the middle one and is
nothing else than the terminus medius of the first figure.” This clear
statement shows not only how circumstantial every conclusion from
analogy is, but also how little it achieves. There is hardly any doubt
of the well-known fact that science has much to thank analogy for, since
analogy is the simplest and easiest means for progress in thought. If
anything is established in any one direction but progress is desired in
another, then the attempt is made to adapt what is known to the
proximate unknown and to draw the possible inference by analogy.
Thousands upon thousands of analogies have been attempted and have
failed,--but no matter; one successful one became a hypothesis and
finally an important natural law. In our work, however, the case is
altogether different, for we are not concerned with the construction of
hypotheses, we are concerned with the discovering of truth, or with the
recognition that it cannot be discovered.

The only place where our problems permit of the use of analogy is in the
making of so-called constructions, i.e., when we aim to clarify or to
begin the explanation of a case which is at present unintelligible, by
making some assumption. The construction then proceeds in analogy to
some already well known earlier case. We say: “Suppose the case to have
been so and so,” and then we begin to test the assumption by applying it
to the material before us, eliminating and constructing progressively
until we get a consistent result. There is no doubt that success is
frequently attained in this way and that it is often the only way in
which a work may be begun. At the same time, it must be recognized how
dangerous this is, for in the eagerness of the work it is easy to forget
that so far, one is working only according to analogy by means of an
assumption still to be proved. This assumption is in such cases
suddenly considered as something already proved and is counted as such
with the consequence that the result must be false. If you add the
variability in value of analogy, a variability not often immediately
recognized, the case becomes still worse. We have never been on the
moon, have therefore apparently no right to judge the conditions
there--and still we know--only by way of analogy--that if we jumped into
the air there we should fall back to the ground. But still further: we
conclude again, by analogy, that there are intelligent beings on Mars;
if, however, we were to say how these people might look, whether like us
or like cubes or like threads, whether they are as large as bees or ten
elephants, we should have to give up because we have not the slightest
basis for analogy.

In the last analysis, analogy depends upon the recurrence of similar
conditions. Therefore we tacitly assume when we judge by analogy that
the similarity of conditions contains an equivalence of ultimately valid
circumstance. The certainty of analogy is as great as the certainty of
this postulate, and its right as great as the right of this postulate.

If, then, the postulate is little certain, we have gained nothing and
reach out into the dark; if its certainty is great we no longer have an
analogy, we have a natural law. Hence, Whately uses the term analogy as
an expression for the similarity of relation, and in this regard the use
of analogy for our real work has no special significance. Concerning
so-called false analogies and their importance cf. J. Schiel’s Die
Methode der induktiven Forschung (Braunschweig 1865]).


Section 28. (f) Probability.

Inasmuch as the work of the criminal judge depends upon the proof of
evidence, it is conceivable that the thing for him most important is
that which has evidential character or force.[142] A sufficient
definition of evidence or proof does not exist because no bounds have
been set to the meaning of “Proved.” All disciplines furnish examples of
the fact that things for a long time had probable validity, later
indubitable validity; that again some things were considered proved and
were later shown to be incorrect, and that many things at one time
wobbly are in various places, and even among particular persons,
supposed to be at the limits of probability and proof. Especially
remarkable is the fact that the concept of _the proved_ is very various
in various sciences, and it would be absorbing to establish the
difference between what is called proved and what only probable in a
number of given examples by the mathematician, the physicist, the
chemist, the physician, the naturalist, the philologist, the historian,
the philosopher, the lawyer, the theologian, etc. But this is no task
for us and nobody is called upon to determine who knows what “Proved”
means. It is enough to observe that the differences are great and to
understand why we criminalists have such various answers to the
question: Is this proved or only probable? The varieties may be easily
divided into groups according to the mathematical, philosophic,
historical or naturalistic inclinations of the answerer. Indeed, if the
individual is known, what he means by “proved” can be determined
beforehand. Only those minds that have no especial information remain
confused in this regard, both to others, and to themselves.

Sharply to define the notion of “proved” would require at least to
establish its relation to usage and to say: What we desire leads us to
an _assumption_, what is possible gives us _probability_, what appears
certain, we call _proved_. In this regard the second is always, in some
degree, the standard for the first (desires, e.g., cause us to act; one
becomes predominant and is fixed as an assumption which later on becomes
clothed with a certain amount of reliability by means of this fixation).

The first two fixations, the assumption and the probability, have in
contrast to their position among other sciences only a heuristic
interest to us criminalists. Even assumptions, when they become
hypotheses, have in various disciplines a various value, and the
greatest lucidity and the best work occur mainly in the quarrel about an
acutely constructed hypothesis.

_Probability_ has a similar position in the sciences. The scholar who
has discovered a new thought, a new order, explanation or solution,
etc., will find it indifferent whether he has made it only highly
probable or certain. He is concerned only with the idea, and a scholar
who is dealing with the idea for its own sake will perhaps prefer to
bring it to a great probability rather than to indubitable certainty,
for where conclusive proof is presented there is no longer much interest
in further research, while probability permits and requires further
study. But our aim is certainty and proof only, and even a high degree
of probability is no better than untruth and can not count. In passing
judgment and for the purpose of judgment a high degree of probability
can have only corroborative weight, and then it is probability only when
taken in itself, and proof when taken with regard to the thing it
corroborates. If, for example, it is most probable that X was recognized
at the place of a crime, and if at the same time his evidence of alibi
has failed, his footmarks are corroborative; so are the stolen goods
which have been seen in his possession, and something he had lost at the
place of the crime which is recognized as his property, etc. In short,
when all these indices are in themselves established only as highly
probable, they give under certain circumstances, when taken together,
complete certainty, because the coincidence of so many high
probabilities must be declared impossible if X were not the criminal.

In all other cases, as we have already pointed out, _assumption_ and
probability have only a heuristic value for us lawyers. With the
assumption, we must of course count; many cases can not be begun without
the assistance of assumption. Every only half-confused case, the process
of which is unknown, requires first of all and as early as possible the
application of some assumption to its material. As soon as the account
is inconsistent the assumption must be abandoned and a fresh one and yet
again a fresh one assumed, until finally one holds its own and may be
established as probable. It then remains the center of operation, until
it becomes of itself a proof or, as we have explained, until so many
high probabilities in various directions have been gathered, that, taken
in their order, they serve evidentially. A very high degree of
probability is sufficient in making complaints; but sentencing requires
“certainty,” and in most cases the struggle between the prosecution and
the defense, and the doubt of the judge, turns upon the question of
probability as against proof.[143]

That probability is in this way and in a number of relations, of great
value to the criminalist can not appear doubtful. Mittermaier defines
its significance briefly: “Probability naturally can never lead to
sentence. It is, however, important as a guide for the conduct of the
examiner, as authorizing him to take certain measures; it shows how to
attach certain legal processes in various directions.”

Suppose that we review the history of the development of the theory of
probability. The first to have attempted a sharp distinction between
demonstrable and probable knowledge was Locke. Leibnitz was the first to
recognize the importance of the theory of probability for inductive
logic. He was succeeded by the mathematician Bernoulli and the
revolutionist Condorcet. The theory in its modern form was studied by
Laplace, Quetelet, Herschel, von Kirchmann, J. von Kries, Venn, Cournot,
Fick, von Bortkiewicz, etc. The concept that is called probability
varies with different authorities. Locke[144] divides all fundamentals
into demonstrative and probable. According to this classification it is
probable that “all men are mortal,” and that “the sun will rise
to-morrow.” But to be consistent with ordinary speech the fundamentals
must be classified as evidence, certainties, and probabilities. By
certainties I understand such fundamentals as are supported by
experience and leave no room for doubt or consideration--everything
else, especially as it permits of further proof, is more or less
probable.

Laplace[145] spoke move definitely--“Probability depends in part on our
ignorance, in part on our knowledge....

“The theory of probability consists in the reduction of doubts of the
same class of a definite number of equally possible cases in such a way
that we are equally undetermined with regard to their existence, and it
further consists in the determination of the number of those cases which
are favorable to the result the probability of which is sought. The
relation of this number to the number of all possible cases is the
measure of the probability. It is therefore a fraction the numerator of
which is derived from the number of cases favorable to the result and
the denominator from the number of all possible cases.” Laplace,
therefore, with J. S. Mill, takes probability to be a low degree of
certainty, while Venn[146] gives it an objective support like truth. The
last view has a great deal of plausibility inasmuch as there is
considerable doubt whether an appearance is to be taken as certain or as
only probable. If this question is explained, the assertor of certainty
has assumed some objective foundation which is indubitable at least
subjectively. Fick represents the establishment of probability as a
fraction as follows: “The probability of an incompletely expressed
hypothetical judgment is a real fraction proved as a part of the whole
universe of conditions upon which the realization of the required result
necessarily depends.

“According to this it is hardly proper to speak of the probability of
any result. Every individual event is either absolutely necessary or
impossible. The probability is a quality which can pertain only to a
hypothetical judgment.”[147]

That it is improper to speak of the probability of a result admits of no
doubt, nor will anybody assert that the circumstance of to-morrow’s rain
is in itself probable or improbable--the form of expression is only a
matter of usage. It is, however, necessary to distinguish between
conditioned and unconditioned probability. If I to-day consider the
conditions which are attached to the ensuing change of weather, if I
study the temperature, the barometer, the cloud formation, the amount of
sunlight, etc., as conditions which are related to to-morrow’s weather
as its forerunners, then I must say that to-morrow’s rain is probable to
such or such a degree. And the correctness of my statement depends upon
whether I know the conditions under which rain must appear, more or less
accurately and completely, and whether I relate those conditions
properly. With regard to unconditioned probabilities which have nothing
to do with the conditions of to-day’s weather as affecting to-morrow’s,
but are simply observations statistically made concerning the number of
rainy days, the case is quite different. The distinction between these
two cases is of importance to the criminalist because the substitution
of one for the other, or the confusion of one with the other, will cause
him to confuse and falsely to interpret the probability before him.
Suppose, e.g., that a murder has happened in Vienna, and suppose that I
declare immediately after the crime and in full knowledge of the facts,
that according to the facts, i.e., according to the conditions which
lead to the discovery of the criminal, there is such and such a degree
of probability for this discovery. Such a declaration means that I have
calculated a conditioned probability. Suppose that on the other hand, I
declare that of the murders occurring in Vienna in the course of ten
years, so and so many are unexplained with regard to the personality of
the criminal, so and so many were explained within such and such a
time,--and consequently the probability of a discovery in the case
before us is so and so great. In the latter case I have spoken of
unconditioned probability. Unconditioned probability may be studied by
itself and the event compared with it, but it must never be counted on,
for the positive cases have already been reckoned with in the
unconditioned percentage, and therefore should not be counted another
time. Naturally, in practice, neither form of probability is frequently
calculated in figures; only an approximate interpretation of both is
made. Suppose that I hear of a certain crime and the fact that a
footprint has been found. If without knowing further details, I cry out:
“Oh! Footprints bring little to light!” I have thereby asserted that the
statistical verdict in such cases shows an unfavorable percentage of
unconditional probability with regard to positive results. But suppose
that I have examined the footprint and have tested it with regard to the
other circumstances, and then declared: “Under the conditions before us
it is to be expected that the footprint will lead to results”--then I
have declared, “According to the conditions the conditioned probability
of a positive result is great.” Both assertions may be correct, but it
would be false to unite them and to say, “The conditions for results are
very favorable in the case before us, but generally hardly anything is
gained by means of footprints, and hence the probability in this case is
small.” This would be false because the few favorable results as against
the many unfavorable ones have already been considered, and have already
determined the percentage, so that they should not again be used.

Such mistakes are made particularly when determining the complicity of
the accused. Suppose we say that the manner of the crime makes it highly
probable that the criminal should be a skilful, frequently-punished
thief, i.e., our probability is conditioned. Now we proceed to
unconditioned probability by saying: “It is a well-known fact that
frequently-punished thieves often steal again, and we have therefore two
reasons for the assumption that X, of whom both circumstances are true,
was the criminal.” But as a matter of fact we are dealing with only one
identical probability which has merely been counted in two ways. Such
inferences are not altogether dangerous because their incorrectness is
open to view; but where they are more concealed great harm may be done
in this way.

A further subdivision of probability is made by Kirchmann.[148] He
distinguished:

(1) General probability, which depends upon the causes or consequences
of some single uncertain result, and derives its character from them. An
example of the dependence on causes is the collective weather prophecy,
and of dependence on consequences is Aristotle’s dictum, that because we
see the stars turn the earth must stand still. Two sciences especially
depend upon such probabilities: history and law, more properly the
practice and use of criminal law. Information imparted by men is used
in both sciences; this information is made up of effects and hence the
occurrence is inferred from as cause.

(2) Inductive probability. Single events which must be true, form the
foundation, and the result passes to a valid universal. (Especially made
use of in the natural sciences, e.g., in diseases caused by bacilli; in
case X we find the appearance A and in diseases of like cause Y and Z,
we also find the appearance A. It is therefore probable that all
diseases caused by bacilli will manifest the symptom A.)

(3) Mathematical Probability. This infers that A is connected either
with B or C or D, and asks the degree of probability. I. e.: A woman is
brought to bed either with a boy or a girl: therefore the probability
that a boy will be born is one-half.

Of these forms of probability the first two are of equal importance to
us, the third rarely of value, because we lack arithmetical cases and
because probability of that kind is only of transitory worth and has
always to be so studied as to lead to an actual counting of cases. It is
of this form of probability that Mill advises to know, before applying a
calculation of probability, the necessary facts, i.e., the relative
frequency with which the various events occur, and to understand clearly
the causes of these events. If statistical tables show that five of
every hundred men reach, on an average, seventy years, the inference is
valid because it expresses the existent relation between the causes
which prolong or shorten life.

A further comparatively self-evident division is made by Cournot, who
separates subjective probability from the possible probability
pertaining to the events as such. The latter is objectively defined by
Kries[149] in the following example:

“The throw of a regular die will reveal, in the great majority of cases,
the same relation, and that will lead the mind to suppose it objectively
valid. It hence follows, that the relation is changed if the shape of
the die is changed.” But how “this objectively valid relation,” i.e.,
substantiation of probability, is to be thought of, remains as unclear
as the regular results of statistics do anyway. It is hence a question
whether anything is gained when the form of calculation is known.

Kries says, “Mathematicians, in determining the laws of probability,
have subordinated every series of similar cases which take one course
or another as if the constancy of general conditions, the independence
and chance equivalence of single events, were identical throughout.
Hence, we find there are certain simple rules according to which the
probability of a case may be calculated from the number of successes in
cases observed until this one and from which, therefore, the probability
for the appearance of all similar cases may be derived. These rules are
established without any exception whatever.” This statement is not
inaccurate because the general applicability of the rules is brought
forward and its use defended in cases where the presuppositions do not
agree. Hence, there are delusory results, e.g., in the calculation of
mortality, of the statements of witnesses and judicial deliverances.
These do not proceed according to the schema of the ordinary play of
accident. The application, therefore, can be valid only if the constancy
of general conditions may be reliably assumed.

But this evidently is valid only with regard to unconditioned
probability which only at great intervals and transiently may influence
our practical work. For, however well I may know that according to
statistics every xth witness is punished for perjury, I will not be
frightened at the approach of my xth witness though he is likely,
according to statistics, to lie. In such cases we are not fooled, but
where events are confused we still are likely to forget that
probabilities may be counted only from great series of figures in which
the experiences of individuals are quite lost.

Nevertheless figures and the conditions of figures with regard to
probability exercise great influence upon everybody; so great indeed,
that we really must beware of going too far in the use of figures. Mill
cites a case of a wounded Frenchman. Suppose a regiment made up of 999
Englishmen and one Frenchman is attacked and one man is wounded. No one
would believe the account that this one Frenchman was the one wounded.
Kant says significantly: “If anybody sends his doctor 9 ducats by his
servant, the doctor certainly supposes that the servant has either lost
or otherwise disposed of one ducat.” These are merely probabilities
which depend upon habits. So, it may be supposed that a handkerchief has
been lost if only eleven are found, or people may wonder at the doctor’s
ordering a tablespoonful every five quarters of an hour, or if a job is
announced with $2487 a year as salary.

But just as we presuppose that wherever the human will played any part,
regular forms will come to light, so we begin to doubt that such forms
will occur where we find that accident, natural law, or the unplanned
coöperation of men were determining factors. If I permit anybody to
count up accidentally concurrent things and he announces that their
number is one hundred, I shall probably have him count over again. I
shall be surprised to hear that somebody’s collection contains exactly
1000 pieces, and when any one cites a distance of 300 steps I will
suppose that he had made an approximate estimation but had not counted
the steps. This fact is well known to people who do not care about
accuracy, or who want to give their statements the greatest possible
appearance of correctness; hence, in citing figures, they make use of
especially irregular numbers, e.g. 1739, 7/8, 3.25%, etc. I know a case
of a vote of jurymen in which even the proportion of votes had to be
rendered probable. The same jury had to pass that day on three small
cases. In the first case the proportion was 8 for, 4 against, the second
case showed the same proportion and the third case the same. But when
the foreman observed the proportion he announced that one juryman must
change his vote because the same proportion three times running would
appear too improbable! If we want to know the reason for our superior
trust in irregularity in such cases, it is to be found in the fact that
experience shows nature, in spite of all her marvelous orderliness in
the large, to be completely free, and hence irregular in little things.
Hence, as Mill shows in more detail, we expect no identity of form in
nature. We do not expect next year to have the same order of days as
this year, and we never wonder when some suggestive regularity is broken
by a new event. Once it was supposed that all men were either black or
white, and then red men were discovered in America. Now just exactly
such suppositions cause the greatest difficulties, because we do not
know the limits of natural law. For example, we do not doubt that all
bodies on earth have weight. And we expect to find no exception to this
rule on reaching some undiscovered island on our planet; all bodies will
have weight there as well as everywhere else. But the possibility of the
existence of red men had to be granted even before the discovery of
America. Now where is the difference between the propositions: All
bodies have weight, and, All men are either white or black? It may be
said circularly the first is a natural law and the second is not. But
why not? Might not the human body be so organized that according to the
natural law it would be impossible for red men to exist? And what
accurate knowledge have we of pigmentation? Has anybody ever seen a
green horse? And is the accident that nobody has ever seen one to
prevent the discovery of green horses in the heart of Africa? May,
perhaps, somebody not breed green horses by crossings or other
experiments? Or is the existence of green horses contrary to some
unknown but invincible natural law? Perhaps somebody may have a green
horse to-morrow; perhaps it is as impossible as water running up hill.

To know whether anything is natural law or not always depends upon the
grade and standing of our immediate experience--and hence we shall never
be able honestly to make any universal proposition. The only thing
possible is the greatest possible accurate observation of probability in
all known possible cases, and of the probability of the discovery of
exceptions. Bacon called the establishment of reliable assumptions,
counting up without meeting any contradictory case. But what gives us
the law is the manner of counting. The untrained mind accepts facts as
they occur without taking the trouble to seek others; the trained mind
seeks the facts he needs for the premises of his inference. As Mill
says, whatever has shown itself to be true without exception may be held
universal so long as no doubtful exception is presented, and when the
case is of such a nature that a real exception could not escape our
observation.

This indicates how we are to interpret information given by others. We
hear, “Inasmuch as this is always so it may be assumed to be so in the
present case.” Immediate acceptance of this proposition would be as
foolhardy as doubt in the face of all the facts. The proper procedure is
to examine and establish the determining conditions, i.e., who has
counted up this “always,” and what caution was used to avoid the
overlooking of any exception. The real work of interpretation lies in
such testing. We do not want to reach the truth with one blow, we aim
only to approach it. But the step must be taken and we must know how
large it is to be, and know how much closer it has brought us to the
truth. And this is learned only through knowing who made the step and
how it was made. Goethe’s immortal statement, “Man was not born to solve
the riddle of the universe, but to seek out what the problem leads to in
order to keep himself within the limits of the conceivable,” is valid
for us too.

Our great mistake in examining and judging often lies in our setting too
much value upon individual circumstances, and trying to solve the
problem with those alone, or in not daring to use any given circumstance
sufficiently. The latter represents that stupidity which is of use to
scientific spirits when they lack complete proof of their points, but
is dangerous in practical affairs. As a rule, it is also the consequence
of the failure to evaluate what is given, simply because one forgets or
is too lazy to do so. Proper action in this regard is especially
necessary where certain legal proceedings have to occur which are
entitled to a definite degree of probability without requiring
certainty, i.e., preliminary examinations, arrests, investigations of
the premises, etc. No law says how much probability is in such cases
required. To say how much is impossible, but it is not unwise to stick
to the notion that the event must appear true, if not be proved true,
i.e., nothing must be present to destroy the appearance of truth. As
Hume says, “Whenever we have reason to trust earlier experiences and to
take them as standards of judgment of future experiences, these reasons
may have probability.”

The place of probability in the positive determination of the order of
modern criminal procedure is not insignificant. When the law determines
upon a definite number of jurymen or judges, it is probable that this
number is sufficient for the discovery of the truth. The system of
prosecution establishes as a probability that the accused is the
criminal. The idea of time-lapse assumes the probability that after the
passage of a certain time punishment becomes illusory, and prosecution
uncertain and difficult. The institution of experts depends on the
probability that the latter make no mistakes. The warrant for arrest
depends on the probability that the accused behaved suspiciously or
spoke of his crime, etc. The oath of the witness depends on the
probability that the witness will be more likely to tell the truth under
oath, etc.

Modern criminal procedure involves not only probabilities but also
various types of possibility. Every appeal has for its foundation the
possibility of an incorrect judgment; the exclusion of certain court
officials is based on the possibility of prejudice, or at least on the
suspicion of prejudice; the publicity of the trial is meant to prevent
the possibility of incorrectness; the revision of a trial depends on the
possibility that even legal sentences may be false, and the institution
of the defendant lawyer depends upon the possibility that a person
without defense may receive injustice. All the formalities of the action
of the court assume the possibility that without them improprieties may
occur, and the institution of seizing letters and messages for evidence,
asserts only the possibility that the latter contain things of
importance, etc.

When the positive dicta of the law deal with possibility and
probability in questions of great importance the latter become
especially significant.

We have yet to ask what is meant by “rule” and what its relation is to
probability. Scientifically “rule” means law subjectively taken and is
of equal significance with the guiding line for one’s own conduct,
whence it follows that there are only rules of art and morality, but no
rules of nature. Usage does not imply this interpretation. We say that
as a rule it hails only in the daytime; by way of exception, in the
night also; the rule for the appearance of whales indicates that they
live in the Arctic Ocean; a general rule indicates that bodies that are
especially soluble in water should dissolve more easily in warm than in
cold water, but salt dissolves equally well in both. Again we say: As a
rule the murderer is an unpunished criminal; it is a rule that the
brawler is no thief and vice versa; the gambler is as a rule a man of
parts, etc. We may say therefore, that regularity is equivalent to
customary recurrence and that whatever serves as rule may be expected as
probable. If, i.e., it be said, that this or that happens as a rule, we
may suppose that it will repeat itself this time. It is not permissible
to expect more, but it frequently happens that we mistake rules
permitting exceptions for natural laws permitting none. This occurs
frequently when we have lost ourselves in the regular occurrences for
which we are ourselves responsible and suppose that because things have
been seen a dozen times they must always appear in the same way. It
happens especially often when we have heard some phenomenon described in
other sciences as frequent and regular and then consider it to be a law
of nature. In the latter case we have probably not heard the whole
story, nor heard general validity assigned to it. Or again, the whole
matter has long since altered. Lotze wrote almost half a century ago,
that he had some time before made the statistical observation that the
great positive discoveries of exact physiology have an average life of
about four years. This noteworthy statement indicates that great
positive discoveries are set up as natural laws only to show themselves
as at most regular phenomena which have no right to general validity.
And what is true of physiology is true of many other sciences, even of
the great discoveries of medicine, even legal medicine. This, therefore,
should warn against too much confidence in things that are called
“rules.” False usage and comfortable dependence upon a rule have very
frequently led us too far. Its unreliability is shown by such maxims as
“Three misses make a rule” or “Many stupidities taken together give a
golden rule of life,” or “To-day’s exception is to-morrow’s rule,” or
the classical perversion: “The rule that there are no rules without
exception is a rule without exception, hence, there is one rule without
exception.”

The unreliability of rules is further explained by their rise from
generalization. We must not generalize, as Schiel says, until we have
shown that if there are cases which contradict our generalizations we
know those contradictions. In practice approximate generalizations are
often our only guides. Natural law is too much conditioned, cases of it
too much involved, distinctions between them too hard to make, to allow
us to determine the existence of a natural phenomenon in terms of its
natural characteristics as a part of the business of our daily life. Our
own age generalizes altogether too much, observes too little, and
abstracts too rapidly. Events come quickly, examples appear in masses,
and if they are similar they tend to be generalized, to develop into a
rule, while the exceptions which are infinitely more important are
unobserved, and the rule, once made, leads to innumerable mistakes.


Section 29. (g) Chance.

The psychological significance of what we call chance depends upon the
concept of chance and the degree of influence that we allow it to
possess in our thinking. What is generally called chance, and what is
called chance in particular cases, will depend to a significant degree
upon the nature of the case. In progressive sciences the laws increase
and the chance-happenings decrease; the latter indeed are valid only in
particular cases of the daily life and in the general business of it. We
speak of chance or accident when events cross which are determined in
themselves by necessary law, but the law of the crossing of which is
unknown. If, e.g., it is observed that where there is much snow the
animals are white, the event must not be attributed to accident, for the
formation of snow in high mountains or in the north, and its long stay
on the surface of the earth develop according to special natural laws,
and the colors of animals do so no less--but that these two orderly
series of facts should meet requires a third law, or still better, a
third group of laws, which though unknown some time ago, are now known
to every educated person.

For us lawyers chance and the interpretation of it are of immense
importance not only in bringing together evidence, but in every case of
suspicion, for the problem always arises whether a causal relation may
be established between the crime and the suspect, or whether the
relation is only accidental. “Unfortunate coincidence”--“closely related
connection of facts”--“extraordinary accumulation of reason for
suspicion,”--all these terms are really chance mistaken for causation.
On the knowledge of the difference between the one and the other depends
the fate of most evidence and trials. Whoever is fortunate enough in
rightly perceiving what chance is, is fortunate in the conduct of his
trial.

Is there really a theory of chance? I believe that a direct treatment of
the subject is impossible. The problem of chance can be only
approximately explained when all conceivable chance-happenings of a
given discipline are brought together and their number reduced by
careful search for definite laws. Besides, the problem demands the
knowledge of an extremely rich casuistry, by means of which, on the one
hand, to bring together the manifoldness of chance events, and on the
other to discover order. Enough has been written about chance, but a
systematic treatment of it must be entirely theoretical. So
Windelband’s[150] excellent and well-ordered book deals with relations
(chance and cause, chance and law, chance and purpose, chance and
concept) the greatest value of which is to indicate critically the
various definitions of the concept of chance. Even though there is no
definition which presents the concept of chance in a completely
satisfactory manner, the making of such definitions is still of value
because one side of chance is explained and the other is thereby seen
more closely. Let us consider a few of these and other definitions.
Aristotle says that the accidental occurs, παρἁ φὑσν, according to
nature. Epicurus, who sees the creation of the world as a pure accident,
holds it to occur τἁ μἑν ἁπὁ τὑχης, τἁ δἑ παρ’ἡμὡν. Spinoza believes
nothing to be contingent save only according to the limitations of
knowledge; Kant says that conditioned existence as such, is called
accidental; the unconditioned, necessary. Humboldt: “Man sees those
things as accident which he can not explain genetically.” Schiel:
“Whatever may not be reduced back to law is called accidental.”
Quetelet: “The word chance serves officiously to hide our ignorance.”
Buckle derives the idea of chance from the life of nomadic tribes, which
contains nothing firm and regulated. According to Trendelenburg chance
is that which could not be otherwise. Rosenkranz says: Chance is a
reality which has only the value of possibility, while Fischer calls
chance the individualized fact, and Lotze identifies it with everything
that is not valid as a natural purpose. For Windelband “chance consists,
according to usage, in the merely factual but not necessary transition
from a possibility to an actuality. Chance is the negation of necessity.
It is a contradiction to say: ‘This happened by accident,’ for the word
‘by’ expressed a cause.”

A. Höfler[151] says most intelligently, that the contradiction of the
idea of chance by the causal law may be easily solved by indicating the
especial relativity of the concept. (Accidental with regard to one, but
otherwise appearing as a possible causal series).

The lesson of these definitions is obvious. What we call chance plays a
great role in our legal work. On our recognizing a combination of
circumstances as accidental the result of the trial in most cases
depends, and the distinction between accident and law depends upon the
amount of knowledge concerning the events of the daily life especially.
Now the use of this knowledge in particular cases consists in seeking
out the causal relation in a series of events which are adduced as
proof, and in turning accident into order. Or, in cases where the law
which unites or separates the events can not be discovered, it may
consist in the very cautious interpretation of the combination of events
on the principle _simul cum hoc non est propter hoc_.


Section 30.(h) Persuasion and Explanation.

How in the course of trial are people convinced? The criminalist has as
presiding officer not only to provide the truth which convinces; it is
his business as state official to convince the defendant of the
correctness of the arguments adduced, the witness of his duty to tell
the truth. But he again is often himself convinced by a witness or an
accused person--correctly or incorrectly. Mittermaier[152] calls
conviction a condition in which our belief-it-is-true depends on full
satisfactory grounds of which we are aware. But this state of conviction
is a goal to be reached and our work is not done until the convincing
material has been provided. Seeking the truth is not enough. Karl Gerock
assures us that no philosophical system offers us the full and finished
truth, but there is a truth for the idealist, and to ask Pilate’s blasé
question is, as Lessing suggests, rendering the answer impossible. But
this shows the difference between scientific and practical work; science
may be satisfied with seeking truth, but we must possess truth. If it
were true that truth alone is convincing, there would not be much
difficulty, and one might be content that one is convinced only by what
is correct. But this is not the case. Statistically numbers are supposed
to prove, but actually numbers prove according to their uses. So in the
daily life we say facts are proofs when it would be more cautious to
say: facts are proofs according to their uses. It is for this reason
that sophistical dialectic is possible. Arrange the facts in one way and
you reach one result, arrange the facts another way and you may reach
the opposite. Or again, if you study the facts in doubtful cases
honestly and without prejudice you find how many possible conclusions
may be drawn, according to their arrangement. We must, of course, not
have in mind that conviction and persuasion which is brought about by
the use of many words. We have to consider only that adduction of facts
and explanation, simple or complex, in a more or less skilful,
intentional or unintentional manner, by means of which we are convinced
at least for a moment. The variety of such conviction is well known to
experience.

“The naïveté of the first glance often takes the prize from scholarship.
All hasty, decisive judgment betrays, when it becomes habitual,
superficiality of observation and impiety against the essential
character of particular facts. Children know as completely determined
and certain a great deal which is doubtful to the mature man” (V.
Volkmar).

So, frequently, the simplest thing we are told gets its value from the
manner of telling, or from the person of the narrator. And inasmuch as
we ourselves are much more experienced and skilful in arranging and
grouping facts than are our witnesses and the accused, it often happens
that we persuade these people and that is the matter which wants
consideration.

Nobody will assert that it will occur to any judge to persuade a witness
to anything which he does not thoroughly believe, but we know how often
we persuade ourselves to some matter, and nothing is more conceivable
than that we might like to see other people agree with us about it. I
believe that the criminalist, because, let us say, of his power, as a
rule takes his point of view too lightly. Every one of us, no doubt, has
often begun his work in a small and inefficient manner, has brought it
along with mistakes and scantiness and when finally he has reached a
somewhat firm ground, he has been convinced by his failures and mistakes
of his ignorance and inadequacy. Then he expected that this conviction
would be obvious also to other people whom he was examining. But this
obviousness is remarkably absent, and all the mistakes, cruelties, and
miscarriages of justice, have not succeeded in robbing it of the dignity
it possesses in the eyes of the nation. Perhaps the goodwill which may
be presupposed ought to be substituted for the result, but it is a fact
that the layman presupposes much more knowledge, acuteness, and power in
the criminalist than he really possesses. Then again, it is conceivable
that a single word spoken by the judge has more weight than it should
have, and then when a real persuasion--evidently in the best sense of
the word--is made use of, it _must_ be influential. I am certain that
every one of us has made the frightful observation that by the end of
the examination the witness has simply taken the point of view of the
examiner, and the worst thing about this is that the witness still
thinks that he is thinking in his own way.

The examiner knows the matter in its relation much better, knows how to
express it more beautifully, and sets pretty theories going. The
witness, to whom the questions are suggestive, becomes conceited, likes
to think that he himself has brought the matter out so excellently, and
therefore is pleased to adopt the point of view and the theories of the
examiner who has, in reality, gone too far in his eagerness. There is
less danger of this when educated people are examined for these are
better able to express themselves; or again when women are examined for
these are too obstinate to be persuaded, but with the great majority the
danger is great, and therefore the criminalist can not be told too often
how necessary it is that he shall meet his witness with the least
conceivable use of eloquence.

Forensic persuasion is of especial importance and has been considered so
since classical days, whether rightly, is another question. The orations
of state prosecutors and lawyers for the defense, when made before
scholarly judges, need not be held important. If individuals are ever
asked whether they were persuaded or made doubtful by the prosecutor or
his opponent they indicate very few instances. A scholarly and
experienced judge who has not drawn any conclusions about the case until
the evidence was all in need hardly pay much attention to the pleaders.
It may indeed be that the prosecution or defense may belittle or
intensify one or another bit of evidence which the bench might not have
thought of; or they may call attention to some reason for severity or
mercy. But on the one hand if this is important it will already have
been touched in the adduction of evidence, and on the other hand such
points are generally banal and indifferent to the real issue in the
case. If this be not so it would only indicate that either we need a
larger number of judges, or even when there are many judges that one
thing or another may be overlooked.

But with regard to the jury the case is quite different; it is easily
influenced and more than makes up for the indifference of the bench.
Whoever takes the trouble to study the faces of the jury during trial,
comes to the conclusion that the speeches of the prosecution and defense
are the most important things in the trial, that they absorb most of the
attention of the jury, and that the question of guilt or innocence does
not depend upon the number and weight of the testimony but upon the more
or less skilful interpretation of it. This is a reproach not to the jury
but to those who demand from it a service it can not render. It is first
necessary to understand how difficult the conduct of a trial is. In
itself the conduct of a jury trial is no art, and when compared with
other tasks demanded of the criminalist may be third or fourth in
difficulty. What is difficult is the determination of the chronological
order in which to present evidence, i.e., the drawing of the brief. If
the brief is well drawn, everything develops logically and
psychologically in a good way and the case goes on well; but it is a
great and really artistic task to draw this brief properly. There are
only two possibilities. If the thing is not done, or the brief is of no
use, the case goes on irrelevantly, illogically and unintelligibly and
the jury can not understand what is happening. If the trick is turned,
however, then like every art it requires preparation and intelligence.
And the jury do not possess these, so that the most beautiful work of
art passes by them without effect. They therefore must turn their
attention, to save what can be saved, upon the orations of the
prosecution and defense. These reproduce the evidence for them in some
intelligible fashion and the verdict will be innocence or guilt
according to the greater intelligence of one or the other of the
contending parties. Persuasiveness at its height, Hume tells us, leaves
little room for intelligence and consideration. It addresses itself
entirely to the imagination and the affections, captures the
well-inclined auditors, and dominates their understanding. Fortunately
this height is rarely reached. In any event, this height, which also
dominates those who know the subject, will always be rare, yet the jury
are not people of knowledge and hence dominations ensue, even through
attempts at persuasiveness which have attained no height whatever. Hence
the great danger.

The only help against this is in the study by the presiding justice, not
as lawyer but as psychologist, of the faces of the jury while the
contending lawyers make their addresses. He must observe very narrowly
and carefully every influence exercised by the speeches, which is
irrelevant to the real problem, and then in summing up call it to the
attention of the jury and bring them back to the proper point of view.
The ability to do this is very marvelous, but it again is an exceedingly
difficult performance.

Nowadays persuadability is hardly more studied but anybody who has
empirically attained some proficiency in it has acquired the same tricks
that are taught by theory. But these must be known if they are to be met
effectively. Hence the study of the proper authors can not be too much
recommended. Without considering the great authors of the classical
period, especially Aristotle and Cicero, there are many modern ones who
might be named.


Section 31. (i) Inference and Judgment.

The judgment to be discussed in the following section is not the
judgment of the court but the more general judgment which occurs in any
perception. If we pursue our tasks earnestly we draw from the simplest
cases innumerable inferences and we receive as many inferences from
those we examine. The correctness of our work depends upon the truth of
both. I have already indicated how very much of the daily life passes as
simple and invincible sense-perception even into the determination of a
sentence, although it is often no more than a very complicated series of
inferences each of which may involve a mistake even if the perception
itself has been correct. The frequency with which an inference is made
from sense-perception is the more astonishing inasmuch as it exceeds all
that the general and otherwise valid law of laziness permits. In fact,
it contradicts that law, though perhaps it may not do so, for a hasty
inference from insufficient premises may be much more comfortable than
more careful observation and study. Such hasty inference is made even
with regard to the most insignificant things. In the course of an
investigation we discover that we have been dealing only with inferences
and that our work therefore has been for nothing. Then again, we miss
that fact, and our results are false and their falsehood is rarely
sought in these petty mistakes. So the witness may have “seen” a watch
in such and such a place when in reality he has only heard a noise that
he took for the ticking of a watch and hence _inferred_ that there had
really been a watch, that he had seen it, and finally _believed_ that
he had seen it. Another witness asserts that X has many chickens; as a
matter of fact he has heard two chickens cluck and infers a large
number. Still another has seen footprints of cattle and speaks of a
herd, or he knows the exact time of a murder because at a given time he
heard somebody sigh, etc. There would be little difficulty if people
told us how they had inferred, for then a test by means of careful
questions would be easy enough--but they do not tell, and when we
examine ourselves we discover that we do exactly the same thing and
often believe and assert that we have seen or heard or smelt or felt
although we have only inferred these things.[153] Here belong all cases
of correct or partly correct inference and of false inference from false
sense-perception. I recall the oft-cited story in which a whole judicial
commission smelt a disgusting odor while a coffin was being exhumed only
to discover that it was empty. If the coffin, for one reason or another,
had not been opened all those present would have taken oath that they
had an indubitable perception although the latter was only inferred from
its precedent condition.

Exner[154] cites the excellent example in which a mother becomes
frightened while her child cries, not because the cry as such sounds so
terrible as because of its combination with the consciousness that it
comes from her own child and that something might have happened to it.
It is asserted, and I think rightly, that verbal associations have a
considerable share in such cases. As Stricker[155] expresses it, the
form of any conceptual complex whatever, brings out its appropriate
word. If we see the _thing_ watch, we get the _word_ watch. If we see a
man with a definite symptom of consumption the word tuberculosis occurs
at once. The last example is rather more significant because when the
whole complex appears mistakes are more remote than when merely one or
another “safe” symptom permits the appearance of the word in question.
What is safe to one mind need not be so to another, and the notion as to
the certainty of any symptom changes with time and place and person.
Mistakes are especially possible when people are so certain of their
“safe” symptoms that they do not examine how they inferred from them.
This inference, however, is directly related to the appearance of the
word. Return to the example mentioned above, and suppose that A has
discovered a “safe” symptom of consumption in B and the word
tuberculosis occurs to him. But the occurrence does not leave him with
the word merely, there is a direct inference “B has tuberculosis.” We
never begin anything with the word alone, we attach it immediately to
some fact and in the present case it has become, as usual, a judgment.
The thought-movement of him who has heard this judgment, however, turns
backward and he supposes that the judge has had a long series of
sense-perceptions from which he has derived his inference. And in fact
he has had only one perception, the reliability of which is often
questionable.

Then there is the additional difficulty that in every inference there
are leaps made by each inferer according to his character and training.
And the maker does not consider whether the other fellow can make
similar leaps or whether his route is different. E. g., when an English
philosopher says, “We really ought not to expect that the manufacture of
woolens shall be perfected by a nation which knows no astronomy,”--we
are likely to say that the sentence is silly; another might say that it
is paradoxical and a third that it is quite correct, for what is missing
is merely the proposition that the grade of culture made possible by
astronomy is such as to require textile proficiency also. “In
conversation the simplest case of skipping is where the conclusion is
drawn directly from the minor premise. But many other inferences are
omitted, as in the case of real thinking. In giving information there is
review of the thinking of other people; women and untrained people do
not do this, and hence the disconnectedness of their conversation.”[156]
In this fact is the danger in examining witnesses, inasmuch as we
involuntarily interpolate the missing details in the skipping
inferences, but do it according to our own knowledge of the facts.
Hence, a test of the correctness of the other man’s inference becomes
either quite impossible or is developed coarsely. In the careful
observation of leaping inferences made by witnesses--and not merely by
women and the uneducated--it will be seen that the inference one might
oneself make might either have been different or have proceeded in a
different way. If, then, all the premises are tested a different result
from that of the witness is obtained. It is well known how identical
premises permit of different conclusions by different people.

In such inferences certain remarkable things occur which, as a rule,
have a given relation to the occupation of the witness. So, e.g., people
inclined to mathematics make the greatest leaps, and though these may be
comparatively and frequently correct, the danger of mistake is not
insignificant when the mathematician deals in his mathematical fashion
with unmathematical things.

Another danger lies in the testimony of witnesses who have a certain
sense of form in representation and whose inferential leaps consists in
their omitting the detailed expression and in inserting the notion of
form instead. I learned of this notable psychosis from a bookkeeper of a
large factory, who had to provide for the test of numberless additions.
It was his notion that if we were to add two and three are five, and six
are eleven, and seven are eighteen we should never finish adding, and
since the avoidance of mistakes requires such adding we must so contrive
that the image of two and three shall immediately call forth the image
of five. Now this mental image of five is added with the actual six and
gives eleven, etc. According to this we do not add, we see only a series
of images, and so rapidly that we can follow with a pencil but slowly.
And the images are so certain that mistake is impossible. “You know how
9 looks? Well, just as certainly we know what the image of 27 and 4 is
like; the image of 31 occurs without change.”

This, as it happens, is a procedure possible only to a limited type, but
this type occurs not only among bookkeepers. When any one of such
persons unites two events he does not consider what may result from such
a union; he sees, if I may say so, only a resulting image. This image,
however, is not so indubitably certain as in the case of numbers; and it
may take all kinds of forms, the correctness of which is not altogether
probable. E. g., the witness sees two forms in the dark and the flash of
a knife and hears a cry. If he belongs to the type under discussion he
does not consider that he might have been so frightened by the flashing
knife as to have cried out, or that he had himself proceeded to attack
with a stick and that the other fellow did the yelling, or that a stab
or cut had preceded the cry--no, he saw the image of the two forms and
the knife and he heard the cry and these leap together into an image,
i.e., one of the forms has a cut above his brow. And these leaps occur
so swiftly and with such assurance that the witness in question often
believes himself to have seen what he infers and swears to it.

There are a great many similar processes at the bottom of impressions
that depend only upon swift and unconscious inference. Suppose, e.g.,
that I am shown the photograph of a small section of a garden, through
which a team is passing. Although I observe the image of only a small
portion of the garden and therefore have no notion of its extent, still,
in speaking of it, I shall probably speak of a very big garden. I have
inferred swiftly and unconsciously that in the fact that a wagon and
horses were present in the pictured portion of the garden, is implied
great width of road, for even gardens of average size do not have such
wide roads as to admit wagons; the latter occurring only in parks and
great gardens. Hence my conclusion: the garden must be very big. Such
inferences[157] are frequent, whence the question as to the source and
the probability of the witness’s information, whether it is positive or
only an impression. Evidently such an impression may be correct. It will
be correct often, inasmuch as impressions occur only when inferences
have been made and tested repeatedly. But it is necessary in any case to
review the sequence of inferences which led to this impression and to
examine their correctness. Unfortunately the witness is rarely aware
whether he has perceived or merely inferred.

Examination is especially important when the impression has been made
after the observation of a few marks or only a single one and not very
essential one at that. In the example of the team the impression may
have been attained by inference, but frequently it will have been
attained through some unessential, purely personal, determinative
characteristic. “Just as the ancient guest recognizes his friend by
fitting halves of the ring, so we recognize the object and its
constitution from one single characteristic, and hence the whole vision
of it is vivified by that characteristic.”[158]

All this is very well if no mistakes are made. When Tertullian said,
“Credo quia impossibile est,” we will allow honesty of statement to this
great scholar, especially as he was speaking about matters of religion,
but when Socrates said of the works of Heraclitus the Obscure: “What I
understand of it is good; I think that what I do not understand is also
good”--he was not in earnest. Now the case of many people who are not as
wise as Tertullian and Socrates is identical with theirs. Numerous
examinations of witnesses made me think of Tertullian’s maxim, for the
testimonies presented the most improbable things as facts. And when they
even explained the most unintelligible things I thought: “And what you
do not understand is also good.”

This belief of uncultured people in their own intelligence has been most
excellently portrayed by Wieland in his immortal “Abderites.” The fourth
philosopher says: “What you call the world is essentially an infinite
series of worlds which envelop one another like the skin of an onion.”
“Very clear,” said the Abderites, and thought they understood the
philosopher because they knew perfectly well what an onion looked like.
The inference which is drawn from the comprehension of one term in a
comparison to the comprehension of the other is one of the most
important reasons for the occurrence of so many misunderstandings. The
example, as such, is understood, but its application to the assertion
and the question whether the latter is also made clear by the example
are forgotten. This explains the well known and supreme power of
examples and comparisons, and hence the wise of all times have used
comparisons in speaking to the poor in spirit. Hence, too, the great
effect of comparisons, and also the numerous and coarse
misunderstandings and the effort of the untrained and unintelligent to
clarify those things they do not understand by means of comparisons.
Fortunately they have, in trying to explain the thing to other people,
the habit of making use of these difficultly discovered comparisons so
that the others, if they are only sufficiently observant, may succeed in
testing the correctness of the inference from one term in a comparison
to the other. We do this frequently in examining witnesses, and we
discover that the witness has made use of a figure to clarify some
unintelligible point and that he necessarily understands it since it
lies within the field of his instruments of thought. But what is
compared remains as confused to him as before. The test of it,
therefore, is very tiring and mainly without results, because one rarely
succeeds in liberating a man from some figure discovered with
difficulty. He always returns to it because he understands it, though
really not what he compares. But what is gained in such a case is not
little, for the certainty that, so revealed, the witness does not
understand the matter in hand, easily determines the value of his
testimony.

The fullness of the possibilities under which anything may be asserted
is also of importance in this matter. The inference that a thing is
impossible is generally made by most people in such wise that they first
consider the details of the eventualities they already know, or
immediately present. Then, when these are before them, they infer that
the matter is quite impossible--and whether one or more different
eventualities have missed of consideration, is not studied at all. Our
kindly professor of physics once told us: “To-day I intended to show you
the beautiful experiments in the interference of light--but it can not
be observed in daylight and when I draw the curtains you raise
rough-house. The demonstration is therefore impossible and I take the
instruments away.” The good man did not consider the other eventuality,
that we might be depended upon to behave decently even if the curtains
were drawn.

Hence the rule that a witness’s assertion that a thing is impossible
must never be trusted. Take the simplest example. The witness assures us
that it is impossible for a theft to have been committed by some
stranger from outside. If you ask him why, he will probably tell you:
“Because the door was bolted and the windows barred.” The eventuality
that the thief might have entered by way of the chimney, or have sent a
child between the bars of the window, or have made use of some peculiar
instrument, etc., are not considered, and would not be if the question
concerning the ground of the inference had not been put.

We must especially remember that we criminalists “must not dally with
mathematical truth but must seek historical truth. We start with a mass
of details, unite them, and succeed by means of this union and test in
attaining a result which permits us to judge the existence and the
characteristics of past events.” The material of our work lies in the
mass of details, and the manner and reliability of its presentation
determines the certainty of our inferences.

Seen more closely the winning of this material may be described as Hume
describes it:[159] “If we would satisfy ourselves, therefore, concerning
the nature of that evidence which assures us of matters of fact, we must
inquire how we arrive at the knowledge of cause and effect. I shall
venture to affirm as a general proposition which admits of no exception,
that the knowledge of this relation is not, in any instance, attained by
reasonings a priori; but arises entirely from experience, when we find
that any particular objects are constantly conjoined with each other;
... nor can our reason, unassisted by experience, ever draw any
inference concerning real existence and matter of fact.”

In the course of his explanation Hume presents two propositions,

(1) I have found that such an object has always been attended with such
an effect.

(2) I foresee that other objects which are in appearance similar, will
be attended with similar effects.

He goes on: “I shall allow, if you please, that the one proposition may
justly be inferred from the other; I know in fact that it always is
inferred. But if you insist that the inference is made by a chain of
reasoning, I desire you to produce that chain of reasoning. The
connection between these propositions is not intuitive. There is
required a medium which may enable the mind to draw such an inference,
if, indeed, it be drawn by reasoning and argument. What the medium is, I
must confess, passes my comprehension; and it is incumbent on those to
produce it who assert that it exists, and is the origin of all our
conclusions concerning matters of fact.”

If we regard the matter more closely we may say with certainty: This
medium exists not as a substance but as a transition. When I speak in
the proposition of “such an object,” I already have “similar” in mind,
inasmuch as there is nothing absolutely like anything else, and when I
say in the first proposition, “such an object,” I have already passed
into the assertion made in the second proposition.

Suppose that we take these propositions concretely:

(1) I have discovered that bread made of corn has a nourishing effect.

(2) I foresee that other apparently similar objects, e.g., wheat, will
have a like effect.

I could not make various experiments with the same corn in case (1). I
could handle corn taken as such from one point of view, or considered as
such from another, i.e., I could only experiment with very similar
objects. I can therefore make these experiments with corn from
progressively remoter starting points, or soils, and finally with corn
from Barbary and East Africa, so that there can no longer be any
question of identity but only of similarity. And finally I can compare
two harvests of corn which have less similarity than certain species of
corn and certain species of wheat. I am therefore entitled to speak of
identical or similar in the first proposition as much as in the second.
One proposition has led into another and the connection between them has
been discovered.

The criminological importance of this “connection” lies in the fact that
the correctness of our inferences depends upon its discovery. We work
continuously with these two Humian propositions, and we always make our
assertion, first, that some things are related as cause and effect, and
we join the present case to that because we consider it similar. If it
is really similar, and the connection of the first and the second
proposition are actually correct, the truth of the inference is
attained. We need not count the unexplained wonders of numerical
relations in the result. D’Alembert asserts: “It seems as if there were
some law of nature which more frequently prevents the occurrence of
regular than irregular combinations; those of the first kind are
mathematically, but not physically, more probable. When we see that high
numbers are thrown with some one die, we are immediately inclined to
call that die false.” And John Stuart Mill adds, that d’Alembert should
have set the problem in the form of asking whether he would believe in
the die if, after having examined it and found it right, somebody
announced that ten sixes had been cast with it.

We may go still further and assert that we are generally inclined to
consider an inference wrong which indicates that accidental matters have
occurred in regular numerical relation. Who believes the hunter’s story
that he has shot 100 hares in the past week, or the gambler’s that he
has won 1000 dollars; or the sick man’s, that he was sick ten times? It
will be supposed at the very least that each is merely indicating an
approximately round sum. Ninety-six hares, 987 dollars, and eleven
illnesses will sound more probable. And this goes so far that during
examinations, witnesses are shy of naming such “improbable ratios,” if
they at all care to have their testimony believed. Then again, many
judges are in no wise slow to jump at such a number and to demand an
“accurate statement,” or even immediately to decide that the witness is
talking only “about.” How deep-rooted such views are is indicated by the
circumstance that bankers and other merchants of lottery tickets find
that tickets with “pretty numbers” are difficult to sell. A ticket of
series 1000, number 100 is altogether unsalable, for such a number “can
not possibly be sold.” Then again, if one has to count up a column of
accidental figures and the sum is 1000, the correctness of the sum is
always doubted.

Here are facts which are indubitable and unexplained. We must therefore
agree neither to distrust so-called round numbers, nor to place
particular reliance on quite irregular figures. Both should be examined.

It may be that the judgment of the correctness of an inference is made
analogously to that of numbers and that the latter exercise an influence
on the judgment which is as much conceded popularly as it is actually
combated. Since Kant, it has been quite discovered that the judgment
that fools are in the majority must lead through many more such truths
in judging--and it is indifferent whether the judgment dealt with is
that of the law court or of a voting legislature or mere judgments as
such.

Schiel says, “It has been frequently asserted that a judgment is more
probably correct according to the number of judges and jury.” Quite
apart from the fact that the judge is less careful, makes less effort,
and feels less responsibility when he has associates, this is a false
inference from an enormous average of cases which are necessarily remote
from any average whatever. And when certain prejudices or weaknesses of
mind are added, the mistake multiplies. Whoever accurately follows, if
he can avoid getting bored, the voting of bodies, and considers by
themselves individual opinions about the subject, they having remained
individual against large majorities and hence worthy of being subjected
to a cold and unprejudiced examination, will learn some rare facts. It
is especially interesting to study the judgment of the full bench with
regard to a case which has been falsely judged; surprisingly often only
a single individual voice has spoken correctly. This fact is a warning
to the judge in such cases carefully to listen to the individual opinion
and to consider that it is very likely to deserve study just because it
is so significantly in the minority.

The same thing is to be kept in mind when a thing is asserted by a large
number of witnesses. Apart from the fact that they depend upon one
another, that they suggest to one another, it is also easily possible,
especially if any source of error is present, that the latter shall have
influenced all the witnesses.

Whether a judgment has been made by a single judge or is the verdict of
any number of jurymen is quite indifferent since the correctness of a
judgment does not lie in numbers. Exner says, “The degree of probability
of a judgment’s correctness depends upon the richness of the field of
the associations brought to bear in establishing it. The value of
knowledge is judicially constituted in this fact, for it is in essence
the expansion of the scope of association. And the value is proportional
to the richness of the associations between the present fact and the
knowledge required.” This is one of the most important of the doctrines
we have to keep in mind, and it controverts altogether those who suppose
that we ought to be satisfied with the knowledge of some dozens of
statutes, a few commentaries, and so and so many precedents.

If we add that “every judgment is an identification and that in every
judgment we assert that the content represented is identical in spite of
two different associative relationships,”[160] it must become clear what
dangers we undergo if the associative relationships of a judge are too
poor and narrow. As Mittermaier said seventy years ago: “There are
enough cases in which the weight of the evidence is so great that all
judges are convinced of the truth in the same way. But in itself what
determines the judgment is the essential character of him who makes it.”
What he means by essential character has already been indicated.

We have yet to consider the question of the value of inferences made by
a witness from his own combinations of facts, or his descriptions. The
necessity, in such cases, of redoubled and numerous examinations is
often overlooked. Suppose, for example, that the witness does not know a
certain important date, but by combining what he does know, infers it to
have been the second of June, on which day the event under discussion
took place. He makes the inference because at the time he had a call
from A, who was in the habit of coming on Wednesdays, but there could be
no Wednesday after June seventh because the witness had gone on a long
journey on that day, and it could not have been May 26 because this day
preceded a holiday and the shop was open late, a thing not done on the
day A called. Nor, moreover, could the date have been May 20, because it
was very warm on the day in question, and the temperature began to rise
only after May 20. In view of these facts the event under discussion
must have occurred upon June 2nd and only on that day.

As a rule, such combinations are very influential because they appear
cautious, wise and convincing. They impose upon people without
inclination toward such processes. More so than they have a right to,
inasmuch as they present little difficulty to anybody who is accustomed
to them and to whom they occur almost spontaneously. As usually a thing
that makes a great impression upon us is not especially examined, but is
accepted as astounding and indubitable, so here. But how very necessary
it is carefully to examine such things and to consider whether the
single premises are sound, the example in question or any other example
will show. The individual dates, the facts and assumptions may easily be
mistaken, and the smallest oversight may render the result false, or at
least not convincing.

The examination of manuscripts is still more difficult. What is written
has a certain convincing power, not only on others but on the writer,
and much as we may be willing to doubt and to improve what has been
written immediately or at most a short time ago, a manuscript of some
age has always a kind of authority and we give it correctness cheaply
when that is in question. In any event there regularly arises in such a
case the problem whether the written description is quite correct, and
as regularly the answer is a convinced affirmative. It is impossible to
give any general rule for testing such affirmation. Ordinarily some
clearness may be attained by paying attention to the purpose of the
manuscript, especially in order to ascertain its sources and the
personality of the writer. There is much in the external form of the
manuscript. Not that especial care and order in the notes are
particularly significant; I once published the accounts of an old
peasant who could neither read nor write, and his accounts with a
neighbor were done in untrained but very clear fashion, and were
accepted as indubitable in a civil case. The purposiveness, order, and
continuity of a manuscript indicate that it was not written after the
event; and are therefore, together with the reason for having written it
and obviously with the personality of the writer, determinative of its
value.


Section 32.(j) Mistaken Inferences.

It is true, as Huxley says, that human beings would have made fewer
mistakes if they had kept in mind their tendency to false judgments
which depend upon extraordinary combinations of real experiences. When
people say: I felt, I heard, I saw this or that, in 99 cases put of 100
they mean only that they have been aware of some kind of sensation the
nature of which they determine in a judgment. Most erroneous inferences
ensue in this fashion. They are rarely formal and rarely arise by virtue
of a failure to use logical principles; their ground is the inner
paucity of a premise, which itself is erroneous because of an erroneous
perception or conception.[161] As Mill rightly points out, a large
portion of mankind make mistakes because of tacit assumptions that the
order of nature and the order of knowledge are identical and that things
must exist as they are thought, so that when two things can not be
thought together they are supposed not to exist together, and the
inconceivable is supposed to be identical with the non-existent. But
what they do not succeed in conceiving must not be confused with the
absolutely inconceivable. The difficulty or impossibility of conceiving
may be subjective and conditional, and may prevent us from understanding
the relation of a series of events only because some otherwise
proximate condition is unknown or overlooked. Very often in criminal
cases when I can make no progress in some otherwise simple matter, I
recall the well known story of an old peasant woman who saw the tail of
a horse through an open stable door and the head of another through
another door several yards away, and because the colors of both head and
tail were similar, was moved to cry out: “Dear Lord, what a long horse!”
The old lady started with the presupposition that the rump and the head
of the two horses belonged to one, and could make no use of the obvious
solution of the problem of the inconceivably long horse by breaking it
in two.

Such mistakes may be classified under five heads.[162]

(1) Aprioristic mistakes. (Natural prejudices).

(2) Mistakes in observation.

(3) Mistakes in generalization. (When the facts are right and the
inferences wrong).

(4) Mistakes of confusion. (Ambiguity of terms or mistakes by
association).

(5) Logical fallacies.

All five fallacies play important rôles in the lawyer’s work.

We have very frequently to fight natural prejudices. We take certain
classes of people to be better and others to be worse than the average,
and without clearly expressing it we expect that the first class will
not easily do evil nor the other good. We have prejudices about some one
or another view of life; some definition of justice, or point of view,
although we have sufficient opportunity to be convinced of their
incorrectness. We have a similar prejudice in trusting our human
knowledge, judgment of impressions, facts, etc., far too much, so far
indeed, that certain relations and accidents occurring to any person we
like or dislike will determine his advantage or disadvantage at our
hands.

Of importance under this heading, too, are those inferences which are
made in spite of the knowledge that the case is different; the power of
sense is more vigorous than that of reflection. As Hartmann expresses
it: “The prejudices arising from sensation, are not conscious judgments
of the understanding but instinctively practical postulates, and are,
therefore, very difficult to destroy, or even set aside by means of
conscious consideration. You may tell yourself a thousand times that the
moon at the horizon is as big as at the zenith--nevertheless you see it
smaller at the zenith.” Such fixed impressions we meet in every
criminal trial, and if once we have considered how the criminal had
committed a crime we no longer get free of the impression, even when we
have discovered quite certainly that he had no share in the deed. The
second type of fallacy--mistakes in observation--will be discussed later
under sense perception and similar matters.

Under mistakes of generalization the most important processes are those
of arrangement, where the environment or accompanying circumstances
exercise so determinative an influence that the inference is often made
from them alone and without examination of the object in question. The
Tanagra in the house of an art-connoisseur I take to be genuine without
further examination; the golden watch in the pocket of a tramp to be
stolen; a giant meteor, the skeleton of an iguana, a twisted-looking
Nerva in the Royal Museum of Berlin, I take to be indubitably original,
and indubitably imitations in the college museum of a small town. The
same is true of events: I hear a child screeching in the house of the
surly wife of the shoemaker so I do not doubt that she is spanking it;
in the mountains I infer from certain whistles the presence of chamois,
and a single long drawn tone that might be due to anything I declare to
have come from an organ, if a church is near by.

All such processes are founded upon experience, synthesis, and, if you
like, prejudices. They will often lead to proper conclusions, but in
many cases they will have the opposite effect. It is a frequently
recurring fact that in such cases careful examination is most of all
necessary, because people are so much inclined to depend upon “the
first, always indubitably true impression.” The understanding has
generalized simply and hastily, without seeking for justification.

The only way of avoiding great damage is to extract the fact in itself
from its environment and accompanying circumstance, and to study it
without them. The environment is only a means of proof, but no proof,
and only when the object or event has been validated in itself may we
adduce one means of proof after another and modify our point of view
accordingly. Not to do so, means always to land upon false inferences,
and what is worse, to find it impossible upon the recognition of an
error later on, to discover at what point it has occurred. By that time
it has been buried too deep in the heap of our inferential system to be
discoverable.

The error of confusion Mill reduces especially to the unclear
representation of _what_ proof is, i.e., to the ambiguity of words. We
rarely meet such cases, but when we do, they occur after we have
compounded concepts and have united rather carelessly some symbol with
an object or an event which ought not to have been united, simply
because we were mistaken about its importance. A warning example may be
found in the inference which is made from the sentence given a criminal
because of “identical motive.” The Petitio, the Ignorantia, etc., belong
to this class. The purely logical mistakes or mistakes of syllogism do
not enter into these considerations.


Section 33. (k) Statistics of the Moral Situation.

Upon the first glance it might be asserted that statistics and
psychology have nothing to do with each other. If, however, it is
observed that the extraordinary and inexplicable results presented by
statistics of morals and general statistics influence our thought and
reflection unconditionally, its importance for criminal psychology can
not be denied. Responsibility, abundance of criminals, their
distribution according to time, place, personality, and circumstances,
the regularity of their appearance, all these have so profound an
influence upon us both essentially and circumstantially that even our
judgments and resolutions, no less than the conduct and thought of other
people whom we judge, are certainly altered by them.[163] Moreover,
probability and statistics are in such close and inseparable connection
that we may not make use of or interpret the one without the other.
Eminent psychological contributions by Münsterberg show the importance
the statistical problems have for psychology. This writer warns us
against the over-valuation of the results of the statistics of morality,
and believes that its proper tendencies will be discovered only much
later. In any event the real value of statistical synthesis and
deduction can be discovered only when it is closely studied. This is
particularly true with regard to criminal conditions. The works of many
authors[164] teach us things that would not otherwise be learned, and
they would not be dealt with here if only a systematic study of the
works themselves could be of use. We speak here only of their importance
for our own discipline. Nobody doubts that there are mysteries in the
figures and figuring of statistics. We admit honestly that we know no
more to-day than when Paul de Decker discussed Quetelet’s labors in
statistics of morality in the Brussels Academy of Science, and confessed
what a puzzle it was that human conduct, even in its smallest
manifestations, obeyed in their totality constant and immutable laws.
Concerning this curious fact Adolf Wagner says: “If a traveler had told
us something about some people where a statute determines exactly how
many persons per year shall marry, die, commit suicide, and crimes
within certain classes,--and if he had announced furthermore that these
laws were altogether obeyed, what should we have said? And as a matter
of fact the laws are obeyed all the world over.”[165]

Of course the statistics of morality deal with quantities not qualities,
but in the course of statistical examination the latter are met with.
So, e.g., examinations into the relation of crime to school-attendance
and education, into the classes that show most suicides, etc., connect
human qualities with statistical data. The time is certainly not far off
when we shall seek for the proper view of the probability of a certain
assumption with regard to some rare crime, doubtful suicide,
extraordinary psychic phenomena, etc., with the help of a statistical
table. This possibility is made clearer when the inconceivable constancy
of some figures is considered. Suppose we study the number of suicides
since 1819 in Austria, in periods of eight years. We find the following
figures, 3000, 5000, 6000, 7000, 9000, 12000, 15000--i.e., a regular
increase which is comparable to law.[166] Or suppose we consider the
number of women, who, in the course of ten continuous years in France,
shot themselves; we find 6, 6, 7, 7, 6, 6, 7; there is merely an
alternation between 6 and 7. Should not we look up if in some one year
eight or nine appeared? Should not we give some consideration to the
possibility that the suicide is only a pretended one? Or suppose we
consider the number of men who have drowned themselves within the same
time: 280, 285, 292, 276, 257, 269, 258, 276, 278, 287,--Wagner says
rightly of such figures “that they contain the arithmetical relation of
the mechanism belonging to a moral order which ought to call out even
greater astonishment than the mechanism of stellar systems.”

Still more remarkable are the figures when they are so brought together
that they may be seen as a curve. It is in this way that Drobisch brings
together a table which distributes crime according to age. Out of a
thousand crimes committed by persons between the ages of:

  +-------------------+----------+----------+
  |                   |  AGAINST |  AGAINST |
  |                   | PROPERTY |  PERSONS |
  +-------------------+----------+----------+
  |Less than 16 years |      2   |   0.53   |
  |          16-21    |    105   |     28   |
  |          21-25    |    114   |     50   |
  |          25-30    |    101   |     48   |
  |          30-35    |     93   |     41   |
  |          35-40    |     78   |     31   |
  |          40-45    |     63   |     25   |
  |          45-50    |     48   |     19   |
  |          50-55    |     34   |     15   |
  |          55-60    |     24   |     12   |
  |          60-65    |     19   |     11   |
  |          65-70    |     14   |      8   |
  |          70-80    |      8   |      5   |
  |More than 80       |      2   |      2   |
  +-------------------+----------+----------+

Through both columns a definite curve may be drawn which grows steadily
and drops steadily. Greater mathematical certainty is almost
unthinkable. Of similar great importance is the parallelization of the
most important conditions. When, e.g., suicides in France, from 1826 to
1870 are taken in series of five years we find the figures 1739, 2263,
2574, 2951, 3446, 3639, 4002, 4661, 5147; if now during that period the
population has increased from 30 to only 36 millions other determining
factors have to be sought.[167]

Again, most authorities as quoted by Gutberlet,[168] indicate that most
suicides are committed in June, fewest in December; most at night,
especially at dawn, fewest at noon, especially between twelve and two
o’clock. The greatest frequency is among the half-educated, the age
between sixty and seventy, and the nationality Saxon (Oettingen).

The combination of such observations leads to the indubitable conclusion
that the results are sufficiently constant to permit making at least an
assumption with regard to the cases in hand. At present, statistics say
little of benefit with regard to the individual; J. S. Mill is right in
holding that the death-rate will help insurance companies but will tell
any individual little concerning the duration of his life. According to
Adolf Wagner, the principal statistical rule is: The law has validity
when dealing with great numbers; the constant regularity is perceivable
only when cases are very numerous; single cases show many a variation
and exception. Quetelet has shown the truth of this in his example of
the circle. “If you draw a circle on the blackboard with thick chalk,
and study its outline closely in small sections, you will find the
coarsest irregularities; but if you step far back and study the circle
as a whole, its regular, perfect form becomes quite distinct.” But the
circle must be drawn carefully and correctly, and one must not give way
to sentimentality and tears when running over a fly’s legs in drawing.
Emil du Bois-Reymond[169] says against this: “When the postmaster
announces that out of 100,000 letters a year, exactly so and so many
come unaddressed, we think nothing of the matter--but when Quetelet
counts so and so many criminals to every 100,000 people our moral sense
is aroused since it is painful to think that we are not criminals simply
because somebody else has drawn the black spot.” But really there is as
little regrettable in this fact as in the observation that every year so
and so many men break their legs, and so and so many die--in those cases
also, a large number of people have the good fortune not to have broken
their legs nor to have died. We have here the irrefutable logic of facts
which reveals nothing vexatious.

On the other hand, there is no doubt that our criminal statistics, to be
useful, must be handled in a rather different fashion. We saw, in
studying the statistics of suicide, that inferences with regard to
individual cases could be drawn only when the material had been studied
carefully and examined on all sides. But our criminological statistic is
rarely examined with such thoroughness; the tenor of such examination is
far too bureaucratic and determined by the statutes and the process of
law. The criminalist gives the statistician the figures but the latter
can derive no significant principles from them. Consider for once any
official report on the annual results in the criminal courts in any
country. Under and over the thousands and thousands of figures and rows
of figures there is a great mass of very difficult work which has been
profitable only in a very small degree. I have before me the four
reports of a single year which deal with the activities of the Austrian
courts and criminal institutions, and which are excellent in their
completeness, correctness, and thorough revision. Open the most
important,--the results of the administration of criminal law in the
various departments of the country,--and you find everything
recorded:--how many were punished here and how many there, what their
crimes were, the percentage of condemned according to age, social
standing, religion, occupation, wealth, etc.; then again you see endless
tables of arrests, sentences, etc., etc. Now the value of all this is to
indicate merely whether a certain regularity is discoverable in the
procedure of the officials. Material psychologically valuable is rare.
There is some energetic approximation to it in the consideration of
culture, wealth, and previous sentences, but even these are dealt with
most generally, while the basis and motive of the death-sentence is
barely indicated. We can perceive little consideration of motives with
regard to education, earlier life, etc., in their relation to
sentencing. Only when statistics will be made to deal actually and in
every direction with qualities and not merely with quantities will they
begin to have a really scientific value.


Topic II. KNOWLEDGE.


Section 34.

Criminal law, like all other disciplines, must ask under what conditions
and when we are entitled to say “we know.” The answer is far from being
perennially identical, though it might have been expected that the
conviction of knowledge would be ever united with identical conditions.
The strange and significant difference is determined by the question
whether the verdict, “we know,” will or will not have practical
consequences. When we discuss some question like the place of a certain
battle, the temperature of the moon, or the appearance of a certain
animal in the Pliocene, we first assume that there is a true answer;
reasons for and against will appear, the former increase in number, and
suddenly we discover in some book the assurance that, “We know the
fact.” That assurance passes into so and so many other books; and if it
is untrue, no essential harm can be done.

But when science is trying to determine the quality of some substance,
the therapeutic efficiency of some poison, the possibilities of some
medium of communication, the applicability of some great national
economic principle like free trade, then it takes much more time to
announce, “We know that this is so and not otherwise.” In this case one
sees clearly that tremendous consequences follow on the practical
interpretation of “we know,” and therefore there is in these cases quite
a different taxation of knowledge from that in cases where the practical
consequences are comparatively negligible.

Our work is obviously one of concrete practical consequences. It
contains, moreover, conditions that make imperfect knowledge equivalent
to complete ignorance, for in delivering sentence every “no” may each
time mean, “We know that he has not done it” or again, “We know that it
is not altogether certain that he has done it.” Our knowledge in such
cases is limited to the recognition of the confusion of the subject, and
knowledge in its widest sense is the consciousness of some definite
content; in this case, confusion. Here, as everywhere, knowledge is not
identical with truth; knowledge is only subjective truth. Whoever knows,
has reasons for considering things true and none against so considering
them. Here, he is entitled to assume that all who recognize his
knowledge will justify it. But, when even everybody justifies his
knowledge, it can be justified only in its immediacy; to-morrow the
whole affair may look different. For this reason we criminalists assert
much less than other investigators that we seek the truth; if we presume
to such an assertion, we should not have the institutions of equity,
revision, and, in criminal procedure, retrial. Our knowledge, when named
modestly, is only the innermost conviction that some matter is so and so
according to human capacity, and “such and such a condition of things.”
Parenthetically, we agree that “such and such a condition of things” may
alter with every instant and we declare ourselves ready to study the
matter anew if the conditions change. We demand material, but relative
truth.

One of the acutest thinkers, J. R. von Mayer, the discoverer of the
working principle of “conservation of energy,” says, “the most
important, if not the only rule for real natural science is this: Always
to believe that it is our task to know the phenomena before we seek
explanation of higher causes. If a fact is once known in all its
aspects, it is thereby explained and the duty of science fulfilled.” The
author did not have us dry-souled lawyers in mind when he made this
assertion, but we who modestly seek to subordinate our discipline to
that of the correct one of natural science, must take this doctrine
absolutely to heart. Every crime we study is a fact, and once we know it
in all its aspects and have accounted for every little detail, we have
explained it and have done our duty.

But the word explain does not lead us very far. It is mainly a matter of
reducing the mass of the inexplicable to a minimum and the whole to its
simplest terms. If only we succeed in this reduction! In most cases we
substitute for one well-known term, not another still better one, but a
strange one which may mean different things to different people. So
again, we explain one event by means of another more difficult one. It
is unfortunate that we lawyers are more than all others inclined to make
unnecessary explanations, because our criminal law has accustomed us to
silly definitions which rarely bring us closer to the issue and which
supply us only with a lot of words difficult to understand instead of
easily comprehensible ones. Hence we reach explanations both impossible
and hard to make, explanations which we ourselves are often unwilling to
believe. And again we try to explain and to define events which
otherwise would have been understood by everybody and which become
doubtful and uncertain because of the attempt. The matter becomes
especially difficult when we feel ourselves unsure, or when we have
discovered or expect contradiction. Then we try to convince ourselves
that we know something, although at the beginning we were clearly enough
aware that we knew nothing. We must not forget that our knowledge can
attain only to ideas of things. It consists alone in the perception of
the relation and agreement, or in the incompatibility and contradiction
of some of our ideas. Our task lies exactly in the explication of these
impressions, and the more thoroughly that is done the greater and more
certain is the result. But we must never trust our own impressions
merely. “When the theologian, who deals with the supersensible, has said
all that, from his point of view, he can say, when the jurist, who
represents those fundamental laws which are the result of social
experience, has considered all reasons from his own point of view, the
final authority in certain cases must be the physician who is engaged in
studying the life of the body.”

I get this from Maudsley,[170] and it leads us to keep in mind that
_our_ knowledge is very one-sided and limited, and that an event is
known only when all have spoken who possess especial knowledge of its
type. Hence, every criminalist is required to found his knowledge upon
that of the largest possible number of experts and not to judge or
discuss any matter which requires especial information without having
first consulted an expert with regard to it. Only the sham knows
everything; the trained man understands how little the mind of any
individual may grasp, and how many must coöperate in order to explain
the very simplest things.

The complexity of the matter lies in the essence of the concept “to
be.” We use the word “to be” to indicate the intent of all perceived and
perceivable. “‘To be’ and ‘to know’ are identical in so far as they have
identical content, and the content may be known?”[171]




PART II.

OBJECTIVE CONDITIONS OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION: THE MENTAL ACTIVITY OF
THE EXAMINEE.




TITLE A. GENERAL CONDITIONS.


Topic I. OF SENSE-PERCEPTION.


Section 35.

Our conclusions depend upon perceptions made by ourselves and others.
And if the perceptions are good our judgments _may_ be good, if they are
bad our judgments _must_ be bad. Hence, to study the forms of
sense-perception is to study the fundamental conditions of the
administration of law, and the greater the attention thereto, the more
certain is the administration.

It is not our intention to develop a theory of perception. We have only
to extract those conditions which concern important circumstances,
criminologically considered, and from which we may see how we and those
we examine, perceive matters. A thorough and comprehensive study of this
question can not be too much recommended. Recent science has made much
progress in this direction, and has discovered much of great importance
for us. To ignore this is to confine oneself merely to the superficial
and external, and hence to the inconceivable and incomprehensible, to
ignoring valuable material for superficial reasons, and what is worse,
to identifying material as important which properly understood has no
value whatever.


Section 36. (a) General Considerations.

The criminalist studies the physiological psychology[172] of the senses
and their functions, in order to ascertain their nature, their influence
upon images and concepts, their trustworthiness, their reliability and
its conditions, and the relation of perception to the object. The
question applies equally to the judge, the jury, the witness, and the
accused. Once the essence of the function and relation of
sense-perception is understood, its application in individual cases
becomes easy.

The importance of sense-perception need not be demonstrated. “If we
ask,” says Mittermaier, “for the reason of our conviction of the truth
of facts even in very important matters, and the basis of every judgment
concerning existence of facts, we find that the evidence of the senses
is final and seems, therefore, the only true source of certainty.”

There has always, of course, been a quarrel as to the objectivity and
reliability of sense-perception. That the senses do not lie, “not
because they are always correct, but because they do not judge,” is a
frequently quoted sentence of Kant’s; the Cyrenaics have already
suggested this in asserting that pleasure and pain alone are
indubitable. Aristotle narrows the veracity of sensation to its
essential content, as does Epicurus. Descartes, Locke and Leibnitz have
suggested that no image may be called, as mere change of feeling, true
or false. Sensationalism in the work of Gassendi, Condillac, and
Helvetius undertook for this reason the defense of the senses against
the reproach of deceit, and as a rule did it by invoking the
infallibility of the sense of touch against the reproach of the
contradictions in the other senses. Reid went back to Aristotle in
distinguishing specific objects for each sense and in assuming the truth
of each sense within its own field.

That these various theories can be adjusted is doubtful, even if, from a
more conservative point of view, the subject may be treated
quantitatively. The modern quantification of psychology was begun by
Herbart, who developed a mathematical system of psychology by
introducing certain completely unempirical postulates concerning the
nature of representation and by applying certain simple premises in all
deductions concerning numerical extent. Then came Fechner, who assumed
the summation of stimuli. And finally these views were determined and
fixed by the much-discussed Weber’s Law, according to which the
intensity of the stimulus must increase in the proportion that the
intensity of the sensation is to increase; i.e., if a stimulus of 20
units requires the addition of 3 before it can be perceived, a stimulus
of 60 units would require the addition of 9. This law, which is of
immense importance to criminalists who are discussing the
sense-perceptions of witnesses, has been thoroughly and conclusively
dealt with by A. Meinong.[173]

“Modern psychology takes qualities perceived externally to be in
themselves subjective but capable of receiving objectivity through our
relation to the outer world.... The qualitative character of our sensory
content produced by external stimuli depends primarily on the
organization of our senses. This is the fundamental law of perception,
of modern psychology, variously expressed, but axiomatic in all
physiological psychology.”[174] In this direction Helmholtz[175] has
done pioneer work. He treats particularly the problem of optics, and
physiological optics is the study of perception by means of the sense of
sight. We see things in the external world through the medium of light
which they direct upon our eyes. The light strikes the retina, and
causes a sensation. The sensation brought to the brain by means of the
optic nerve becomes the condition of the representation in consciousness
of certain objects distributed in space.... We make use of the sensation
which the light stimulates in the mechanism of the optic nerve to
construct representations concerning the existence, form, and condition
of external objects. Hence we call images perceptions of sight. (Our
sense-perception, according to this theory, consists, therefore,
entirely of sensations; the latter constitute the stuff or the content
from which the other is constructed). Our sensations are effects caused
in our organs, externally, and the manifestation of such an effect
depends essentially upon the nature of the apparatus which has been
stimulated.

There are certain really known inferences, e.g., those made by the
astronomer from the perspective pictures of the stars to their positions
in space. These inferences are founded upon well-studied knowledge of
the principles of optics. Such knowledge of optics is lacking in the
ordinary function of seeing; nevertheless it is permissible to conceive
the psychical function of ordinary perception as unconscious inferences,
inasmuch as this name will completely distinguish them from the commonly
so-called conscious inferences.

The last-named condition is of especial importance to us. We need
investigation to determine the laws of the influence of optical and
acoustical knowledge upon perception. That these laws are influential
may be verified easily. Whoever is ignorant, e.g., that a noise is
reflected back considerably, will say that a wagon is turning from the
side from which the noise comes, though if he knows the law, if he knows
that fact, his answer would be reversed. So, as every child knows that
the reflection of sound is frequently deceptive, everybody who is asked
in court will say that he believes the wagon to be on the right side
though it might as well have been on the left. Again, if we were unaware
that light is otherwise refracted in water than in air we could say that
a stick in the water has been bent obtusely, but inasmuch as everybody
knows this fact of the relation of light to water, he will declare that
the stick appears bent but really is straight.

From these simplest of sense-perceptions to the most complicated, known
only to half a dozen foremost physicists, there is an infinite series of
laws controlling each stage of perception, and for each stage there is a
group of men who know just so much and no more. We have, therefore, to
assume that their perceptions will vary with the number and manner of
their accomplishments, and we may almost convince ourselves that each
examinee who has to give evidence concerning his sense-perception should
literally undergo examination to make clear his scholarly status and
thereby the value of his testimony. Of course, in practice this is not
required. First of all we judge approximately a man’s nature and nurture
and according to the impression he makes upon us, thence, his
intellectual status. This causes great mistakes. But, on the other hand,
the testimony is concerned almost always with one or several physical
events, so that a simple relational interrogation will establish
certainly whether the witness knows and attends to the physical law in
question or not. But anyway, too little is done to determine the means a
man uses to reach a certain perception. If instantaneous contradictions
appear, there is little damage, for in the absence of anything certain,
further inferences are fortunately made in rare cases only. But when the
observation is that of one person alone, or even when more testify but
have accidentally the same amount of knowledge and hence have made the
same mistake, and no contradiction appears, we suppose ourselves to
possess the precise truth, confirmed by several witnesses, and we argue
merrily on the basis of it. In the meantime we quite forget that
contradictions are our salvation from the trusting acceptance of
untruth--and that the absence of contradiction means, as a rule, the
absence of a starting point for further examination.

For this reason and others modern psychology requires us to be cautious.
Among the others is the circumstance that perceptions are rarely pure.
Their purity consists in containing nothing else than perception; they
are mixed when they are connected with imaginations, judgments, efforts,
and volitions. How rarely a perception is pure I have already tried to
show; judgments almost always accompany it. I repeat too, that owing to
this circumstance and our ignorance of it, countless testimonies are
interpreted altogether falsely. This is true in many other fields. When,
for example, A. Fick says: “The condition we call sensation occurs in
the consciousness of the subject when his sensory nerves are
stimulated,” he does not mean that the nervous stimulus in itself is
capable of causing the condition in question. This one stimulus is only
a single tone in the murmur of countless stimuli, which earlier and at
the same time have influenced us and are different in their effect on
each man. Therefore, that single additional tone will also be different
in each man. Or, when Bernstein says that “Sensation, i.e., the
stimulation of the sensorium and the passage of this stimulation to the
brain, does not in itself imply the perception of an object or an event
in the external world,” we gather that the objectivity of the perception
works correctively not more than one time out of many. So here again
everything depends upon the nature and nurture of the subject.

Sensations are, according to Aubert, still more subjective. “They are
the specific activity of the sense organs, (not, therefore, passive as
according to Helmholtz, but active functions of the sense organs).
Perception arises when we combine our particular sensations with the
pure images of the spirit or the schemata of the understanding,
especially with the pure image of space. The so-called ejection or
externalization of sensations occurs only as their scheme and relation
to the unity of their object.”

So long as anything is conceived as passive it may always recur more
identically than when it is conceived as active. In the latter case the
individuality of the particular person makes the perception in a still
greater degree individual, and makes it almost the creature of him who
perceives. Whether Aubert is right or not is not our task to discover,
but if he is right then sense-perception is as various as is humanity.
The variety is still further increased by means of the comprehensive
activity which Fischer[176] presupposes. “Visual perception has a
comprehensive or compounding activity. We never see any absolute simple
and hence do not perceive the elements of things. We see merely a
spatial continuum, and that is possible only through comprehensive
activity--especially in the case of movement in which the object of
movement and the environment must both be perceived.” But each
individual method of “comprehension” is different. And it is uncertain
whether this is purely physical, whether only the memory assists (so
that the attention is biased by what has been last perceived), whether
imagination is at work or an especial psychical activity must be
presupposed in compounding the larger elements. The fact is that men may
perceive an enormous variety of things with a single glance. And
generally the perceptive power will vary with the skill of the
individual. The narrowest, smallest, most particularizing glance is that
of the most foolish; and the broadest, most comprehensive, and comparing
glance, that of the most wise. This is particularly noticeable when the
time of observation is short. The one has perceived little and generally
the least important; the other has in the same time seen everything from
top to bottom and has distinguished between the important and the
unimportant, has observed the former rather longer than the latter, and
is able to give a better description of what he has seen. And then, when
two so different descriptions come before us, we wonder at them and say
that one of them is untrue.[177]

The speed of apperception has been subjected to measurement by Auerbach,
Kries, Baxt, von Tigerstedt and Bergqvist, Stern, Vaschide, Vurpass,
etc. The results show 0.015 to 0.035 seconds for compounded images.
Unfortunately, most of these experiments have brought little unanimity
in the results and have not compared, e.g., the apperception-times of
very clever people with those of very slow and stupid ones. In the
variety of perception lies the power of presentation (in our sense of
the term). In the main other forces assist in this, but when we consider
how the senses work in combination we must conclude that they determine
their own forms. “If we are to say that sense experience instructs us
concerning the manifoldness of objects we may do so correctly if we add
the scholium that many things could not be mentioned without synthesis.”
So Dörner writes. But if we approach the matter from another side, we
see how remarkable it is that human perceptions can be compared at all.
Hermann Schwarz says “According to the opinion of the physicists we know
external events directly by means of the organs, the nerves of which
serve passively to support consciousness in the perception of such
events. On the contrary, according to the opinion of most physiologists,
the nerve fibers are active in the apprehension of external events, they
modify it, alter it until it is well nigh unrecognizable, and turn it
over to consciousness only after the original process has undergone
still another transformation into new forms of mechanical energy in the
ganglion cells of the outer brain. This is the difference between the
physical theory of perception and the physiological.”

In this connection there are several more conditions pertaining to
general sense-perception. First of all there is that so-called
vicariousness of the senses which substitutes one sense for another, in
representation. The _actual_ substitution of one sense by another as
that of touch and sight, does not belong to the present discussion. The
substitution of sound and sight is only apparent. E. g., when I have
several times heard the half-noticed voice of some person without seeing
him, I will imagine a definite face and appearance which _are_ pure
imagination. So again, if I hear cries for help near some stream, I see
more or less clearly the form of a drowning person, etc. It is quite
different in touching and seeing; if I touch a ball, a die, a cat, a
cloth, etc., with my eyes closed, then I may so clearly see the color of
the object before me that I might be really seeing it. But in this case
there is a real substitution of greater or lesser degree.

The same vicariousness occurs when perception is attributed to one sense
while it properly belongs to another. This happens particularly at such
times when one has not been present during the event or when the
perception was made while only half awake, or a long time ago, and
finally, when a group of other impressions have accompanied the event,
so that there was not time enough, if I may say so, properly to register
the sense impression. So, e.g., some person, especially a close friend,
may have been merely heard and later quite convincingly supposed to have
been seen. Sensitive people, who generally have an acuter olfactory
sense than others, attach to any perceived odor all the other
appropriate phenomena. The vicariousnesses of visual sensations are the
most numerous and the most important. Anybody who has been pushed or
beaten, and has felt the blows, will, if other circumstances permit and
the impulse is strong enough, be convinced that he has seen his
assaulter and the manner of the assault. Sometimes people who are shot
at will claim to have seen the flight of the ball. And so again they
will have seen in a dark night a comparatively distant wagon, although
they have only heard the noise it made and felt the vibration. It is
fortunate that, as a rule, such people try to be just in answering to
questions which concern this substitution of one sense-perception for
another. And such questions ought to be urgently put. That a false
testimony can cause significant errors is as obvious as the fact that
such substitutions are most frequent with nervous and imaginative
persons.

Still more significant is that characteristic phenomenon, to us of
considerable importance, which might be called retrospective
illumination of perception. It consists in the appearance of a
sense-perception under conditions of some noticeable interruption, when
the stimulus does not, as a rule, give rise to that perception. I cite a
simple example in which I first observed this fact. Since I was a child
there had been in my bed-room a clock, the loud ticking of which habit
of many years prevented my hearing. Once, as I lay awake in bed, I heard
it tick suddenly three times, then fall silent and stop. The occurrence
interested me, I quickly got a light and examined the clock closely. The
pendulum still swung, but without a sound; the time was right. I
inferred that the clock must have stopped going just a few minutes
before. And I soon found out why: the clock is not encased and the
weight of the pendulum hangs free. Now under the clock there always
stood a chair which this time had been so placed as to be inclined
further backward. The weight followed that inclination and so the
silence came about.

I immediately made an experiment. I set the clock going again, and again
held the weight back. The last beats of the pendulum were neither
quicker nor slower, nor louder or softer than any others, before the
sudden stoppage of the clock. I believe the explanation to be as
follows: As customary noises especially are unheard, I did not hear the
pendulum of the clock. But its sudden stopping disturbed the balance of
sound which had been dominating the room. This called attention to the
cause of the disturbance, i.e., the ticking which had ceased, and hence
perception was intensified _backwards_ and I heard the last ticks, which
I had not perceived before, one after another. The latent stimulus
caused by the ticking worked backward. My attention was naturally
awakened only _after_ the last tick, but my perception was consecutive.

I soon heard of another case, this time, in court. There was a shooting
in some house and an old peasant woman, who was busy sewing in the room,
asserted that she had just before the shooting heard a _few_ steps in
the direction from which the shot must have come. Nobody would agree
that there was any reason for supposing that the person in question
should have made his final steps more noisily than his preceding ones.
But I am convinced that the witness told the truth. The steps of the new
arrival were perceived subconsciously; the further disturbance of the
perception hindered her occupation and finally, when she was frightened
by the shot, the upper levels of consciousness were illuminated and the
noises which had already reached the subconsciousness passed over the
threshold and were consciously perceived.

I learned from an especially significant case, how the same thing could
happen with regard to vision. A child was run over and killed by a
careless coachman. A pensioned officer saw this through the window. His
description was quite characteristic. It was the anniversary of a
certain battle. The old gentleman, who stood by the window thinking
about it and about his long dead comrades, was looking blankly out into
the street. The horrible cry of the unhappy child woke him up and he
really began to see. Then he observed that he had in truth seen
everything that had happened _before_ the child was knocked over--i.e.,
for some reason the coachman had turned around, turning the horses in
such a way at the same time that the latter jumped sidewise upon the
frightened child, and hence the accident. The general expressed himself
correctly in this fashion: “I saw it all, but I did not perceive and
know that I saw it until _after_ the scream of the child.” He offered
also in proof of the correctness of his testimony, that he, an old
cavalry officer, would have had to see the approaching misfortune if he
had consciously seen the moving of the coachman, and then he would have
had to be frightened. But he knew definitely that he was frightened only
when the child cried out--he could not, therefore, have consciously
perceived the preceding event. His story was confirmed by other
witnesses.

This psychological process is of significance in criminal trials,
inasmuch as many actionable cases depend upon sudden and unexpected
events, where retrospective illumination may frequently come in. In such
cases it is most important to determine what actually has been
perceived, and it is never indifferent whether we take the testimony in
question as true or not.

With regard to the senses of criminals, Lombroso and Ottolenghi have
asserted that they are duller than those of ordinary people. The
assertion is based on a collection made by Lombroso of instances of the
great indifference of criminals to pain. But he has overlooked the fact
that the reason is quite another thing. Barbarous living and barbarous
morals are especially dulling, so that indifference to pain is a
characteristic of all barbarous nations and characters. Inasmuch as
there are many criminals among barbarous people, barbarity, criminality
and indifference to pain come together in a large number of cases. But
there is nothing remarkable in this, and a direct relation between crime
and dullness of the senses can not be demonstrated.


(b) The Sense of Sight.

Section 37. (1) _General Considerations._

Just as the sense of sight is the most dignified of all our senses, it
is also the most important in the criminal court, for most witnesses
testify as to what they have seen. If we compare sight with the hearing,
which is next in the order of importance, we discover the well-known
fact that what is seen is much more certain and trustworthy than what is
heard. “It is better to see once than to hear ten times,” says the
universally-valid old maxim. No exposition, no description, no
complication which the data of other senses offer, can present half as
much as even a fleeting glance. Hence too, no sense can offer us such
surprises as the sense of sight. If I imagine the thunder of Niagara,
the voice of Lucca, the explosion of a thousand cartridges, etc., or
anything else that I have not heard, my imagination is certainly
incorrect, but it will differ from reality only in degree. It is quite
different with visual imagination. We need not adduce examples of
magnificence like the appearance of the pyramids, a tropical light; of a
famous work of art, a storm at sea, etc. The most insignificant thing
ever seen but variously pictured in imagination will be greeted at first
sight with the words: “But I imagined it quite different!” Hence the
tremendous importance of every local and material characteristic which
the criminal court deals with. Every one of us knows how differently he
has, as a rule, imagined the place of the crime to be; how difficult it
is to arrive at an understanding with the witness concerning some
unseen, local characteristic, and how many mistakes false images of the
unseen have caused. Whenever I ciceroned anybody through the Graz
Criminal Museum, I was continually assailed with “Does this or that look
so? But I thought it looked quite different!” And the things which evoke
these exclamations are such as the astonished visitors have spoken and
written about hundreds of times and often passed judgments upon. The
same situation occurs when witnesses narrate some observation. When the
question involves the sense of hearing some misunderstanding may be
popularly assumed. But the people know little of optical illusions and
false visual perceptions, though they are aware that incorrect auditions
are frequent matters of fact. Moreover, to the heard object a large
number of more or less certain precautionary judgments are attached. If
anybody, e.g., has _heard_ a shot, stealthy footsteps, crackling flames,
we take his experience always to be _approximate_. We do not do so when
he assures us he has _seen_ these things or their causes. Then we take
them--barring certain mistakes in observation,--to be indubitable
perceptions in which misunderstanding is impossible.

In this, again, is the basis for the distrust with which we meet
testimony concerning hearsay. For we feel uncertain in the mere absence
of the person whose conversation is reported, since his value can not be
determined. But a part of the mistrust lies in the fact that it is not
vision but the perennially half-doubted hearing that is in issue. Lies
are assigned mainly to words; but there are lies which are visual
(deceptions, maskings, illusions, etc.). Visual lies are, however, a
diminishing minority in comparison with the lies that are heard.

The certainty of the correctness of vision lies in its being tested with
the sense of touch,--i.e. in the adaptation of our bodily sense to
otherwise existing things. As Helmholtz says, “The agreement between our
visual perceptions and the external world, rests, at least in the most
important matters, on the same ground that all our knowledge of the
actual world rests on, upon the experience and the lasting test of their
correctness by means of experiments, i.e., of the movements of our
bodies.” This would almost make it seem that the supreme judge among the
senses is the touch. But that is not intended; we know well enough to
what illusions we are subject if we trust the sense of touch alone. At
the same time we must suppose that the question here is one of the
nature of the body, and this can be measured only by something similar,
i.e., by our own physical characteristics, but always under the control
of some other sense, especially the sense of sight.

The visual process itself consists, according to Fischer, “of a
compounded series of results which succeed each other with extraordinary
rapidity and are causally related. In this series the following elements
may principally be distinguished.

(1) The physico-chemical process.

(2) The physiologico-sensory.

(3) The psychological.

(4) The physiologico-motor.

(5) The process of perception.”

It is not our task to examine the first four elements. In order clearly
to understand the variety of perception, we have to deal with the last
only. I once tried to explain this by means of the phenomenon of
instantaneous photographs (cinematographs). If we examine one such
representing an instant in some quick movement, we will assert that we
never could have perceived it in the movement itself. This indicates
that our vision is slower than that of the photographic apparatus, and
hence, that we do not apprehend the smallest particular conditions, but
that we each time unconsciously compound a group of the smallest
conditions and construct in that way the so-called instantaneous
impressions. If we are to compound a great series of instantaneous
impressions in one galloping step, we must have condensed and compounded
a number of them in order to get the image that we see with our eyes as
instantaneous. We may therefore say that the least instantaneous image
we ever see with our eyes contains many parts which only the
photographic apparatus can grasp. Suppose we call these particular
instances a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m; it is self-evident that
the manner of their composition must vary with each individual. One man
may compound his elements in groups of three: a, b, c,--d, e, f,--g, h,
i, etc.; another may proceed in dyads: a, b,--c, d,--e, f,--g, h,--etc.;
a third may have seen an unobservable instant later, but constructs his
image like the first man: b, c, d,--l, m, n, etc.; a fourth works slowly
and rather inaccurately, getting: a, c, d,--f, h, i,--etc. Such
variations multiply, and when various observers of the same event
describe it they do it according to their different characteristics. And
the differences may be tremendous. Substitute numerals for letters and
the thing becomes clear. The relative slowness of our apprehension of
visual elements has the other consequence that we interpolate objects in
the lacunæ of vision _according to our expectations_. The best example
of this sort of thing would be the perception of assault and battery.
When ten people in an inn see how A raises a beer glass against B’s
head, five expect: “Now he’ll pound him,” and five others: “Now he’ll
throw it.” If the glass has reached B’s head none of the ten observers
have seen how it reached there, but the first five take their oath that
A pounded B with the glass, and the other five that he threw it at B’s
head. And all ten have really seen it, so firmly are they convinced of
the correctness of their swift judgment of expectation. Now, before we
treat the witness to some reproach like untruth, inattention, silliness,
or something equally nice, _we_ had better consider whether his story is
not true, and whether the difficulty might not really lie in the
imperfection of our own sensory processes. This involves partly what
Liebmann has called “anthropocentric vision,” i.e., seeing with man as
the center of things. Liebmann further asserts, “that we see things only
in perspective sizes, i.e., only from an angle of vision varying with
their approach, withdrawal and change of position, but in no sense as
definite cubical, linear, or surface sizes. The apparent size of an
object we call an angle of vision at a certain distance. But, what
indeed is the different, true size? We know only relations of
magnitude.” This description is important when we are dealing with
testimony concerning size. It seems obvious that each witness who speaks
of size is to be asked whence he had observed it, but at the same time a
great many unexpected errors occur, especially when what is involved is
the determination of the size of an object in the same plane. One need
only to recall the meeting of railway tracks, streets, alleys, etc., and
to remember how different in size, according to the point of view of the
witness, various objects in such places must appear. Everybody knows
that distant things seem smaller than near ones, but almost nobody knows
what the difference amounts to. For examples see Lotze, “Medical
Psychology,” Leipzig, 1852.

In addition we often think that the clearness of an object represents
its distance and suppose that the first alone determines the latter. But
the distinctness of objects, i.e., the perceptibility of a
light-impression, depends also upon the absolute brightness and the
differences in brightness. The latter is more important than is
supposed. Try to determine how far away you can see a key-hole when the
wall containing the door is in the shadow, and when there is a window
opposite the key-hole. A dark object of the size of a key-hole will not
be visible at one hundredth of the distance at which the key-hole is
perceived. Moreover, the difference in intensity is not alone in
consideration; the intensity of the object _with regard to its
background_ has yet to be considered. Aubert has shown that the accuracy
of the distinction is the same when a square of white paper is looked at
from an angle of 18´´, and when conversely a square of black paper on
white background is looked at from an angle of 35´´. “When we put a gray
paper in the sunshine, it may become objectively brighter than white
paper in shadow. But this does not prevent us from knowing one as gray
and the other as pure white. We separate the color of the object from
the intensity of the incident light.” But this is not always so simple,
inasmuch as we know in the case in hand which paper is gray and which
white, which is in the sunlight and which in the shadow. But if these
facts are not known mistakes often occur so that a man dressed in dark
clothes but in full light will be described as wearing lighter clothes
than one who wears light clothes in the shadow.

Differences of illumination reveal a number of phenomena difficult to
explain. Fechner calls attention to the appearance of stars: “At night
everybody sees the stars, in daylight not even Sirius or Jupiter is
seen. Yet the absolute difference between those places in the heavens
where the stars are and the environing places is just as great as in the
night--there is only an increase in illumination.” Of still greater
importance to us is the circumstance noted but not explained by
Bernstein. If, in daylight, we look into a basement room from outside,
we can perceive nothing, almost; everything is dark, even the windows
appear black. But in the evening, if the room is ever so slightly
illuminated, and we look into it from outside, we can see even small
articles distinctly. Yet there was much intenser light in the room in
question during the day than the single illumination of the night could
have provided. Hence, it is asserted, the difference in this case is a
standard one. In open day the eye is accustomed to the dominating
brightness of daylight, beside which the subdued illumination of the
room seems relatively dark. But in the evening one is in the dark, and
hence even the little light of a single candle is enough to enable one
to see. That this explanation is untrue is shown by the fact that the
phenomenon is not regulated even when the circumstances in question are
made identical. If, for example, you approach the window in daylight
with your eyes shut, lean your forehead against the pane and shut out
the light on the sides with your hands, and then open your eyes, you see
as little in the room as when you looked into it without performing this
ceremony. So again, if during the night you gazed at some near-by gas
lamp and then glanced into the room, there is only a few moments’
indistinctness at most, after that the single candle is enough. The
reason, then, must be different from the assigned one--but whatever it
is, we need only to maintain that immediate judgment concerning numerous
cases involving situations of this kind would be overhasty. It is often
said that a witness was able to see this or that under such and such
illumination, or that he was unable to see it, although he denies his
ability or inability. The only solution of such contradictions is an
experiment. The attempt must be made either by the judge or some
reliable third person, to discover whether, under the same conditions
of illumination, anything could be seen at the place in question or not.

As to _what_ may be seen in the distance, experiment again, is the best
judge. The human eye is so very different in each man that even the
acute examination into what is known of the visual image of the Pleiades
shows that the _average_ visual capacity of classic periods is no
different from our own, but still that there was great variety in visual
capacity. What enormous visual power is attributed to half-civilized and
barbarous peoples, especially Indians, Esquimos, etc.! Likewise among
our own people there are hunters, mountain guides, etc., who can see so
clearly in the distance that mere stories about it might be fables. In
the Bosnian campaign of 1878 we had a soldier who in numerous cases of
our great need to know the enemy’s position in the distance could
distinguish it with greater accuracy than we with our good
field-glasses. He was the son of a coal-miner in the Styrian mountains,
and rather a fool. Incidentally it may be added that he had an
incredible, almost animal power of orientation.

As we know little concerning far-sightedness, so also we are unable to
define what near-sighted people can see. Inasmuch as their vision does
not carry, they are compelled to make intellectual supplementations.
They observe the form, action, and clothes of people more accurately
than sharp-eyed persons, and hence recognize acquaintances at a greater
distance than the latter. Therefore, before an assertion of a
short-sighted man is doubted an experiment should be made, or at least
another trustworthy short-sighted person should be asked for his
opinion.

The background of objects, their movement and form have decided effects
on the difference in visual perception. It is an ancient observation
that lengthy objects like poles, wires, etc., are visible at
incomparably greater distances than, e.g., squares of the same length.
In examination it has been shown that the boundary of accurate
perception can hardly be determined. I know a place where under
favorable illumination taut, white and very thin telephone wires may be
seen at a distance of more than a kilometer. And this demands a very
small angle of vision.

Humboldt calls attention to the large number of “optical fables.” He
assures us that it is certainly untrue that the stars may be seen in
daylight from a deep well, from mines, or high mountains, although this
has been repeatedly affirmed since Aristotle.

The explanation of our power to see very thin, long objects at a very
great distance, is not our affair, but is of importance because it
serves to explain a number of similar phenomena spoken of by witnesses.
We have either incorrectly to deny things we do not understand, or we
have to accept a good deal that is deniable. We will start, therefore,
with the well-known fact that a point seen for a considerable time may
easily disappear from perception. This has been studied by Helmholtz and
others, and he has shown how difficult it is to keep a point within the
field of vision for only ten or twenty minutes. Aubert examines older
studies of the matter and concludes that this disappearance or confusion
of an object is peripheral, but that fixation of a small object is
always difficult. If we fix a distant point it is disappearing at every
instant so that an accurate perception is not possible; if however we
fix upon a long, thin body, e.g., a wire, it is unnecessary to fix a
single point and we may see the object with a wandering eye, hence more
clearly.

Helmholtz adds that weakly objective images disappear like a wet spot on
warm tin, at the moment a single point is fixed, as does e.g., a
landscape seen at night. This last acute observation is the basis of
many a testimony concerning the sudden disappearance of an object at
night. It has helped me in many an examination, and always to advantage.

In this connection the over-estimation of the moon’s illuminating power
is not to be forgotten. According to Helmholtz the power of the full
moon is not more than that of a candle twelve feet away. And how much
people claim to have seen by moonlight! Dr. Vincent[178] says that a man
may be recognized during the first quarter at from two to six meters, at
full moon at from seven to ten meters, and at the brightest full moon,
an intimate may be recognized at from fifteen to sixteen meters. This is
approximately correct and indicates how much moonlight is
over-estimated.

In addition to the natural differences of sight there are also those
artificially created. How much we may help ourselves by skilful
distinctions, we can recognize in the well-known and
frequently-mentioned business of reading a confused handwriting. We aim
to weaken our sense-perception in favor of our imagination, i.e. so to
reduce the clearness of the former as to be able to test upon it in some
degree a larger number of images. We hold the MS. away from us, look at
it askant, with contracted eyebrows, in different lights, and finally we
read it. Again, the converse occurs. If we have seen something with a
magnifying glass we later recognize details without its help. Definite
conditions may bring to light very great distinctions. A body close to
the face or in the middle distance looks different according as one eye
or both be used in examining it. This is an old story and explains the
queer descriptions we receive of such objects as weapons and the like,
which were suddenly held before the face of the deponent. In cases of
murderous assault it is certain that most uncanny stories are told,
later explained by fear or total confusion or intentional dishonesty,
but really to be explained by nothing more than actual optical
processes.

I do not believe that binocular vision is of much importance in the law;
I know of no case in ordinary vision where it matters whether one or
both eyes have been used. It is correct to assert that one side or the
other of a vertically held hand will be clearer if, before looking at it
with both eyes, you look at it with one or the other, but this makes
little difference to our purpose. It must be maintained that a part of
what we see is seen with one eye only,--if, e.g., I look at the sky and
cover one eye with my hand, a certain portion of the heaven disappears,
but I observe no alteration in the remaining portion. When I cover the
other eye, other stars disappear. Therefore, in binocular vision certain
things are seen with one eye only. This may be of importance when an
effect has been observed first with both eyes, then with one; raising
the question of the difference in observation--but such a question is
rare.

There are two additional things to consider. The first is the problem of
the influence of custom on increasing visual power in darkness. This
power is as a rule undervalued. No animal, naturally, can see anything
in complete darkness. But it is almost unbelievable how much can be seen
with a very little light. Here again, prisoners tell numerous stories
concerning their vision in subterranean prisons. One saw so well as to
be able to throw seven needles about the cell and then to find them
again. Another, the naturalist Quatremére-Disjonval, was able so
accurately to observe the spiders in his cell as to make the observation
the basis for his famous “Aranéologie.” Aubert tells of his having had
to stay in a room so dark as to make it necessary for others to feel
their way, but nevertheless being able to read books without detection
because the others could not see the books.

How quickly we get used to darkness and how much more we see after a
while, is well known. It is also certain that the longer you are in
darkness the more you see. You see more at the end of a day than after a
few hours, and at the end of a year, still more. The eye, perhaps,
changes in some degree for just this purpose. But a prolonged use of the
visual mechanism tends to hypertrophy--or atrophy, as the eyes of
deep-sea fishes show. It is well, in any event, to be careful about
contradicting the testimonies of patients who have long lived in the
dark, concerning what they have seen. The power to see in the dark is so
various that without examination, much injustice may be done. Some
people see almost nothing at twilight, others see at night as well as
cats. And in court these differences must be established and
experimentally verified.

The second important element is the innervation of the muscles in
consequence of movement merely seen. So Stricker points out, that the
sight of a man carrying a heavy load made him feel tension in the
muscles involved, and again, when he saw soldiers exercising, he almost
was compelled openly to act as they. In every case the muscular
innervation followed the visual stimulus.

This may sound improbable but, nevertheless, everybody to some degree
does the identical things. And at law the fact may be of importance in
cases of assault and battery. Since I learned it, I have repeatedly
observed in such cases, from harmless assault to murder, that people,
although they had not been seen to deal any blows, were often accused of
complicity simply because they were making suspicious movements that led
to the following inference: “They stuck their hands into their trousers
pocket looking for a knife, clenched their fists, looked as if they were
about to jump, swung their hands.” In many such cases it appeared that
the suspects were harmless spectators who were simply more obvious in
their innervation of the muscles involved in the assault they were
eagerly witnessing. This fact should be well kept in mind; it may
relieve many an innocent.


Section 38. (2) _Color Vision._

Concerning color vision only a few facts will be mentioned: 1. It will
be worth while, first of all, to consider whether color exists. Liebmann
holds that if all the people were blind to red, red would not exist;
red, i.e., is some cervical phantasy. So are light, sound, warmth,
taste, etc. With other senses we have another world. According to
Helmholtz, it is senseless to ask whether cinnabar is red as we see it
or is only so as an optical illusion. “The sensation of red is the
normal reaction of normally constructed eyes to light reflected from
cinnabar. A person blind to red, will see cinnabar as black, or a dark
grayish yellow, and this is the correct reaction for these abnormal
eyes. But he needs to know that his eyes are different from those of
other people. In itself the sensation is neither more correct nor less
correct than any other even though those who can see red are in the
great majority. The red color of cinnabar exists as such only in so far
as there are eyes which are similar to those of the majority of mankind.
As such light reflected from cinnabar may not properly be called red; it
is red only for especial kinds of eyes.” This is so unconditionally
incorrect that an impartial judge of photography says[179] that
everything that normal eyes call violet and blue, is very bright, and
everything they call green and red is very dark. The red-blind person
will see as equal certain natural reds, greens and gray-yellows, both in
intensity and shadow. But on the photograph he will be able to
distinguish the differences in brightness caused by these three
otherwise identical colors. We may, therefore, assume that colors
possess _objective_ differences, and that these objective differences
are perceived even by persons of normal vision. But whether I am able to
sense the same effect in red that another senses, and whether I should
not call red blue, if I had the color-vision of another, is as
impossible to discover as it is useless. When the question of color is
raised, therefore, we will try to discover only whether the person in
question has normal color-vision, or what the nature and degree of his
abnormality may be.

2. It is not unimportant to know whether single tints are recognizable
in the distance. There have been several examinations of this fact.
Aubert[180] constructed double squares of ten millimeters and determined
the angle of vision at which the color as such could be seen. His
results were:

  +----------------+------------+------------+
  |  COLOR OF THE  |   WHITE    |   BLACK    |
  |     SQUARE     | BACKGROUND |            |
  +----------------+------------+------------+
  | White          |            |       39´´ |
  | Red            |    1´ 43´´ |       59´´ |
  | Light Green    |    1´ 54´´ |    1´ 49´´ |
  | Dirty Red      |    3´ 27´´ |    1´ 23´´ |
  | Blue           |    5´ 43´´ |    4´ 17´´ |
  | Brown          |    4´ 55´´ |    1´ 23´´ |
  | Light Blue     |    2´ 17´´ |    1´ 23´´ |
  | Orange         |    1´  8´´ |    0´ 39´´ |
  | Gray           |    4´ 17´´ |    1´ 23´´ |
  | Rose           |    2´ 18´´ |    3´ 49´´ |
  | Yellow         |    3´ 27´´ |    0´ 39´´ |
  +----------------+------------+------------+

It is interesting to notice that the angle for blue on a white
background is almost nine times that for white, orange, or yellow on a
black background. In cases where colors are of importance, therefore, it
will be necessary to discover the color and the nature of its background
before the accuracy of the witness can be established.

3. It is well known that in the diminution of brightnesses red
disappears before blue, and that at night, when all colors have
disappeared, the blue of heaven is still visible. So if anybody asserts
that he has been able to see the blue of a man’s coat but not his
red-brown trousers, his statement is possibly true, while the converse
would be untrue. But there are no reliable or consonant accounts of the
order in which colors disappear in increasing darkness. The knowledge of
this order would help a great deal in the administration of criminal
justice.

4. The retina will not see red at the periphery, because there are no
red rods there. A stick of red sealing wax drawn across the eye from
right to left, appears at the periphery of the visual field to be black.
If, then, a witness has not looked right at a definitely red object, and
has seen it askance, he has certainly not observed its color. The
experiment may be made by anybody.

5. According to Quantz[181] objects in less refractable colors (red,
orange, yellow, and purple) look 0.2 to 3.6% bigger against white, while
blue, blue-green, and violet objects appear from 0.2 to 2.2% smaller.
Dark and long-lined objects seem longer; bright and horizontal seem
wider. And these facts are significant when witnesses judge of size.

6. If colors are observed through small openings, especially through
very small holes, the nuances become essentially different and green may
even seem colorless.

7. According to Aubert, sparkle consists of the fact that one point in a
body is very bright while the brightness diminishes almost absolutely
from that point; e.g., a glancing wire has a very narrow bright line
with deep shadows on each side; a ball of mercury in a thermometer, a
shining point and then deep shadow. When we see this we say it sparkles
because we unite it with a number of similar observations. It is
therefore conceivable that at a great distance, under conditions of
sharp or accidental illuminations, etc., we are likely to see things as
sparkling which do not do so in the least. With the concept “sparkling,”
moreover, we tend to unite, at least under certain circumstances,
definite images, and hence “glancing weapons” are often seen in places
where there were only quite harmless dull objects. So also coins are
seen to sparkle where really there are none.


Section 39. (3) _The Blind Spot._

Everybody knows what the blind spot is, and every psychology and
physiology text-book talks about it. But as a rule it is identified only
with the little point and the tiny cross pictured in the text-books, and
it is supposed that it does not much matter if the little cross, under
certain circumstances, can not be seen. But it must not be forgotten
that the size of the blind spot increases with the distance so that at a
fairly great distance, possibly half the length of a room, the blind
spot becomes so great that a man’s head may disappear from the field of
vision. According to Helmholtz: “The effect of the blind spot is very
significant. If we make a little cross on a piece of paper and then a
spot the size of a pea two inches to the right, and if we look at the
cross with the left eye closed, the spot disappears. The size of the
blind spot is large enough to cover in the heavens a plate which has
twelve times the diameter of the moon. It may cover a human face at a
distance of 6´, but we do not observe this because we generally fill out
the void. If we see a line in the place in question, we see it unbroken,
because we know it to be so, and therefore supply the missing part.”

A number of experiments have been made with more or less success to
explain the blind spot. It is enough for us to agree that we see
habitually with both eyes and that the “spot as big as a pea” disappears
only when we look at the cross. But when we fix our eyes on anything we
pay attention to that only and to nothing else. And it is indifferent to
us if an uninteresting object disappears, so that the moment we begin to
care about the “spot as large as a pea,” it is immediately to hand and
needs no imaginative completion. If it be objected that fixing with the
eyes and being interested are not identical, we reply that a distinction
is made only in experiment. You fix one point and are interested in the
other because you expect it to disappear. And this experiment, as
anybody will immediately recognize, has its peculiar difficulty, because
it requires much concentration not to look at the point which interests
us. This never happens in the daily life, and it will not be easy to fix
a point which is not interesting.

At the same time there are conceivable cases in which objects seen
askance may be of importance, and where the visual fixation of a single
point will not reveal every reflection that fell on the blind spot. I
have not met with a practical case in which some fact or testimony could
be explained only by the blind spot, but such cases are conceivable.


Section 40. (c) The Sense of Hearing.

We have two problems with regard to sound--whether the witnesses have
heard correctly, and whether we hear them correctly. Between both
witnesses and ourselves there are again other factors. Correct
comprehension, faithful memory, the activity of the imagination, the
variety of influences, the degree of personal integrity; but most
important is the consideration, whether the witness has heard correctly.
As a general thing we must deny in most cases completely accurate
reproduction of what witnesses have heard. In this connection dealing
with questions of honor is instructive. If the question is the recall of
slander the terms of it will be as various as the number of witnesses.
We discover that the sense, the tendency of slander is not easily
mistaken. At least if it is, I have not observed it. The witness, e.g.,
will confuse the words “scamp,” “cheat,” “swindler,” etc., and again the
words: “ox,” “donkey,” “numbskull,” etc. But he will not say that he has
heard “scamp” where what was said was “donkey.” He simply has observed
that A has insulted B with an epithet of moral turpitude or of stupidity
and under examination he inserts an appropriate term. Often people hear
only according to meanings and hence the difficulty of getting them to
reproduce verbally and directly something said by a third person. They
always engage upon indirect narration because they have heard only the
meaning, not the words. Memory has nothing to do with this matter, for
when in examination, a witness is requested to reproduce directly what
he has just heard, he will reproduce no more than the sense, not the
words. Not to do so requires an unusual degree of intelligence and
training.

Now if the witnesses only reproduced the actual meaning of what they
heard, no harm would be done, but they tell us only what they _suppose_
to be the meaning, and hence we get a good many mistakes. It does seem
as if uneducated and half-educated people are able to shut their ears to
all things they do not understand. Even purely sensory perception is
organized according to intelligent capacity.

If this is kept in mind it will be possible correctly to interpret
testimonies in those difficult instances in which one man narrates what
he has heard from another concerning his own statement, and where it
might be quite impossible to judge the nature and culture of this third
person. There are a few other conditions to consider besides.

If we have to discover a person’s hearing power or his hearing power
under definite conditions, it is best never to depend, in even slightly
important cases, on vocal tests merely. The examination must be made by
experts, and if the case is really subtle it must be made under the same
circumstances of place and condition, and with the same people as in the
original situation. Otherwise nothing certain can be learned.

The determination of auditory power is, however, insufficient, for this
power varies with the degree any individual can distinguish a single
definite tone among many, hear it alone, and retain it. And this varies
not only with the individual but also with the time, the place, the
voice, etc. In my bed-room, e.g., and in three neighboring rooms I have
wall-clocks each of which is running. The doors of the room are open
right and left. At night when everything is quiet, I can sometimes hear
the ticking of each one of these clocks; immediately isolate one
completely and listen to that so that the ticking of the other three
completely disappears. Then again I may kindly command myself not to
hear this ticking, but to hear one of the other three, and I do so,
though I fail to hear two clocks together at just the same instant. On
another day under similar circumstances I completely fail in this
attempt. Either I hear none of the clocks in particular, or only for a
short time, which results in the ticking’s being again lost in the
general noise; or I do hear the ticking of one clock, but never of that
which I have chosen to hear.

This incident is variously explicable and the experiment may be repeated
with various persons. It indicates that auditory capacity is exceedingly
differentiated and that there is no justification for aprioristic doubt
of especial powers. It is, however, admittedly difficult to say how
experiments can be made under control.

There are still a few more marvels. It is repeatedly asserted, e.g., by
Tyndall, that a comparatively large number of people do not hear high
tones like the chirping of crickets, although the normal hearing of such
people is acute. Others again easily sense deep tones but distinguish
them with difficulty because they retain only a roll or roar, but do not
hear the individual tones.[182] And generally, almost all people have
difficulty in making a correct valuation of the direction of sound.
Wundt says that we locate powerful sounds in front of us and are
generally better able to judge right and left than before and
behind.[183] These data, which are for us quite important, have been
subjected to many tests. Wundt’s statement has been confirmed by various
experiments which have shown that sound to the right and the left are
best distinguished, and sounds in front and below, in front to the right
and to the left, and below, to the right and to the left, are least
easily distinguished. Among the experimenters were Preyer, Arnheim,
Kries, Münsterberg.

All these experiments indicate certain constant tendencies to definite
mistakes. Sounds in front are often mistaken for sounds behind and felt
to be higher than their natural head-level. Again, it is generally
asserted that binaural hearing is of great importance for the
recognition of the direction of sound. With one ear this recognition is
much more difficult. This may be verified by the fact that we turn our
heads here and there as though to compare directions whenever we want to
make sure of the direction of sound. In this regard, too, a number of
effective experiments have been made.

When it is necessary to determine whether the witness deposes correctly
concerning the direction of sound, it is best to get the official
physician to find out whether he hears with both ears, and whether he
hears equally well with both. It is observed that persons who hear
excellently with both ears are unfortunate in judging the direction of
sound. Others again are very skilful in this matter, and may possibly
get their skill from practice, sense of locality, etc. But in any case,
certainty can be obtained only by experimentation.

With regard to the conduction of sound--it is to be noted that sound is
carried astonishingly far by means of compact bodies. The distance at
which the trotting of horses, the thunder of cannons, etc., may be heard
by laying the ear close to the ground is a common-place in fiction.
Therefore, if a witness testifies to have heard something at a great
distance in this way, or by having laid his ear to the wall, it is well
not to set the evidence aside. Although it will be difficult in such
cases to make determinative experiments, it is useful to do so because
the limits of his capacity are then approximated.

Under certain circumstances it may be of importance to know what can be
heard when the head, or at least the ear, is under water. The experiment
may be made in the bath-room, by setting the back of the head under
water so that the ears are completely covered but the mouth and the
eyes are free. The mouth must be kept closed so that there shall be no
intrusion of sound through the Eustachian tube. In this condition
practically no sound can be heard which must _first pass through the
air_. If, therefore, anybody even immediately next to you, speaks ever
so loud, you can hear only a minimum of what he says. On the other hand,
noises that are conducted by compact bodies, i.e. the walls, the bath,
and the water, can be heard with astonishing distinctness, especially if
the bath is not detachable but is built into the wall. Then if some
remote part of the building, e.g. some wall, is knocked, the noise is
heard perfectly well, although somebody standing near the bath hears
nothing whatever. This may be of importance in cases of accident, in
certain attempts at drowning people, and in accidental eaves-dropping.

There are several things to note with regard to deaf persons, or such as
have difficulty with their hearing. According to Fechner, deafness
begins with the inability to hear high tones and ends with the inability
to hear deep ones, so that it often happens that complainants are not
believed because they still hear deep tones. Again, there are mistakes
which rise from the fact that the deaf often learn a great deal from the
movements of the lips, and the reading of these movements has become the
basis of the so-called “audition” of deaf mutes. There are stories of
deaf mutes who have perceived more in this way, and by means of their
necessary and well-practised synthesis of impressions, than persons with
good hearing power.

The differences that age makes in hearing are of importance. Bezold has
examined a large number of human ears of different ages and indicates
that after the fiftieth year there is not only a successive decrease in
the number of the approximately normal-hearing, but there is a
successively growing increase in the degree of auditory limitation which
the ear experiences with increasing age. The results are more surprising
than is supposed.

Not one of 100 people over fifty years of age could understand
conversational speech at a distance of sixteen meters; 10.5% understood
it at a distance of eight to sixteen meters. Of school children 46.5%
(1918 of them) from seven to eighteen understood it at a distance of 20
meters plus, and 32.7% at a distance of from 16 to 8 meters. The
percentage then is 10.5 for people over fifty as against 79.2 of people
over seven and under 18. Old women can hear better than old men. At a
distance of 4 to 16 meters the proportion of women to men who could hear
was 34 to 17. The converse is true of children, for at a distance of 20
meters and more the percentage of boys was 49.9 and girls 48.2. The
reason for this inversion of the relation lies in the harmful influences
of manual labor and other noisy occupations of men. These comparisons
may be of importance when the question is raised as to how much more a
witness may have heard than one of a different age.


Section 41. (d) The Sense of Taste.

The sense of taste is rarely of legal importance, but when it does come
into importance it is regularly very significant because it involves, in
the main, problems of poisoning. The explanation of such cases is rarely
easy and certain--first of all, because we can not, without difficulty,
get into a position of testing the delicacy and acuteness of any
individual sense of taste, where such testing is quite simple with
regard to seeing and hearing. At the same time, it is necessary when
tests are made, to depend upon general, and rarely constant impressions,
since very few people mean the same thing by, stinging, prickly,
metallic, and burning tastes, even though the ordinary terms sweet,
sour, bitter, and salty, may be accepted as approximately constant. The
least that can be done when a taste is defined as good, bad, excellent,
or disgusting, is to test it in every possible direction with regard to
the age, habits, health, and intelligence of the taster, for all of
these exercise great influence on his values. Similarly necessary are
valuations like flat, sweetish, contractile, limey, pappy, sandy, which
are all dictated by almost momentary variations in well-being.

But if any denotation is to be depended upon, and in the end some one
has to be, it is necessary to determine whether the perception has been
made with the end or the root of the tongue.[184] Longet, following the
experiments of certain others, has brought together definite results in
the following table:

  +-----------------------+------------+-------------+
  |                       |            |             |
  |TASTE                  | TONGUE-TIP | TONGUE ROOT |
  |                       |            |             |
  +-----------------------+------------+-------------+
  |Glauber’s salts        |   salty    |  bitter     |
  |Iodkalium              |    “       |     “       |
  |Alum                   |   sour     |   sweet     |
  |Glycerine              |   none     |     “       |
  |Rock candy             |    “       |     “       |
  |Chlorate of strychnine |    “       |     “       |
  |Natrium carbonate      |    “       | alkaloid    |
  +-----------------------+------------+-------------+

In such cases too, particularly as diseased conditions and personal
idiosyncrasies exercise considerable influences, it will be important to
call in the physician. Dehn is led by his experiments to the conclusion
that woman’s sense of taste is finer than man’s, and again that that of
the educated man finer than that of the uneducated. In women education
makes no difference in this regard.


Section 42. (e) The Sense of Smell.

The sense of smell would be of great importance for legal consideration
if it could get the study it deserves. It may be said that many men have
more acute olfactory powers than they know, and that they may learn more
by means of them than by means of the other senses. The sense of smell
has little especial practical importance. It only serves to supply a
great many people with occasional disagreeable impressions, and what men
fail to find especially necessary they do not easily make use of. The
utility of smell would be great because it is accurate, and hence
powerful in its associative quality. But it is rarely attended to; even
when the associations are awakened they are not ascribed to the sense of
smell but are said to be accidental. I offer one example only, of this
common fact. When I was a child of less than eight years, I once visited
with my parents a priest who was a school-mate of my father’s. The day
spent in the parsonage contained nothing remarkable, so that all these
years I have not even thought of it. A short time ago all the details I
encountered on that day occurred to me very vividly, and inasmuch as
this sudden memory seemed baseless, I studied carefully the cause of its
occurrence, without success. A short time later I had the same
experience and at the same place. This was a clew, and I then recalled
that I had undertaken a voyage of discovery with the small niece of the
parson and had been led into a fruit cellar. There I found great heaps
of apples laid on straw, and on the wall a considerable number of the
hunting boots of the parson. The mixed odors of apple, straw and boots
constituted a unique and long unsmelled perfume which had sunk deep into
my memory. And as I passed a room which contained the same elements of
odor, all those things that were associated with that odor at the time I
first smelt it, immediately recurred.

Everybody experiences such associations in great number, and in
examinations a little trouble will bring them up, especially when the
question deals with remote events, and a witness tells about some
“accidental” idea of his. If the accident is considered to be an
association and studied in the light of a memory of odor, one may often
succeed in finding the right clew and making progress.

But accurate as the sense of smell is, it receives as a rule little
consideration, and when some question concerning smell is put the answer
is generally negative. Yet in no case may a matter be so easily
determined as in this one; one may without making even the slightest
suggestion, succeed in getting the witness to confess that he had
smelled something. Incidentally, one may succeed in awakening such
impressions as have not quite crossed the threshold of consciousness, or
have been subdued and diverted. Suppose, e.g., that a witness has
smelled fire, but inasmuch as he was otherwise engaged was not fully
conscious of it or did not quite notice it, or explained it to himself
as some kitchen odor or the odor of a bad cigar. Such perceptions are
later forgotten, but with proper questioning are faithfully and
completely brought to memory.

Obviously much depends on whether anybody likes certain delicate odors
or not. As a rule it may be held that a delicate sense of smell is
frequently associated with nervousness. Again, people with broad
nostrils and well developed foreheads, who keep their mouths closed most
of the time, have certainly a delicate sense of smell. People of
lymphatic nature, with veiled unclear voices, do not have a keen sense
of smell, and still duller is that of snufflers and habitual smokers. Up
to a certain degree, practice may do much, but too much of it dulls the
sense of smell. Butchers, tobacconists, perfumers, not only fail to
perceive the odors which dominate their shops; their sense of smell has
been dulled, anyway. On the other hand, those who have to make delicate
distinctions by means of their sense, like apothecaries, tea dealers,
brewers, wine tasters, etc. achieve great skill. I remember that one
time when I had in court to deal almost exclusively with gypsies, I
could immediately smell whether any gypsies had been brought there
during the night.

Very nervous persons develop a delicateness and acuteness of smell which
other persons do not even imagine. Now we have no real knowledge of how
odors arise. That they are not the results of the radiation of very tiny
parts is shown by the fact that certain bodies smell though they are
known not to give off particles. Zinc, for example, and such things as
copper, sulphur, and iron, have individual odors; the latter,
particularly when it is kept polished by a great deal of
friction,--e.g., in the cases of chains, key-rings kept in the pocket.

In defining the impressions of smell great difficulties occur. Even
normal individuals often have a passionate love for odors that are
either indifferent or disgusting to others (rotten apples, wet sponges,
cow-dung, and the odor of a horse-stable, garlic, assafoetida, very ripe
game, etc.). The same individual finds the odor of food beautiful when
hungry, pleasant when full-fed, and unendurable when he has migraine. It
would be necessary to make an accurate description of these differences
and all their accompanying circumstances. With regard to sex, the sense
of smell, according to Lombroso,[185] is twice as fine in men as in
women. This is verified by Lombroso’s pupils Ottolenghi and Sicard,
Roncoroni and Francis Galton. Experience of daily life does not confirm
this, though many smokers among men rarely possess acute sense of smell,
and this raises the percentage considerably in favor of women.


Section 43. (f) The Sense of Touch.

I combine, for the sake of simplicity, the senses of location, pressure,
temperature, etc., under the general expression: sense of touch. The
problem this sense raises is no light one because many witnesses tell of
perceptions made in the dark or when they were otherwise unable to see,
and because much is perceived by means of this sense in assaults,
wounds, and other contacts. In most cases such witnesses have been
unable to regard the touched parts of their bodies, so that we have to
depend upon this touch-sense alone. Full certainty is possible only when
sight and touch have worked together and rectified one another. It has
been shown that the conception of the third dimension can not be
obtained through the sense of sight. At the beginning we owe the
perception of this dimension only to touch and later on to experience
and habit. The truth of this statement is confirmed by the reports of
persons who, born blind, have gained sight. Some were unable to
distinguish by means of mere sight a silver pencil-holder from a large
key. They could only tell them to be different things, and recognized
their nature only after they had felt them. On the other hand, the
deceptive possibilities in touch are seen in the well-known mistakes to
which one is subjected in blind touching. At the same time practice
leads to considerable accuracy in touch and on many occasions the sense
is trusted more than sight--e.g., whenever we test the delicacy of an
object with our finger-tips. The fineness of paper, leather, the
smoothness of a surface, the presence of points, are always tested with
the fingers. So that if a witness assures us that this or that was very
smooth, or that this surface was very raw, we must regularly ask him
whether he had tested the quality by touching it with his fingers, and
we are certain only if he says yes. Whoever has to depend much on the
sense of touch increases its field of perception, as we know from the
delicacy of the sense in blind people. The statements of the blind
concerning their contact sensations may be believed even when they seem
improbable; there are blind persons who may feel the very color of
fabrics, because the various pigments and their medium give a different
surface-quality to the cloth they color.

In another direction, again, it is the deaf who have especial power. So,
we are assured by Abercrombie that in his medical practice he had
frequently observed how deaf people will perceive the roll of an
approaching wagon, or the approach of a person, long before people with
good hearing do so. For a long time I owned an Angora which, like all
Angoras, was completely deaf, and her deafness had been tested by
physicians. Nevertheless, if the animal was dozing somewhere and anybody
came near it, she would immediately notice his steps, and would
distinguish them, for she would jump up frightened, if the newcomer was
unknown, and would stretch herself with pleasure in the expectation of
petting if she felt a friend coming. She would sense the lightest touch
on the object she occupied, bench, window-seat, sofa, etc., and she was
especially sensitive to very light scratching of the object. Such
sensitivity is duplicated frequently in persons who are hard of hearing,
and whom, therefore, we are likely to doubt.

The sense of touch is, moreover, improved not only by practice, but also
by the training of the muscles. Stricker asserts that he has frequently
noticed that the observational capacity of individuals who make much use
of their muscles is greater than among persons whose habits are
sedentary. This does not contradict the truth established by many
experiments that the educated man is more sensitive in all directions
than the uneducated. Again, women have a better developed sense of touch
than men, the space-sense and the pressure-sense being equivalent in
both sexes. On these special forms of the touch-sense injections of
various kinds have decided influence. The injection of morphine, e.g.,
reduces the space-sense in the skin. _Cannabinum tannicum_ reduces
sensibility and alcohol is swift and considerable in its effects.
According to Reichenbach some sensitives are extreme in their feeling.
The best of them notice immediately the approach and relative position
of people, or the presence of another in a dark room. That very nervous
people frequently feel air pressure, fine vibrations, etc., is perfectly
true. And this and other facts show the great variety of touch
impressions that may be distinguished. The sense of temperature has a
comparatively high development, and more so in women than in men. At the
lips and with the tips of the fingers, differences of two-tenths of a
degree are perceived. But where an absolute valuation and not a
difference is to be perceived, the mean variation, generally, is not
much less than 4 degrees. E.g., a temperature of 19 degrees R. will be
estimated at from 17 to 21 degrees. I believe, however, that the
estimation of very common temperatures must be accepted as correct.
E.g., anybody accustomed to have his room in winter 14 degrees R. will
immediately notice, and correctly estimate, the rise or fall of one
degree. Again, anybody who takes cold baths in summer will observe a
change of one degree in temperature. It will, therefore, be possible to
believe the pronouncements of witnesses concerning a narrow range of
temperatures, but all the conditions of perception must be noted for the
differences are extreme. It has been shown, e.g., that the whole hand
finds water of 29 degrees R. warmer than water of 32 degrees R. which is
merely tested with the finger. Further, Weber points out,[186] “If we
put two adjacent fingers into two different warm fluids the sensations
flow together in such a way that it is difficult to distinguish
differences. But if we use two hands in this test, it is especially
successful when we change the hands from one fluid to another. The
closer the points on the skin which receive contemporary impressions,
and perhaps, the closer the portions of the brain to which these
impressions are sent, the more easily these sensations flow together;
while again, the further they are from one another the less frequently
does this occur.” In the practice of criminal law such matters will
rarely arise, but estimations of temperature are frequently required and
their reliability must be established.

It is important to know what a wounded man and his enemy feel in the
first instant of the crime and in what degree their testimonies are
reliable. First of all, we have to thank the excellent observations of
Weber, for the knowledge that we find it very difficult to discover with
closed eyes the angle made by a dagger thrust against the body. It is
equally difficult to determine the direction from which a push or blow
has come. On the other hand we can tell very accurately in what
direction a handful of hair is pulled.

With regard to the time it takes to feel contact and pain, it is
asserted that a short powerful blow on a corn is felt immediately, but
the pain of it one to two seconds later. It may be that corns have an
especial constitution, but otherwise the time assigned before feeling
pain is far too long. Helmholtz made 1850 measurements which proved that
the nervous current moves 90 feet a second. If, then, you prick your
finger, you feel it a thirtieth of a second later. The easiest
experiments which may be made in that regard are insufficient to
establish anything definite. We can only say that the perception of a
peripheral pain occurs an observable period after the shock, i.e., about
a third of a second later than its cause.

The sensation of a stab is often identified as contact with a hot
object, and it is further asserted that the wounded person feels close
to the pain which accompanies the push or the cut, the cold of the blade
and its presence in the depths of his body. So far as I have been able
to learn from wounded people, these assertions are not confirmed.
Setting aside individuals who exaggerate intentionally and want to make
themselves interesting or to indicate considerable damage, all answers
point to the fact that stabs, shots, and blows are sensed as pushes. In
addition, the rising of the blood is felt almost immediately, but
nothing else; pain comes much later. It is asserted by
couleur-students[187] who have occasion to have a considerable number of
duels behind them, that “sitting thrusts,” even when they are made with
the sharpest swords, are sensed only as painless, or almost painless,
blows or pushes. Curiously enough all say that the sensation is felt as
if caused by some very broad dull tool: a falling shingle, perhaps. But
not one has felt the cold of the entering blade.

Soldiers whose shot wounds were inquired into, often just a few minutes
after their being wounded, have said unanimously that they had felt only
a hard push.

It is quite different with the man who causes the wound. Lotze has
rightly called attention to the fact that in mounting a ladder with
elastic rungs one perceives clearly the points at which the rungs are
fastened to the sides. The points at which an elastic trellis is
fastened is felt when it is shaken, and the resistance of the wood when
an axe is used on it. In the same way the soldier senses clearly the
entrance of his sword-point or blade into the body of his enemy. The
last fact is confirmed by the students. One can clearly distinguish
whether the sword has merely beaten through the skin or has sunk deeply
and reached the bone. And this sensation of touch is concentrated in the
_right_ thumb, which is barely under the hilt of the sword at the point
where the grip rests.

The importance of the fact that the wounder feels his success lies in
the possibility it gives him, when he wants to tell the truth, to
indicate reliably whether and how far he has wounded his opponent. The
importance of the testimony of the wounded man lies in its influence on
determining, in cases where there were more than one concerned in the
assault, which wound is to be assigned to which man. We often hear from
the victim who really desires to tell the truth, “I was quite convinced
that X dealt me the deep stab in the shoulder, but he has only pushed
and not stabbed me--I did not perceive a stab.” Just the same, it was X
who stabbed him, and if the examining judge explains the matter to the
victim, his testimony will be yet more honest.

There are still a few other significant facts.

1. It is well known that the portion of the skin which covers a bone and
which is then so pulled away that it covers a fleshy part, can not
easily identify the point of stimulation. Such transpositions may be
made intentionally in this experiment, but they occur frequently through
vigorous twists of the body. When the upper part of the body is drawn
backwards, while one is sitting down, a collection of such
transpositions occur and it is very hard then to localize a blow or
stab. So, too, when an arm is held backward in such a way as to turn the
flat of the hand uppermost. It is still more difficult to locate a wound
when one part of the body is held by another person and the skin pulled
aside.

2. The sensation of wetness is composed of that of cold and easy
movement over surface. Hence, when we touch without warning a cold
smooth piece of metal, we think that we are touching something wet. But
the converse is true for we believe that we are touching something cold
and smooth when it is only wet. Hence the numerous mistakes about
bleeding after wounds. The wounded man or his companions believe that
they have felt blood when they have only felt some smooth metal, or they
have really felt blood and have taken it for something smooth and cold.
Mistakes about whether there was blood or not have led to frequent
confusion.

3. Repetition, and hence summation, intensifies and clarifies the
sensation of touch. As a consequence, whenever we want to test anything
by touching it we do so repeatedly, drawing the finger up and down and
holding the object between the fingers; for the same reason we
repeatedly feel objects with pleasant exteriors. We like to move our
hands up and down smooth or soft furry surfaces, in order to sense them
more clearly, or to make the sensation different because of its duration
and continuance. Hence it is important, every time something has to be
determined through touch, to ask whether the touch occurred once only or
was repeated. The relation is not the same in this case as between a
hasty glance and accurate survey, for in touching, essential differences
may appear.

4. It is very difficult to determine merely by touch whether a thing is
straight or crooked, flat, convex or concave. Weber has shown that a
glass plate drawn before the finger in such wise as to be held weakly at
first, then more powerfully, then again more powerfully seems to be
convex and when the reverse is done, concave. Flatness is given when the
distance is kept constant.

5. According to Vierordt,[188] the motion of a point at a constant rate
over a sizable piece of skin, e.g., the back of the hand from the wrist
to the finger tips, gives, if not looked at, the definite impression of
increasing rapidity. In the opposite direction, the definiteness is less
but increases with the extent of skin covered. This indicates that
mistakes may be made in such wounds as cuts, scratches, etc.

6. The problem may arise of the reliability of impressions of habitual
pressure. Weber made the earliest experiments, later verified by
Fechner, showing that the sensation of weight differs a great deal on
different portions of the skin. The most sensitive are the forehead, the
temples, the eyelids, the inside of the forearm. The most insensitive
are the lips, the trunk and the finger-nails. If piles of six silver
dollars are laid on various parts of the body, and then removed, one at
a time, the differences are variously felt. In order to notice a removal
the following number must be taken away:

  One dollar from the top of the finger,

  One dollar from the sole of the foot,

  Two dollars from the flat of the hand,

  Two dollars from the shoulder blade,

  Three dollars from the heel,

  Four dollars from the back of the head,

  Four dollars from the breast,

  Five dollars from the middle of the back,

  Five dollars from the abdomen.

Further examinations have revealed nothing new. Successful experiments
to determine differences between men and women, educated and uneducated,
in the acuteness of the sense of pressure, have not been made. The facts
they involve may be of use in cases of assault, choking, etc.


Topic 2. PERCEPTION AND CONCEPTION.


Section 44.

What lawyers have to consider in the transition from purely sensory
impressions to intellectual conceptions of these impressions, is the
possibility of later reproducing any observed object or event. Many
so-called scientific distinctions have, under the impulse of scientific
psychology, lost their status. Modern psychology does not see
sharply-drawn boundaries between perception and memory, and suggests
that the proper solution of the problem of perception is the solution of
the problem of knowledge.[189]

With regard to the relation of consciousness to perception we will make
the distinctions made by Fischer.[190] There are two spheres or regions
of consciousness: the region of sensation, and of external perception.
The former involves the inner structure of the organism, the latter
passes from the organism into the objective world. Consciousness has a
sphere of action in which it deals with the external world by means of
the motor nerves and muscles, and a sphere of perception which is the
business of the senses.

External perception involves three principal functions: apprehension,
differentiation, and combination. Perception in the narrower sense of
the term is the simple sensory conscious apprehension of some present
object stimulating our eyes. We discover by means of it what the object
is, its relation to ourselves and other things, its distance from us,
its name, etc.

What succeeds this apprehension is the most important thing for us
lawyers, i.e. _recognition_. Recognition indicates only that an object
has sufficiently impressed a mind to keep it known and identifiable. It
is indifferent what the nature of the recognized object is. According to
Hume the object may be an enduring thing (“non-interrupted and
non-dependent on mind”), or it may be identical with perception itself.
In the latter case the perception is considered as a logical judgment
like the judgment: “It is raining,” or the feeling that “it is raining,”
and there recognition is only the recognition of a perception. Now
judgments of this sort are what we get from witnesses, and what we have
to examine and evaluate. This must be done from two points of view.
First, from the point of view of the observer and collector of instances
who is seeking to discover the principle which governs them. If this is
not done the deductions that we make are at least unreliable, and in
most cases, false. As Mach says, “If once observation has determined all
the facts of any natural science, a new period begins for that science,
the period of deduction.” But how often do we lawyers distinguish these
two periods in our own work.[191]

The second point of importance is the presence of mistakes in the
observations. The essential mistakes are classified by Schiel under two
headings. Mistakes in observation are positive or negative, wrong
observation or oversight. The latter occurs largely through preconceived
opinions. The opponents of Copernicus concluded that the earth did not
move because otherwise a stone dropped from the top of a tower would
reach the ground a little to the west. If the adherents of Copernicus
had made the experiment they would have discovered that the stone does
fall as the theory requires. Similar oversights occur in the lawyer’s
work hundreds of times. We are impressed with exceptions that are made
by others or by ourselves, and give up some already tried approach
without actually testing the truth of the exception which challenges it.
I have frequently, while at work, thought of the story of some one of
the Georges, who did not like scholars and set the following problem to
a number of philosophers and physicists: “When I put a ten pound stone
into a hundred pound barrel of water the whole weighs a hundred and ten
pounds, but when I put a live fish of ten pounds into the barrel the
whole still weighs only a hundred pounds?” Each one of the scholars had
his own convincing explanation, until finally the king asked one of the
foot-men, who said that he would like to see the experiment tried before
he made up his mind. I remember a case in which a peasant was accused of
having committed arson for the sake of the insurance. He asserted that
he had gone into a room with a candle and that a long spider’s web which
was hanging down had caught fire from it accidentally and had inflamed
the straw which hung from the roof. So the catastrophe had occurred.
Only in the second examination did it occur to anybody to ask whether
spider’s web can burn at all, and the first experiment showed that that
was impossible.

Most experiences of this kind indicate that in recognizing events we
must proceed slowly, without leaping, and that we may construct our
notions only on the basis of knowledge we already possess. Saint Thomas
says, “Omnes cognitio fit secundum similitudinem cogniti in
cognoscente.” If this bit of wisdom were kept in mind in the examination
of witnesses it would be an easier and simpler task than usual. Only
when the unknown is connected with the known is it possible to
understand the former. If it is not done the witness will hardly be able
to answer. He nowhere finds support, or he seeks one of his own, and
naturally finds the wrong one. So the information that an ordinary
traveler brings home is mainly identical with what he carries away, for
he has ears and eyes only for what he expects to see. For how long a
time did the negro believe that disease pales the coral that he wears?
Yet if he had only watched it he would have seen how foolish the notion
was. How long, since Adam Smith, did people believe that extravagance
helps industry, and how much longer have people called Copernicus a fool
because they actually saw the sun rise and set. So J. S. Mill puts his
opinions on this matter. Benneke[192] adds, “If anybody describes to me
an animal, a region, a work of art, or narrates an event, etc., I get no
notion through the words I hear of the appearance of the subject. I
merely have a problem set me by means of the words and signs, in the
conception of the subject, and hence it depends for truth mainly upon
the completeness of earlier conceptions of similar things or events, and
upon the material I have imaginatively at hand. These are my perceptual
capital and my power of representation.”

It naturally is not necessary to ask whether a narrator has ever seen
the things he speaks of, nor to convince oneself in examination that the
person in question knows accurately what he is talking about. At the
same time, the examiner ought to be clear on the matter and know what
attitude to take if he is going to deal intelligibly with the other. I
might say that all of us, educated and uneducated, have apprehended and
remember definite and distinct images of all things we have seen, heard,
or learned from descriptions. When we get new information we simply
attach the new image to the old, or extinguish a part of the old and put
the new in its place, or we retain only a more or less vigorous breath
of the old with the new. Such images go far back; even animals possess
them. One day my small son came with his exciting information that his
guinea pig, well known as a stupid beast, could count. He tried to prove
this by removing the six young from their mother and hiding them so that
she could not see what happened to them. Then he took one of the six,
hid it, and brought the remaining five back to the old lady. She smelled
them one after the other and then showed a good deal of excitement, as
if she missed something. Then she was again removed and the sixth pig
brought back; when she was restored to her brood, she sniffed all six
and showed a great deal of satisfaction. “She could count at least six.”
Naturally the beast had only a fixed collective image of her brood, and
as one was missing the image was disturbed and incorrect. At the same
time, the image was such as is created by the combination of events or
circumstances. It is not far from the images of low-browed humanity and
differs only in degree from those of civilized people.

The fact that a good deal of what is said is incorrect and yet not
consciously untrue, depends upon the existence of these images and their
association with the new material. The speaker and the auditor have
different sets of images; the first relates the new material differently
from a second, and so of course they can not agree.[193] It is the
difficult task of the examiner so to adapt what is said as to make it
appropriate to the right images without making it possible for incorrect
interpretations to enter. When we have a well-known money-lender as
witness concerning some unspeakable deal, a street-walker concerning
some brawling in a peasant saloon, a clubman concerning a duel, a
game-warden concerning poaching, the set of images of each one of these
persons will be a bad foundation for new perceptions. On the other hand,
it will not be difficult to abstract from them correctly. But cases of
this sort are not of constant occurrence and the great trouble consists
in once for all discovering what memory-images were present before the
witness perceived the event in question. The former have a great
influence upon the perception of the latter.

In this connection it should not be forgotten that the retention of
these images is somewhat pedantic and depends upon unimportant things.
In the city hall of Graz there is a secretary with thirty-six sections
for the thirty-six different papers. The name of the appropriate journal
was written clearly over each section and in spite of the clearness of
the script the depositing and removing of the papers required certain
effort, inasmuch as the script had to be read and could not be
apprehended. Later the name of the paper was cut out of each and pasted
on the secretary instead of the script, and then, in spite of the
various curly and twisted letters, the habitual images of the titles
were easily apprehended and their removal and return became mechanical.
The customary and identical things are so habitual that they are
apprehended with greater ease than more distinct objects.

Inasmuch as we can conceive only on the basis of the constancy and
similarity of forms, we make these forms the essence of experience. On
the other hand, what is constant and similar for one individual is not
so for another, and essences of experience vary with the experiencer.

“When we behold a die of which we can see three sides at a time, seven
corners, and nine edges, we immediately induce the image or schema of a
die, and we make our further sense-perception accord with this schema.
In this way we get a series of schemas which we may substitute for one
another” (Aubert). For the same reason we associate in description
things unknown to the auditor, which we presuppose in him, and hence we
can make him rightly understand only if we have named some appropriate
object in comparison. Conversely, we have to remember that everybody
takes his comparison from his own experience, so that we must have had a
like experience if we are to know what is compared. It is disastrous to
neglect the private nature of this experience. Whoever has much to do
with peasants, who like to make use of powerful comparisons, must first
comprehend their essential life, if he is to understand how to reduce
their comparisons to correct meanings. And if he has done so he will
find such comparisons and images the most distinct and the most
intelligible.

Sense-perception has a great deal to do in apprehension and no one can
determine the boundary where the sense activity ends and the
intellectual begins. I do not recall who has made note of the
interesting fact that not one of twenty students in an Egyptian museum
knew why the hands of the figures of Egyptian wall pictures gave the
impression of being incorrect--nobody had observed the fact that all the
figures had two right hands.

I once paid a great deal of attention to card-sharping tricks and as I
acquired them, either of myself or from practised gamblers, I
demonstrated them to the young criminalists. For a long time I refused
to believe what an old Greek told me: “The more foolish and obvious a
trick is, the more certain it is; people never see anything.” The man
was right. When I told my pupils expressly, “Now I am cheating,” I was
able to make with safety a false coup, a false deal, etc. Nobody saw it.
If only one has half a notion of directing the eyes to some other thing,
a card may be laid on the lap, thrust into the sleeve, taken from the
pocket, and God knows what else. Now who can say in such a case whether
the sensory glance or the intellectual apprehension was unskilful or
unpractised? According to some authorities the chief source of error is
the senses, but whether something must not be attributed to that
mysterious, inexplicable moment in which sensory perception becomes
intellectual perception, nobody can say.

My favorite demonstration of how surprisingly little people perceive is
quite simple. I set a tray with a bottle of water and several glasses on
the table, call express attention to what is about to occur, and pour a
little water from the bottle into the glass. Then the stuff is taken
away and the astonishing question asked what have I done? All the
spectators reply immediately: you have poured water into a glass. Then I
ask further with what hand did I do it? How many glasses were there?
Where was the glass into which I poured the water? How much did I pour?
How much water was there in the glass? Did I really pour or just pretend
to? How full was the bottle? Was it certainly water and not, perhaps,
wine? Was it not red wine? What did I do with my hand after pouring the
water? How did I look when I did it? Did you not really see that I shut
my eyes? Did you not really see that I stuck my tongue out? Was I
pouring the water while I did it? Or before, or after? Did I wear a ring
on my hand? Was my cuff visible? What was the position of my fingers
while I held the glass? These questions may be multiplied. And it is as
astonishing as amusing to see how little correctness there is in the
answers, and how people quarrel about the answers, and what
extraordinary things they say. Yet what do we require of witnesses who
have to describe much more complicated matters to which their attention
had not been previously called, and who have to make their answers, not
immediately, but much later; and who, moreover, may, in the presence of
the fact, have been overcome by fear, astonishment, terror, etc.! I find
that probing even comparatively trained witnesses is rather too funny,
and the conclusions drawn from what is so learned are rather too
conscienceless.[194] Such introductions as: “But you will know,”--“Just
recall this one,”--“You wouldn’t be so stupid as not to have observed
whether,”--“But my dear woman, you have eyes,”--and whatever else may be
offered in this kindly fashion, may bring out an answer, but what real
worth can such an answer have?

One bright day I came home from court and saw a man step out of a
cornfield, remain a few instants in my field of vision, and then
disappear. I felt at once that the man had done something suspicious,
and immediately asked myself how he looked. I found I knew nothing of
his clothes, his dress, his beard, his size, in a word, nothing at all
about him. But how I would have punished a witness who should have known
just as little. We shall have, in the course of this examination,
frequently to mention the fact that we do not see an event in spite of
its being in the field of perception. I want at this point merely to
call attention to a single well-known case, recorded by Hofmann.[195] At
a trial a circumstantial and accurate attempt was made to discover
whether it was a significant alteration to bite a man’s ear off. The
court, the physician, the witnesses, etc., dealt with the question of
altering, until finally the wounded man himself showed what was meant,
because his other ear had been bitten off many years before,--but then
nobody had noticed that mutilated ear.

In order to know what another person has seen and apprehended we must
first of all know how he thinks, and that is impossible. We frequently
say of another that he must have thought this or that, or have hit upon
such and such ideas, but what the events in another brain may be we can
never observe. As Bois-Reymond says somewhere: “If Laplace’s ghost could
build a homunculus according to the Leibnitzian theory, atom by atom and
molecule by molecule, he might succeed in making it think, but not in
knowing how it thinks.” But if we know, at least approximately, the kind
of mental process of a person who is as close as possible to us in sex,
age, culture, position, experience, etc., we lose this knowledge with
every step that leads to differences. We know well what great influence
is exercised by the multiplicity of talents, superpositions, knowledge,
and apprehensions. When we consider the qualities of things, we
discover that we never apprehend them abstractly, but always concretely.
We do not see color but the colored object; we do not see warmth, but
something warm; not hardness, but something hard. The concept warm, as
such, can not be thought of by anybody, and at the mention of the word
each will think of some particular warm object; one, of his oven at
home; another, of a warm day in Italy; another of a piece of hot iron
which burnt him once. Then the individual does not pay constant court to
the same object. To-day he has in mind this concrete thing, to-morrow,
he uses different names and makes different associations. But every
concrete object I think of has considerable effect on the new
apprehension; and my auditor does not know, perhaps even I myself do
not, what concrete object I have already in mind. And although Berkeley
has already shown that color can not be thought of without space or
space without color, the task of determining the concrete object to
which the witness attaches the qualities he speaks of, will still be
overlooked hundreds of times.

It is further of importance that everybody has learned to know the
object he speaks about through repetition, that different relations have
shown him the matter in different ways. If an object has impressed
itself upon us, once pleasurably and once unpleasantly, we can not
derive the history and character of the present impression from the
object alone, nor can we find it merely in the synthetic memory
sensations which are due to the traces of the former coalescing
impressions. We are frequently unable, because of this coalescing of
earlier impressions, to keep them apart and to study their effect on
present impressions. Frequently we do not even at all know why this or
that impression is so vivid. But if we are ignorant with regard to what
occurs in ourselves, how much can we know about others?

Exner calls attention to the fact that it is in this direction
especially, that the “dark perceptions” play a great rôle. “A great part
of our intelligence depends on the ability of these ‘dark perceptions’
to rise without requiring further attention, into the field of
consciousness. There are people, e.g., who recognize birds in their
flight without knowing clearly what the characteristic flight for any
definite bird may be. Others, still more intelligent, know at what
intervals the flyers beat their wings, for they can imitate them with
their hands. And when the intelligence is still greater, it makes
possible a correct description in words.”

Suppose that in some important criminal case several people, of
different degrees of education and intelligence, have made observations.
We suppose that they all want to tell the truth, and we also suppose
that they have observed and apprehended their objects correctly. Their
testimonies, nevertheless, will be very different. With the degree of
intelligence rises the degree of effect of the “dark subconscious
perceptions.” They give more definite presentation and explanation of
the testimony; they turn bare assertions into well-ordered perceptions
and real representations. But we generally make the mistake of ascribing
the variety of evidence to varying views, or to dishonesty.

To establish the unanimity of such various data, or to find out whether
they have such unanimity, is not easy. The most comfortable procedure is
to compare the lesser testimonies with those of the most intelligent of
the witnesses. As a rule, anybody who has a subconscious perception of
the object will be glad to bring it out if he is helped by some form of
expression, but the danger of suggestion is here so great that this
assistance must be given only in the rarest of cases. The best thing is
to help the witness to his full evidence gradually, at the same time
taking care not to suggest oneself and thus to cause agreement of
several testimonies which were really different but only appeared to
look contradictory on account of the effect of subconscious perceptions.
The very best thing is to take the testimony as it comes, without
alteration, and later on, when there is a great deal of material and the
matter has grown clearer, to test the stuff carefully and to see whether
the less intelligent persons gave different testimonies through lack of
capacity in expression, or because they really had perceived different
things and had different things to say.

This is important when the witnesses examined are experts in the matter
in which they are examined. I am convinced that the belief that such
people must be the best witnesses, is false, at least as a
generalization. Benneke (loco cit.), has also made similar observations.
“The chemist who perceives a chemical process, the connoisseur a
picture, the musician a symphony, perceive them with more vigorous
attention than the layman, but the actual attention may be greater with
the latter.” For our own affair, it is enough to know that the judgment
of the expert will naturally be better than that of the layman; his
apprehension, however, is as a rule one-sided, not so far-reaching and
less uncolored. It is natural that every expert, especially when he
takes his work seriously, should find most interest in that side of an
event with which his profession deals. Oversight of legally important
matters is, therefore, almost inevitable. I remember how an eager young
doctor was once witness of an assault with intent to kill. He had seen
how in an inn the criminal had for some time threatened his victim with
a heavy porcelain match-tray. “The os parietale may here be broken,” the
doctor thought, and while he was thinking of the surgical consequences
of such a blow, the thing was done and the doctor had not seen how the
blow was delivered, whether a knife had been drawn by the victim, etc.
Similarly, during an examination concerning breaking open the drawer of
a table, the worst witness was the cabinet-maker. The latter was so much
interested in the foreign manner in which the portions of the drawer had
been cemented and in the curious wood, that he had nothing to say about
the legally important question of how the break was made, what the
impression of the damaging tool was, etc. Most of us have had such
experiences with expert witnesses, and most of us have also observed
that they often give false evidence because they treat the event in
terms of their own interest and are convinced that things must happen
according to the principles of their trades. However the event shapes
itself, they model it and alter it so much that it finally implies their
own apprehension.

“Subconscious perceptions,” somewhat altered, play another rôle,
according to Exner, in so-called orientation. If anybody is able to
orient himself, i.e., know where he is at any time and keep in mind the
general direction, it is important to be aware of the fact when he
serves as witness, for his information will, in consequence, take a
different form and assume a different value. Exner says of himself, that
he knows at each moment of his climb of the Marcus’ tower in what
direction he goes. As for me, once I have turned around, I am lost. Our
perceptions of location and their value would be very different if we
had to testify concerning relations of places, in court. But hardly
anybody will assure the court that in general he orients himself well or
ill.

As Exner says, “If, when walking, I suddenly stop in front of a house to
look at it, I am definitely in possession, also, of the feeling of its
distance from where I left the road--the unconscious perception of the
road beyond is here at work.” It might, indeed, be compared with pure
subconsciousness in which series of processes occur without our knowing
it.

But local orientation does not end with the feeling for place. It is at
work even in the cases of small memories of location, e.g., in learning
things by heart, in knowing on what page and on what line anything is
printed, in finding unobserved things, etc. These questions of
perception-orientation are important, for there are people all of whose
perceptions are closely related to their sense of location. Much may be
learned from such people by use of this specialty of theirs, while
oversight thereof may render them hopeless as witnesses. How far this
goes with some people--as a rule people with a sense of location are the
more intelligent--I saw some time ago when the Germanist Bernhardt
Seuffert told me that when he did not know how anything is spelled he
imagined its appearance, and when that did not help he wrote both the
forms between which he was vacillating and then knew which one was the
correct one. When I asked him whether the chirographic image appeared
printed or written and in what type, he replied significantly enough,
“As my writing-teacher wrote it.” He definitely localized the image on
his writing book of many years ago and read it off in his mind. Such
specialties must be remembered in examining witnesses.

In conclusion, there is a word to say concerning Cattell’s[196]
investigations of the time required for apprehension. The better a man
knows the language the more rapidly can he repeat and read its words. It
is for this reason that we believe that foreigners speak more rapidly
than we. Cattell finds this so indubitable, that he wants to use speed
as a test in the examinations in foreign languages.

The time used in order to identify a single letter is a quarter of a
second, the time to pronounce it one-tenth of a second. Colors and
pictures require noticeably more, not because they are not recognized,
but because it is necessary to think what the right name is. We are much
more accustomed to reading words.

These observations might be carried a step further. The more definitely
an event to be described is conceived, the clearer the deduction and the
more certain the memory of it, the more rapidly may it be reproduced. It
follows that, setting aside individual idiosyncrasies, the rapidity of
speech of a witness will be of importance when we want to know how much
he has thought on a question and is certain what he is going to say. It
is conceivable that a person who is trying to remember the event
accurately will speak slowly and stutteringly, or at least with
hesitation at the moment. The same will occur if he tries to conceive of
various possibilities, to eliminate some, and to avoid contradiction
and improbability. If, however, the witness is convinced and believes
truly what he is telling, so that he may go over it in his mind easily
and without interruption, he will tell his story as quickly as he can.
This may indeed be observed in public speakers, even judges,
prosecutors, and defense; if anyone of them is not clear with regard to
the case he represents, or not convinced of its correctness, he will
speak slowly; if the situation is reversed he will speak rapidly. Court
and other public stenographers confirm this observation.


Topic 3. IMAGINATION.

Section 45.

The things witnesses tell us have formerly existed in their
imaginations, and the _how_ of this existence determines in a large
degree the _quale_ of what they offer us. Hence, the nature of
imagination must be of interest to us, and the more so, as we need not
concern ourselves with the relation between being and imagination. It
may be that things may exist in forms quite different from those in
which we know them, perhaps even in unknowable forms. The idealist,
according to some authorities, has set this possibility aside and given
a scientific reply to those who raised it.

So far as we lawyers are concerned, the “scientific reply” does not
matter. We are interested in the reliability of the imagination and in
its identification with what we assume to exist and to occur. Some
writers hold that sensory objects are in sense-perception both external
and internal, external with regard to each other, and internal with
regard to consciousness. Attention is called to the fact that the
distinction between image and object constitutes no part of the act of
perception. But those who remark this fact assume that the act does
contain an image. According to St. Augustine the image serves as the
knowledge of the object; according to Erdmann the object is the image
objectified.

Of great importance is the substitutional adequacy of images. E. g., I
imagine my absent dog, Bismarck’s dog, whom I know only pictorially, and
finally, the dog of Alcibiades, whose appearance is known only by the
fact that he was pretty and that his master had cut off his tail. In
this case, the representative value of these images will be definite,
for everybody knows that I can imagine my own dog very correctly, that
the image of Bismarck’s beast will also be comparatively good inasmuch
as this animal has been frequently pictured and described, while the
image of Alcibiades’ dog will want much in the way of
reliability--although I have imagined this historic animal quite vividly
since boyhood. When, therefore, I speak of any one of these three
animals everybody will be able properly to value the correctness of my
images because he knows their conditions. When we speak with a witness,
however, we rarely know the conditions under which he has obtained his
images, and we learn them only from him. Now it happens that the
description offered by the witness adds another image, i.e., our own
image of the matter, and this, and that of the witness, have to be
placed in specific relation to each other. Out of the individual images
of all concerned an image should be provided which implies the image of
the represented event. Images can be compared only with images, or
images are only pictures of images.[197]

The difficulty of this transmutation lies fundamentally in the nature of
representation. Representation can never be identical with its object.
Helmholtz has made this most clear: “Our visions and representations are
effects; objects seen and represented have worked on our nervous system
and on our consciousness. The nature of each effect depends necessarily
upon the nature of its cause, and the nature of the individual upon whom
the cause was at work. To demand an image which should absolutely
reproduce its object and therefore be absolutely true, would be to
demand an effect which should be absolutely independent of the nature of
that object on which the effect is caused. And this is an obvious
contradiction.”

What the difference between image and object consists of, whether it is
merely formal or material, how much it matters, has not yet been
scientifically proved and may never be so. We have to assume only that
the validity of this distinction is universally known, and that
everybody possesses an innate corrective with which he assigns proper
place to image and object, i.e., he knows approximately the distinction
between them. The difficulty lies in the fact that not all people
possess an identical standard, and that upon the creation of the latter
practically all human qualities exert an influence. This variety in
standards, again, is double-edged. On the one side it depends on the
essence of image and of object, on the other it depends on the
alteration which the image undergoes even during perception as well as
during all the ensuing time. Everybody knows this distinction. Whoever
has seen anything under certain circumstances, or during a certain
period of his life, may frequently produce an image of it varying in
individual characteristics, but in its general character constant. If he
sees it later under different conditions, at a different age, when
memory and imaginative disposition have exercised their alterative
influence, image and object fail to correspond in various directions.
The matter is still worse with regard to images of things and events
that have never been seen. I can imagine the siege of Troy, a dragon,
the polar night and Alexander the Great, but how different will the
image be from the object!

This is especially obvious when we have perceived something which did
not appear to us altogether correct. We improve the thing, i.e., we
study how it might have been better, and we remember it as improved;
then the more frequently this object as imagined recurs, the more fixed
its form becomes, but not its actual form, only its altered form. We see
this with especial clearness in the case of drawings that in some way
displease us. Suppose I do not like the red dress of a woman in some
picture and I prefer brown. If later I recall the picture the image will
become progressively browner and browner, and finally I see the picture
as brown, and when I meet the real object I wonder about the red
dress.[198]

We get this situation in miniature each time we hear of a crime, however
barren the news may be,--no more than a telegraphic word. The event must
naturally have some degree of importance, because, if I hear merely that
a silver watch has been stolen, I do not try to imagine that situation.
If, however, I hear that near a hostelry in X, a peasant was robbed by
two traveling apprentices I immediately get an image which contains not
only the unknown region, but also the event of the robbery, and even
perhaps the faces of those concerned. It does not much matter that this
image is completely false in practically every detail, because in the
greater number of cases it is corrected. The real danger lies in the
fact that this correction is frequently so bad and often fails
altogether and that, in consequence, the first image again breaks
through and remains the most vigorous.[199] The vigor is the greater
because we always attach such imagination to something actual or
approximately real, and inasmuch as the latter thing is either really
seen, or at least energetically imagined, the first image acquires
renewed power of coming up. According to Lipps, “Reproductive images
presuppose dispositions. Dispositions ensue upon perceptions that they
imply; still there are reproductive images and imagined wholes which
imply no preceding perceptions. This contradiction is solved when
dispositions are contained in other things at the same time. A finite
number of dispositions may in this way be also infinite.... Dispositions
are transformed power itself, power transformed in such a way as to be
able to respond actively to inner stimulations.”

The process is similar in the reproduction of images during speech. The
fact that this reproduction is not direct but depends on the sequence of
images, leads to the garrulity of children, old men, and uneducated
people, who try to present the whole complex of relations belonging to
any given image. But such total recall drives the judge to despair, not
only because he loses time, but because of the danger of having the
attention turned from important to unimportant things. The same thing is
perceived in judicial documents which often reveal the fact that the
dictator permitted himself to be led astray by unskilful witnesses, or
that he had himself been responsible for abstruse, indirect memories.
The real thinker will almost always be chary of words, because he
retains, from among the numberless images which are attached to his
idea, only those most closely related to his immediate purpose. Hence
good protocols are almost always comparatively short. It is even as
instructive as amusing to examine certain protocols, with regard to what
ought to be omitted, and then with regard to the direct representations,
i.e., to everything that appertains to the real illumination of the
question. It is astounding how little of the latter thing is indicated,
and how often it enters blindly because what was important has been
forgotten and lost.

Of course, we must grant that the essence of representation involves
very great difficulties. By way of example consider so ordinary a case
as the third dimension. We are convinced that according to its nature it
is much more complex than it seems to be. We are compelled to believe
that distance is not a matter of sensation and that it requires to be
explained.[200]

Psychologists indicate that the representation of the third dimension
would be tremendously difficult without the help of experience. But
experience is something relative, we do not know how much experience any
man possesses, or its nature. Hence, we never can know clearly to what
degree a man’s physical vision is correct if we do not see other means
of verification. Consider now what is required in the assumption of the
idea of the fourth dimension. Since its introduction by Henry More, this
idea should quite have altered our conception of space. But we do not
know how many cling to it unconsciously, and we should make no mistake
if we said that nobody has any knowledge of how his neighbor perceives
space.[201]

Movement is another thing difficult to represent or imagine. You can
determine for yourself immediately whether you can imagine even a
slightly complicated movement. I can imagine one individual condition of
a movement after another, sequentially, but I can not imagine the
sequence. As Herbart says somewhere, a successive series of images is
not a represented succession. But if we can not imagine this latter,
what do we imagine is not what it ought to be. According to
Stricker,[202] the representation of movement is a _quale_ which can not
be given in terms of any other sensory quality, and no movement can be
remembered without the brain’s awakening a muscle-movement. Experience
verifies this theory. The awakening of the muscular sense is frequently
obvious whenever movement is thought of, and we may then perceive how,
in the explanation or description of a movement, the innervation which
follows the image in question, occurs. This innervation is always true.
It agrees at least with what the witness has himself perceived and now
tries to renew in his story. When we have him explain, for example, how
some man had been choked, we may see movements of his hands which,
however slight and obscure, still definitely indicate that he is trying
to remember what he has seen, and this irrelevantly of what he is
saying. This makes it possible to observe the alterations of images in
the individual in question, an alteration which always occurs when the
images are related to movements.

It follows further from the fact that movements are difficult to
represent that the witness ought not to be expected accurately to recall
them. Stricker says that for a long time he could not image a snow-fall,
and succeeded only in representing one single instant of it. Now what is
not capable of representation, can not well be recalled, and so we
discover that it merely causes trouble to ask the witness to describe
point by point even a simple sequence. The witness has only successive
images, and even if the particular images are correct, he has nothing
objective for the succession itself, nothing rooted in the sequence. He
is helped, merely, by the logic of events and his memory--if these are
scanty, the succession of images is scanty, and therefore the
reproduction of the event is inadequate. Hence this scantiness is as
little remarkable as the variety of description in various witnesses, a
variety due to the fact that the sequentialization is subjective.

Drawing is a confirmation of the fact that we represent only a single
instant of motion, for a picture can never give us a movement, but only
a single state within that movement. At the same time we are content
with what the picture renders, even when our image contains only this
simple moment of movement. “What is seen or heard, is immediately, in
all its definiteness, content of consciousness” (Schuppe)--but its
movement is not.

The influence of time upon images is hardly indifferent. We have to
distinguish the time necessary for the construction of an image, and the
time during which an image lasts with uniform vividness. Maudsley
believes the first question difficult to answer. He leans on Darwin, who
points out that musicians play as quickly as they can apprehend the
notes. The question will affect the lawyer in so far as it is necessary
to determine whether, after some time, an image of an event may ensue
from which it is possible to infer back to the individuality of the
witness. No other example can be used here, because on the rocky problem
of the occurrence of images are shattered even the regulative arts of
most modern psychophysics.

The second problem is of greater significance. Whether any practical use
of its solution can be made, I can not say, but it urges consideration.
Exner has observed that the uniform vividness of an image lasts hardly a
second. The image as a whole does not disappear in this time, but its
content endures unchanged for so long at most. Then it fades in waves.
The correctness of this description may be tested by anybody. But I
should like to add that my observations of my own images indicate that
in the course of a progressive repetition of the recall of an image its
content is not equally capable of reproduction. I believe, further, that
no essential leaps occur in this alteration of the content of an idea,
but that the alteration moves in some definite direction. If, then, I
recall the idea of some object successively, I will imagine it not at
one time bigger, then smaller, then again bigger, etc.; on the contrary,
the series of images will be such that each new image will be either
progressively bigger or progressively smaller.

If this observation of mine is correct and the phenomenon is not purely
personal, Exner’s description becomes of great value in examination,
which because of its length, requires the repeated recall of
standardizing images, and this in its turn causes an alteration in the
ideational content. We frequently observe that a witness persuades
himself into the belief of some definite idea in the course of his
examination, inasmuch as with regard to some matter he says more and
more definite things at the end than at the beginning. This may possibly
be contingent on the alteration of frequently recalled ideas. One could
make use of the process which is involved in the reproduction of the
idea, by implying it, and so not being compelled to return endlessly to
something already explained.

How other people construct their ideas, we do not, as we have seen,
know, and the difficulty of apprehending the ideas or images of other
people, many authorities clearly indicate.[203]


Topic 4. INTELLECTUAL PROCESSES.


Section 46. (a) General Considerations.

Lichtenberg said somewhere, “I used to know people of great scholarship,
in whose head the most important propositions were folded up in
excellent order. But I don’t know what occurred there, whether the ideas
were all mannikins or all little women--there were no results. In one
corner of the head, these gentlemen put away saltpeter, in another
sulphur, in a third charcoal, but these did not combine into gunpowder.
Then again, there are people in whose heads everything seeks out and
finds everything else, everything pairs off with everything else, and
arranges itself variously.” What Lichtenberg is trying to do is to
indicate that the cause of the happy condition of the last-named friends
is imagination. That imagination is influential, is certain, but it is
equally certain that the human understanding is so different with
different people as to permit such phenomena as Lichtenberg describes. I
do not want to discuss the quantity of understanding. I shall deal, this
time, with its quality, by means of which the variety of its uses may be
explained. It would be a mistake to think of the understanding as
capable of assuming different forms. If it were it would be possible to
construct from the concept understanding a group of different powers
whose common quality would come to us off-hand. But with regard to
understanding we may speak only of more or less and we must think of the
difference in effect in terms only of the difference of the forms of its
application. We see the effects of the understanding alone, not the
understanding itself, and however various a burning city, cast iron, a
burn, and steaming water may be, we recognize that in spite of the
difference of effect, the same fire has brought about all these results.
The difference in the uses of the understanding, therefore, lies in the
manner of its application. Hence these applications will help us, when
we know them, to judge the value of what they offer us. The first
question that arises when we are dealing with an important witness who
has made observations and inferences, is this: “How intelligent is he?
and what use does he make of his intelligence? That is, What are his
processes of reasoning?”

I heard, from an old diplomat, whose historic name is as significant as
his experience, that he made use of a specific means to discover what
kind of mind a person had. He used to tell his subjects the following
story: “A gentleman, carrying a small peculiarly-formed casket, entered
a steam car, where an obtrusive commercial traveler asked him at once
what was contained in the casket. ‘My Mungo is inside!’ ‘Mungo? What is
that?’ ‘Well, you know that I suffer from delirium tremens, and when I
see the frightful images and figures, I let my Mungo out and he eats
them up.’ ‘But, sir, these images and figures do not really exist.’ ‘Of
course they don’t really exist, but my Mungo doesn’t really exist,
either, so it’s all right!’”

The old gentleman asserted that he could judge of the intelligence of
his interlocutor by the manner in which the latter received this story.

Of course it is impossible to tell every important witness the story of
Mungo, but something similar may be made use of which could be sought
out of the material in the case. Whoever has anything worthy the name of
practice will then be able to judge the manner of the witness’s
approach, and especially the degree of intelligence he possesses. The
mistake must not be made, however, that this requires splendid
deductions; it is best to stick to simple facts. Goethe’s golden word is
still true: “The greatest thing is to understand that all fact is theory
... do not look behind phenomena; they are themselves the doctrine.” We
start, therefore, with some simple fact which has arisen in the case and
try to discover what the witness will do with it. It is not difficult;
you may know a thing badly in a hundred ways, but you know it well in
only one way. If the witness handles the fact properly, we may trust
him. We learn, moreover, from this handling how far the man may be
objective. His perception as witness means to him only an experience,
and the human mind may not collect experiences without, at the same
time, weaving its speculations into them. But though everyone does this,
he does it according to his nature and nurture. There is little that is
as significant as the manner, the intensity, and the direction in and
with which a witness introduces his speculation into the story of his
experience. Whole sweeps of human character may show themselves up with
one such little explanation. It is for this reason that Kant called the
human understanding architectonic; it aims to bring together all its
knowledge under one single system, and this according to fixed rules and
systems defined by the needs of ordinary mortals. Only the genius has,
like nature, his own unknown system. And we do not need to count on this
rarest of exceptions.

The people who constitute our most complicated problems are the average,
and insignificant members of the human race. Hume cited the prophet
Alexander quite justly. Alexander was a wise prophet, who selected
Paphlagonis as the first scene of his deception because the people there
were extraordinarily foolish and swallowed with pleasure the coarsest of
swindles. They had heard earlier of the genuineness and power of the
prophet, and the smart ones laughed at him, the fools believed and
spread his faith, his cause got adherents even among educated people,
and finally Marcus Aurelius himself paid the matter so much attention as
to rest the success of a military enterprise on a prophecy of
Alexander’s. Tacitus narrates how Vespasian cured a blind man by
spitting on him, and the story is repeated by Suetonius.

We must never forget that, however great a foolishness may be, there is
always somebody to commit it. It is Hume, again, I think, who so
excellently describes what happens when some inconceivable story is told
to uncritical auditors. Their credulity increases the narrator’s
shamelessness; his shamelessness convinces their credulity. Thinking for
yourself is a rare thing, and the more one is involved with other people
in matters of importance, the more one is convinced of the rarity. And
yet, so little is demanded in thinking. “To abstract the red of blood
from the collective impression, to discover the same concept in
different things, to bring together under the same notion blood and
beer, milk and snow,--animals do not do this; it is thinking.”[204] I
might suggest that in the first place, various animals are capable of
something of the sort, and in the second place, that many men are
incapable of the same thing. The lawyer’s greatest of all mistakes is
always the presupposition that whoever has done anything has also
thought about doing it and while he was doing it. This is especially the
case when we observe that many people repeatedly speak of the same event
and drive us to the opinion that there must be some intelligent idea
behind it,--but however narrow a road may be, behind it there may be any
number of others in series.

We also are bound to be mistaken if we presuppose the lack of reason as
a peculiarity of the uneducated only, and accept as well thought-out the
statements of people who possess academic training. But not everybody
who damns God is a philosopher, and neither do academic persons concern
themselves unexceptionally with thinking. Concerning the failure of our
studies in the high-schools and in the gymnasia, more than enough has
been written, but Helmholtz, in his famous dissertation, “Concerning the
Relation of the Natural Sciences to the Whole of Knowledge,” has
revealed the reason for the inadequacy of the material served up by
gymnasia and high-schools. Helmholtz has not said that the university
improves the situation only in a very small degree, but it may be
understood from his words. “The pupils who pass from our grammar-schools
to exact studies have two defects: 1. A certain laxity in the
application of universally valid laws. The grammatical rules with which
they have been trained, are as a matter of fact, buried under series of
exceptions; the pupils hence are unaccustomed to trust unconditionally
to the certainty of a legitimate consequence of some fixed universal
law. 2. They are altogether too much inclined to depend upon authority
even where they can judge for themselves.”

Even if Helmholtz is right, it is important for the lawyer to recognize
the distinction between the witness who has the gymnasium behind him and
the educated man who has helped himself without that institution. Our
time, which has invented the Ph. D., which wants to do everything for
the public school and is eager to cripple the classical training in the
gymnasium, has wholly forgotten that the incomparable value of the
latter does not lie in the minimum of Latin and Greek which the student
has acquired, but in the disciplinary intellectual drill contained in
the grammar of the ancient tongues. It is superfluous to make fun of the
fact that the technician writes on his visiting cards: Stud. Eng. or
Stud. Mech. and can not pronounce the words the abbreviations stand
for, that he becomes Ph. D. and can not translate his title,--these are
side issues. But it is forgotten that the total examination in which the
public school pupil presents his hastily crammed Latin and Greek, never
implies a careful training in his most impressionable period of life.
Hence the criminalist repeatedly discovers that the capacity for trained
thinking belongs mainly to the person who has been drilled for eight
years in Greek and Latin grammar. We criminalists have much experience
in this matter.

Helmholtz’s first point would, for legal purposes, require very broad
interpretation of the term, “universally valid laws,” extending it also
to laws in the judicial sense of the word. The assertion is frequently
made that laws are passed in the United States in order that they might
not be obeyed, and political regulations are obeyed by the public for,
at most, seven weeks. Of course, the United States is no exception; it
seems as if the respect for law is declining everywhere, and if this
decline occurs in one field no other is likely to be free from it. A
certain subjective or egoistic attitude is potent in this regard, for
people in the main conceive the law to be made only for others; they
themselves are exceptions. Narrow, unconditional adherence to general
norms is not modern, and this fact is to be seen not only in the excuses
offered, but also in the statements of witnesses, who expect others to
follow prescriptions approximately, and themselves hardly at all. This
fact has tremendous influence on the conceptions and constructions of
people, and a failure to take it into consideration means considerable
error.

Not less unimportant is the second point raised in the notion of
“authority.” To judge for himself is everybody’s business, and should be
required of everybody. Even if nobody should have the happy thought of
making use of the better insight, the dependent person who always wants
to go further will lead himself into doubtful situations. The three
important factors, school, newspaper, and theater, have reached an
extraordinary degree of power. People apperceive, think, and feel as
these three teach them, and finally it becomes second nature to follow
this line of least resistance, and to seek intellectual conformity. We
know well enough what consequences this has in law, and each one of us
can tell how witnesses present us stories which we believe to rest on
their own insight but which show themselves finally to depend upon the
opinion of some other element. We frequently base our constructions upon
the remarkable and convincing unanimity of such witnesses when upon
closer examination we might discover that this unanimity has a single
source. If we make this discovery it is fortunate, for only time and
labor have then been lost and no mistake has been committed. But if the
discovery is not made, the unanimity remains an important, but really an
unreliable means of proof.


Section 47. (b) The Mechanism of Thinking.

Since the remarkable dissertation of W. Ostwald,[205] on Sept. 20, 1905,
we have been standing at a turning point which looks toward a new view
of the world. We do not know whether the “ignorabimus” of some of the
scientists will hold, or whether we shall be able to think everything in
terms of energy. We merely observe that the supposedly invincible
principles of scientific materialism are shaken.

Frederick the Great, in a letter to Voltaire, says something which
suggests he was the first to have thought of the purely mechanical
nature of thought. Cabanis had said briefly, that the brain secretes
thought as the liver bile. Tyndall expressed this conception more
cautiously, and demanded merely the confession that every act of
consciousness implies a definite molecular condition of the brain, while
Bois-Reymond declared that we could not explain certain psychical
processes and events by knowledge of the material processes in the
brain. “You shall make no picture or comparison, but see as directly as
the nature of our spirit will permit,” Ostwald tells us, and it is well
to stick to this advice. We need neither to cast aside the mechanical
view of the world nor to accept energism; neither of them is required.
But according to the teachings of the latter, we shall be enabled to
recognize the meaning of natural law in the determination of how actual
events are conditioned by possible ones. And thus we shall see that the
form that all natural laws turn to expresses the mediation of an
invariable, a quantity that remains unchangeable even when all the other
elements in the formula of a possible event alter within the limits
defined by the law.[206]

Every science must provide its own philosophy, and it is our duty to
know properly and to understand clearly how far we may perceive
connections between the physical qualities of any one of our witnesses
and his psychic nature. We will draw no inferences ourselves, but we
will take note of what does not explain itself and apply to experts to
explain what we can not. This is especially necessary where the relation
of the normal to the abnormal becomes a question. The normal effects to
be spoken of are very numerous, but we shall consider only a few. The
first is the connection of symbol and symbolized. “The circumstance that
the symbol, on its side of the union of the two, becomes perfectly clear
while the symbolized object is rather confused, is explained by the fact
that the symbol recalls its object more quickly than the object the
symbol; e.g., the tool recalls its use more quickly than the purpose its
instrument. Name and word recall more quickly, reliably, and
energetically the objects they stand for than do the objects their
symbols.”[207] This matter is more important than it looks at first
glance, inasmuch as the particles of time with which we are dealing are
greater than those with which modern psychologists have to deal,--so
large indeed, that they may be perceived in practice. We lay stress
during the examination, when we are in doubt about the correctness of
the expected answer, upon the promptness and rapidity with which it is
given. Drawn out, tentative, and uncertain answers, we take for a sign
that the witness either is unable or unwilling to give his replies
honestly. If, however, psychologically there are real reasons for
variation in the time in which an answer is given, reasons which do not
depend on its correctness, we must seek out this correctness. Suppose
that we have before us a case in which the name awakens more quickly and
reliably the idea of the person to whom it belongs than conversely. This
occurs to any one of us, and often we can not remember the name of even
a close friend for a greater or shorter period. But we very rarely find
that we do not think of the appearance of the individual whose name we
hear mentioned. But it would be wrong to relate this phenomenon to
certain qualities which contradict it only apparently. E. g., when I
examine old statutes which I myself have worked with and review the
names of the series, I recall that I had something to do with this
Jones, Smith, Black, or White, and I recall what the business was, but I
do not recall their appearance. The reason is, first of all, the fact
that during the trial I did not care about the names which served as a
means of distinguishing one from the other, and they might, for that
purpose, have been _a_, _b_, _c_, etc. Hence, the faces and names were
not as definitely associated as they ordinarily are. Moreover, _this_
failure to recall is a substitution for each other of the many tanti
quanti that we take up in our daily routine. When we have had especial
business with any particular individual we do remember his face when his
name is mentioned.

If, then, a witness does not quickly recall the name of something he is
thinking of, but identifies it immediately when the name is given him,
you have a natural psychological event which itself has no bearing on
the truth or falsity of his testimony.

The same relation is naturally to be found in all cases of parallel
phenomena, i.e., names, symbols, definitions, etc. It applies, also, to
the problem of the alteration in the rapidity of psychical processes
with the time of the day. According to Bechterew and Higier there is an
increase in psychical capacity from morning to noon, then a dropping
until five o’clock in the afternoon, then an increase until nine o’clock
in the evening, and finally a sinking until twelve o’clock midnight.
There is, of course, no doubt that these investigators have correctly
collected their material; that their results shall possess general
validity is, however, not so certain. The facts are such that much
depends, not only on the individual character, but also on the instant
of examination. One hears various assertions of individuals at times
when they are most quick to apprehend and at their best, and hence it is
hardly possible to draw a general rule from such phenomena. One may be
wide awake in the morning, another in the forenoon, a third at night,
and at each time other people may be at their worst. In a similar
fashion, the psychic disposition varies not only during the day, but
from day to day. So far as my observations go the only thing
uncontradicted is the fact that the period between noon and five o’clock
in the afternoon is not a favorable one. I do not believe, however, that
it would be correct to say that the few hours after the noon dinner are
the worst in the day, for people who eat their dinners at about four or
five o’clock assure me that from one to five in the afternoon, they
cannot work so well. These facts may have a value for us in so far as we
can succeed in avoiding the trial of important cases which require
especial consideration during the time mentioned.


Section 48. (c) The Subconscious.

It is my opinion that the importance of unconscious operations[208] in
legal procedure is undervalued. We could establish much that is
significant concerning an individual whose unconscious doings we knew.
For, as a rule, we perform unconsciously things that are deeply
habitual, therefore, first of all what everybody does--walk, greet your
neighbor, dodge, eat, etc.; secondly, we perform unconsciously things to
which we have become accustomed in accordance with our especial
characters.[209] When, during my work, I rise, get a glass of water,
drink it, and set the glass aside again, without having the slightest
suspicion of having done so, I must agree that this was possible only in
my well-known residence and environment, and that it was possible to
nobody else, not so familiar. The coachman, perhaps, puts the horses
into the stable, rubs them down, etc., and thinks of something else
while doing so. He has performed unconsciously what another could not.
It might happen that I roll a cigarette while I am working, and put it
aside; after awhile I roll a second and a third, and sometimes I have
four cigarettes side by side. I needed to smoke, had prepared a
cigarette, and simply because I had to use my hands in writing, etc., I
laid the cigarette aside. In consequence, the need to smoke was not
satisfied and the process was repeated. This indicates what complicated
things may be unconsciously performed if only the conditions are
well-known; but it also indicates what the limits of unconscious action
are: e.g., I had not forgotten what would satisfy my need to smoke, nor
where my cigarette paper was, nor how to make a cigarette, but I had
forgotten that I had made a cigarette without having smoked it. The
activities first named have been repeated thousands of times, while the
last had only just been performed and therefore had not become
mechanical.[210]

Lipps calls attention to another instance: “It may be that I am capable
of retaining every word of a speech and of observing at the same time
the expression which accompanies the speech. I might be equally able to
trace a noise which occurs on the street and still to pay sufficient
attention to the speech. On the other hand, I should lose the thread of
the speech if I were required at the same time to think of the play of
feature and the noise. Expressed in general terms, idea A may possibly
get on with idea B and even idea C; but B and C together make A
impossible. This clearly indicates that B and C in themselves have
opposed A and inhibited it in some degree, but that only the summation
of their inhibition could serve really to exclude A.” This is certainly
correct and may perhaps be more frequently made use of when it is
necessary to judge how much an individual would have done at one and
the same time, and how much he would have done unconsciously. An
approximation of the possibilities can always be made.

Such complicated processes go down to the simplest operations. Aubert
indicates, for example, that in riding a horse at gallop you jump and
only later observe whether you have jumped to the right or the left. And
the physician Förster told Aubert that his patients often did not know
how to look toward right or left. At the same time, everybody remembers
how when he is doing it unconsciously, and it may often be observed that
people have to make the sign of the cross, or the gesture of eating in
order to discover what is right and what left, although they are
unconsciously quite certain of these directions. Still broader
activities are bound up with this unconscious psychosis, activities for
us of importance when the accused later give us different and better
explanations than at the beginning, and when they have not had the
opportunity to study the case out and make additional discoveries, or to
think it over in the mean time. They then say honestly that the new,
really probable exposition has suddenly occurred to them. As a rule we
do not believe such statements, and we are wrong, for even when this
sudden vision appears improbable and not easily realizable, the
witnesses have explained it in this way only because they do not know
the psychological process, which, as a matter of fact, consisted of
subconscious thinking.

The brain does not merely receive impressions unconsciously, it
registers them without the co-operation of consciousness, works them
over unconsciously, awakens the latent residua without the help of
consciousness, and reacts like an organ endowed with organic life toward
the inner stimuli which it receives from other parts of the body. That
this also influences the activity of the imagination, Goethe has
indicated in his statement to Schiller: “Impressions must work silently
in me for a very long time before they show themselves willing to be
used poetically.”

In other respects everybody knows something about this unconscious
intellectual activity. Frequently we plague ourselves with the attempt
to bring order into the flow of ideas--and we fail. Then the next time,
without our having thought of the matter in the interval, we find
everything smooth and clear. It is on this fact that the various popular
maxims rest, e.g., to think a thing over, or to sleep on it, etc. The
unconscious activity of thought has a great share in what has been
thought out.

A very distinctive rôle belongs to the coincidence of conscious
attention with unconscious. An explanation of this process will help us,
perhaps, to explain many incomprehensible and improbable things. “Even
the unconscious psychic activities,--going up and down, smoking, playing
with the hands, etc., conversation,--compete with the conscious or with
other unconscious activities for psychic energy. Hence, a
suddenly-appearing important idea may lead us to stop walking, to remain
without a rule of action, may make the smoker drop his smoking, etc.”
The explanation is as follows: I possess, let us say, 100 units of
psychic energy which I might use in attention. Now we find it difficult
to attend for twenty seconds to one point, and more so to direct our
thought-energy to one thing. Hence I apply only, let us say, 90 units to
the object in question, and apply 10 units to the unconscious play of
ideas, etc. Now, if the first object suddenly demands even more
attention, it draws off the other ten units, and I must stop playing,
for absolutely without attention, even unconscious attention, nothing
can be done.

This very frequent and well-known phenomenon, shows us, first of all,
the unconscious activities in their agreement with the conscious,
inasmuch as we behave in the same way when both are interrupted by the
demand of another thing on our attention. If a row suddenly breaks out
before my window I will interrupt an unconscious drumming with the
fingers as well as a conscious reading, so that it would be impossible
to draw any conclusion concerning the nature of these activities from
the mere interruption or the manner of that interruption. This
similarity is an additional ground for the fact that what is done
unconsciously may be very complex. No absolute boundary may be drawn,
and hence we can derive no proof of the incorrectness of an assertion
from the performance itself, i.e., from _what_ has been done
unconsciously. Only human nature, its habits, idiosyncrasies, and its
contemporary environment can give us any norm.


Section 49. (d) Subjective Conditions.

We have already seen that our ideation has the self for center and point
of reference. And we shall later see that the kind of thinking which
exclusively relates all events to itself, or the closest relations of
the self, is, according to Erdmann, the essence of stupidity. There is,
however, a series of intellectual processes in which the thinker pushes
his self into the foreground with more or less justification, judging
everything else and studying everything else in the light of it,
presupposing in others what he finds in himself, and exhibiting a
greater interest in himself than may be his proper share. Such ideations
are frequently to be found in high-minded natures. I know a genial
high-school teacher, the first in his profession, who is so deeply
absorbed in his thinking, that he never carries money, watch, or keys
because he forgets and loses them. When in the examination of some
critical case he needs a coin he turns to his auditors with the
question: “Perhaps one of you gentlemen may _by some chance_ have a
quarter with you?” He judges from his habit of not carrying money with
him, that to carry it is to be presupposed as a “perhaps,” and the
appearance of a quarter in this crowded auditorium must be “by chance.”

The same thing is true with some of the most habitual processes of some
of the most ordinary people. If a man sees a directory in which his name
must be mentioned, he looks it up and studies it. If he sees a group
photograph in which he also occurs he looks up his own picture, and when
the most miserable cheater who is traveling under a false name picks
that out, he will seek it out of his _own_ relationships, will either
alter his real name or slightly vary the maiden name of his mother, or
deduce it from his place of birth, or simply make use of his christian
name. But he will not be likely to move far from his precious self.

That similar things are true for readers, Goethe told us when he showed
us that everything that anybody reads interests him only when he finds
himself or his activities therein. So Goethe explains that business men
and men of the world apprehend a scientific dissertation better than the
really learned, “who habitually hear no more of it than what they have
learned or taught and with which they meet their equals.”

It is properly indicated that every language has the largest number of
terms for those things which are most important to those who speak it.
Thus we are told that the Arabians have as many as 6000 words for camel,
2000 for horse, and 50 for lion. Richness of form and use always belong
together, as is shown in the fact that the auxiliaries and those verbs
most often used are everywhere the most irregular. This fact may be very
important in examinations, for definite inferences concerning the nature
and affairs of the witness may be drawn from the manner and frequency
with which he uses words, and whether he possesses an especially large
number of forms in any particular direction.

The fact is that we make our conceptions in accordance with the things
as we have seen them, and so completely persuade ourselves of the truth
of one definite, partial definition, that sometimes we wonder at a
phenomenon without judging that it might have been expected to be
otherwise. When I first became a student at Strassbourg, I wondered,
subconsciously, when I heard the ragged gamins talk French fluently. I
knew, indeed, that it was their mother-tongue, but I was so accustomed
to viewing all French as a sign of higher education that this knowledge
in the gamins made me marvel. When I was a child I once had to bid my
grandfather adieu very early, while he was still in bed. I still recall
the vivid astonishment of my perception that grandfather awoke without
his habitual spectacles upon his nose. I must have known that spectacles
are as superfluous as uncomfortable and dangerous when one is sleeping,
and I should not even with most cursory thinking have supposed that he
would have worn his spectacles during the night. But as I was accustomed
always to see my grandfather with spectacles, when he did not have them
I wondered at it.

Such instances are of especial importance when the judge is himself
making observations, i.e., examining the premises of the crime, studying
corpora delicti, etc., because we often suppose ourselves to see
extraordinary and illegal things simply because we have been habituated
to seeing things otherwise. We even construct and name according to this
habit. Taine narrates the instructive story of a little girl who wore a
medal around her throat, of which she was told, “C’est le bon Dieu.”
When the child once saw her uncle with a lorgnon around his neck she
said, “C’est le bon Dieu de mon oncle.” And since I heard the story, I
have repeatedly had the opportunity to think, “C’est aussi le bon Dieu
de cet homme.” A single word which indicates how a man denotes a thing
defines for us his nature, his character, and his circumstances.

For the same reason that everything interests us more according to the
degree it involves us personally, we do not examine facts and completely
overlook them though they are later shown to be unshakable, without our
being able to explain their causal nexus. If, however, we know causes
and relationships, these facts become portions of our habitual mental
equipment. Any practitioner knows how true this is, and how especially
visible during the examination of witnesses, who ignore facts which to
us seem, in the nature of the case, important and definitive. In such
cases we must first of all not assume that these facts have not
occurred because the witness has not explained them or has overlooked
them; we must proceed as suggested in order to validate the relevant
circumstances by means of the witness--i.e., we must teach him the
conditions and relationships until they become portions of his habitual
mental machinery. I do not assert that this is easy--on the contrary, I
say that whoever is able to do this is the most effective of examiners,
and shows again that the witness is no more than an instrument which is
valueless in the hands of the bounder, but which can accomplish all
sorts of things in the hands of the master.

One must beware, however, of too free use of the most comfortable
means,--that of examples. When Newton said, “In addiscendis scientiis
exempla plus prosunt, quam praecepta,” he was not addressing
criminalists, but he might have been. As might, also, Kant, when he
proved that thinking in examples is dangerous because it allows the use
of real thinking, for which it is not a substitute, to lapse. That this
fact is one reason for the danger of examples is certain, but the chief
reason, at least for the lawyer, is the fact that an example requires
not equality, but mere similarity. The degree of similarity is not
expressed and the auditor has no standard for the degree of similarity
in the mind of the speaker. “Omnis analogia claudicat” is correct, and
it may happen that the example might be falsely conceived, that
similarity may be mistaken for equality, or at least, that there should
be ignorance of the inequality. Examples, therefore, are to be used only
in the most extreme cases, and only in such wise, that the nature of the
example is made very clearly obvious and its incorrectness warned
against.

There are several special conditions, not to be overlooked. One of these
is the influence of expectation. Whoever expects anything, sees, hears,
and constructs, only in the suspense of this expectation, and neglects
all competing events most astoundingly. Whoever keenly expects any
person is sensible only of the creaking of the garden door, he is
interested in all sounds which resemble it, and which he can immediately
distinguish with quite abnormal acuteness; everything else so disappears
that even powerful sounds, at any event more powerful than that of the
creaking gate, are overlooked. This may afford some explanation for the
very different statements we often receive from numerous observers of
the same event; each one had expected a different thing, and hence, had
perceived and had ignored different things.

Again, the opposition of the I and You in the person himself is a
noteworthy thing. According to Noel, this is done particularly when one
perceives one’s own foolish management: “How could you have behaved so
foolishly!” Generalized it might be restated as the fact that people say
You to themselves whenever the dual nature of the ego becomes visible,
i.e., whenever one no longer entertains a former opinion, or when one is
undecided and carries about contradictory intentions, or whenever one
wants to compel himself to some achievement. Hence “How could you have
done this?”--“Should you do this or should you not?”--“You simply shall
tell the truth.”--More naïve people often report such inner dialogues
faithfully and without considering that they give themselves away
thereby, inasmuch as the judge learns at least that when this occurred
the practical ego was a stranger to the considering ego, through whom
the subjective conditions of the circumstances involved may be
explained.

What people call excellent characterizes them. Excellences are for each
man those qualities from which others get the most advantage. Charity,
self-sacrifice, mercy, honesty, integrity, courage, prudence, assiduity,
and however else anything that is good and brave may be called, are
always of use to the other fellow but barely and only indirectly the
possessor of the virtues. Hence we praise the latter and spur others on
to identical qualities (to our advantage). This is very barren and
prosaic, but true. Naturally, not everybody has advantage in the
identical virtues of other people, only in those which are of use to
their individual situation--charity is of no use to the rich, and
courage of no use to the protected. Hence, people give themselves away
more frequently than they seem to, and even when no revelation of their
inner lives can be attained from witnesses and accused, they always
express enough to show what they consider to be virtue and what not.

Hartenstein characterizes Hegel as a person who made his opponents out
of straw and rags in order to be able to beat them down the more easily.
This characterizes not only Hegel but a large group of individuals whose
daily life consists of it. Just as there is nowhere any particularly
definite boundary between sanity and foolishness, and everything flows
into everything else, so it is with men and their testimonies, normal
and abnormal. From the sober, clear, and true testimony of the former,
to the fanciful and impossible assertions of the latter, there is a
straight, slowly rising road on which testimony appears progressively
less true, and more impossible. No man can say where the quality of
foolishness begins--nervousness, excitement, hysteria, over-strain,
illusion, fantasy, and pathoformic lies, are the shadings which may be
distinguished, and the quantity of untruth in such testimonies may be
demonstrated, from one to one hundred per cent., without needing to skip
a single degree. We must not, however, ignore and simply set aside even
the testimony of the outlaws and doubtful persons, because also they may
contain some truth, and we must pay still more attention to such as
contain a larger percentage of truth. But with this regard we have our
so-called smart lawyers who are over-strained, and it is they who build
the real men of straw which cost us so much effort and labor. The form
is indeed correct, but the content is straw, and the figure appears
subjectively dangerous only to its creator. And he has created it
because he likes to fight but desires also to conquer easily. The desire
to construct such figures and to present them to the authorities is
widespread and dangerous through our habit of seeking some particular
motive, hatred, jealousy, a long-drawn quarrel, revenge, etc. If we do
not find it we assume that such a motive is absent and take the
accusation, at least for the time, to be true. We must not forget that
frequently there can be no other defining motive than the desire to
construct a man of straw and to conquer him. If this explanation does
not serve we may make use finally of a curious phenomenon, called by
Lazarus _heroification_, which repeats itself at various levels of life
in rather younger people. If we take this concept in its widest
application we will classify under it all forms that contain the almost
invincible demand for attention, for talking about oneself, for growing
famous, on the part of people who have neither the capacity nor the
perseverance to accomplish any extraordinary thing, and who, hence, make
use of forbidden and even criminal means to shove their personalities
into the foreground and so to attain their end. To this class belong all
those half-grown girls who accuse men of seduction and rape. They aim by
this means to make themselves interesting. So do the women who announce
all kinds of persecutions which make them talked about and condoled
with; and the numerous people who want to do something remarkable and
commit arson; then again certain political criminals of all times who
became “immortal” with one single stab, and hence devoted their
otherwise worthless lives thereto; and finally, even all those who, when
having suffered from some theft, arson, or bodily harm, defined their
damage as considerably greater than it actually was, not for the
purpose of recovering their losses, but for the purpose of being
discussed and condoled with.

As a rule it is not difficult to recognize this “heroification,”
inasmuch as it betrays itself through the lack of other motives, and
appears definitely when the intent is examined and exaggerations are
discovered which otherwise would not appear.


Topic 5. ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS.


Section 50.

The question of association is essentially significant for lawyers
because, in many cases, it is only by use of it that we can discover the
conditions of the existence of certain conceptions, by means of which
witnesses may be brought to remember and tell the truth, etc., without
hypnotizing them, or overtesting the correctness of their statements. We
will cursorily make a few general observations only:

Concerning the law of association, very little has been learned since
the time of Aristotle. It is determined by:

1. Similarity (the common quality of the symbol).

2. Contrast (because every image involves opposition between its
extremes).

3. Co-existence, simultaneity (the being together of outer or inner
objects in space).

4. Succession (images call each other out in the same order in which
they occur).

Hume recognized only three grounds of association of
objects--similarity, contact in time and space, and causality. Theo.
Lipps recognizes as the really different grounds of association only
similarity and simultaneity (the simultaneity of their presence in the
mind, especially).

If, however, simultaneity is to be taken in this sense it may be
considered the sole ground of association, for if the images are not
simultaneous there can be no question of association. Simultaneity in
the mind is only the second process, for images are simultaneous in the
mind only because they have occurred simultaneously, existed in the same
space, were similar, etc. Münsterberg,[211] who dealt with the matter
and got important results, points out that all so-called inner
associations, like similarity, contrast, etc., may be reduced to
external association, and all the external associations, even that of
temporal sequence, may be reduced to co-existence, and all
co-existence-associations are psychophysically intelligible. Further:
“The fundamental error of all association processes leading to incorrect
connection of ideas, must be contained in their incompleteness. One idea
was associated with another, the latter with a third, and then we
connect the first with the third ... a thing we should not have done,
since the first, while it co-existed with the second, was also connected
with many others.”

But even this account does not account for certain difficulties, because
some associations are simply set aside, although they should have
occurred. Man is inclined, according to Stricker, to inhibit
associations which are not implied in his “funded” complexes.

If we find direct contradiction with regard to associations, the way out
is not easy. We have then, first, to consider how, by comparatively
remote indirection, to introduce those conditions into the “funded”
complex, which will give rise to the association. But such a
consideration is often a big problem in pedagogy, and we are rarely in
the position of teaching the witness.

There is still the additional difficulty that we frequently do not know
the circumstance with the help of which the witness has made his
association. Thomas Hobbes tells the story of an association which
involved a leap from the British Civil War to the value of a denarius
under the Emperor Tiberius. The process was as follows: King Charles I
was given up by the Scotch for $200,000, Christ was sold for 30 denarii,
what then was a denarius worth? In order to pursue the thread of such an
association, one needs, anyway, only a definite quantity of historical
knowledge, but this quantity must be possessed. But such knowledge is a
knowledge of universal things that anybody may have, while the personal
relations and purely subjective experiences which are at the command of
an individual are quite unknown to any other person, and it is often
exceedingly difficult to discover them.[212] The case is simplest when
one tries to aid the memory of a witness in order to make him place
single dates, e.g., when the attempt is made to determine some time and
the witness is reminded of certain events that occurred during the time
in question in order to assist him in fixing the calendar time. Or
again, when the witness is brought to the place of the crime and the
individual conditions are associated with the local situation. But when
not merely single dates are to be associated, when complete events are
to be associated, a profound knowledge of the situation must precede,
otherwise no association is successful, or merely topsy-turvy results
are attained. The difficulties which here ensue depend actually upon the
really enormous quantity of knowledge every human being must possess in
making use of his senses. Anything that a man has learned at school, in
the newspapers, etc., we know approximately, but we have no knowledge of
what a man has thought out for himself and what he has felt in his
localized conditions, e.g., his home, his town, his travels, his
relations and their experiences, etc.--However important this may be, we
have no means of getting hold of it.

Those associations which have physical expression are of importance only
in particular cases. For example, the feeling of ants all over the body
when you think that you have been near an anthill, or the feeling of
physical pain on hearing the description of wounds. It is exceedingly
funny to see how, during the lectures of dermatologists, the whole
audience scratches that part of the body which is troubling the patient
who is being described.

Such associations may be legally valuable in so far as the accused who
plead innocence make unconscious movements which imply the denied
wounds. In any event, it is necessary to be cautious because frequently
the merely accurate description of a wound may bring about the same
effect in nervous persons as the sight of that wound. If, however, the
wound is not described and even its place not mentioned, and only the
general harm is spoken of, then if the accused reaches for that part of
his body in which the wound of his victim is located, you have a clew,
and your attention should be directed upon it. Such an index is worth no
more, but even as a clew it has some value.

All in all, we may say that the legally significant direction of
association falls in the same class with “getting an idea.” We need
association for the purpose of constructing an image and an explanation
of the event in question; something must “occur to us.” We must “get an
idea,” if we are to know how something happened. We need association,
moreover, in order to discover that something has occurred to the
witness.

“Getting an idea” or “occurrence” is essentially one and the same in all
its forms. We have only to study its several manifestations:

1. “Constructive occurrence,” by means of which the correct thing may
possibly be discovered in the way of combining, inferring, comparing
and testing. Here the association must be intentional and such ideas
must be brought to a fixed image, which may be in such wise associated
with them as to make a result possible. Suppose, e.g., that the case is
one of arson, and the criminal is unknown. Then we will require the
plaintiff to make local, temporal, identifying, and contrasting
associations with the idea of all and each of his enemies, or of
discharged servants, beggars, etc. In this wise we can attain to other
ideas, which may help us to approach some definite theory.

2. “Spontaneous occurrence” in which a thought appears with apparent
suddenness for no particular reason. As a matter of fact, such
suddenness is always caused by some conscious, and in most cases, some
unconscious association, the thread of which can not be later sought out
and exhibited because of its being subconscious, or of its being
overleaped so quickly and readily that it can not be traced. Very often
some particular sense-perception exercises an influence which unites
simultaneous ideas, now here again united. Suppose once during some
extraordinary sound, e.g., the ringing of a bell, which I do not often
hear, I had seen somebody. Now when I hear that bell ringing I will
think of the person without perhaps knowing the definite
association--i.e., the connection of the man with the tone of the bell
occurs unconsciously. This may go still further. That man, when I first
saw him, might have worn, perhaps, a red necktie, let us say
poppy-red--it may now happen that every time I hear that bell-note I
think of a field of poppy-flowers. Now who can pursue this road of
association?

3. “Accluding occurrence,” in which, in the process of the longest
possible calm retention of an idea, another appears of itself and
associates with the first. E. g., I meet a man who greets me although I
do not recognize him. I may perhaps know who he is, but I do not
spontaneously think of it and can not get at his identity
constructively, because of lack of material. I therefore expect
something from this “accluding occurrence” and with my eyes shut I try
as long as possible to keep in mind the idea of this man. Suddenly, I
see him before me with serious face and folded hands, on his right a
similar individual and a similar one on his left, above them a high
window with a curtain--the man was a juryman who sat opposite me. But
the memory is not exhausted with this. I aim to banish his image as
seated and keep him again before my eyes. I see an apparent gate beyond
him with shelves behind; it is the image of a shop-keeper in a small
town who is standing before the door of his shop. I hold this image
straining before my eyes--suddenly a wagon appears with just that kind
of trapping which I have only once seen to deck the equipage of a
land-owner. I know well who this is, what the little town near his
estate is called, and now I suddenly know that the man whose name I want
to remember is the merchant X of Y who once was a juryman in my court.
This means of the longest possible retention of an idea, I have made
frequent use of with the more intelligent witnesses (it rarely succeeds
with women because they are restless), and all in all, with surprising
effects.

4. “Retrospective occurrence,” which consists of the development of
associations backward. E. g.--do what I will, I can not remember the
name of a certain man, but I know that he has a title to nobility, which
is identical with the name of a small town in Obertfalz. Finally, the
name of the town Hirschau occurs to me, and now I easily associate
backwards, “Schaller von Hirschau.” It is, of course, natural that words
should unroll themselves forwards with habitual ease, but backwards only
when we think of the word we are trying to remember, as written, and
then associate the whole as a MS. image. This is unhappily difficult to
use in helping another.


Topic 6. RECOLLECTION AND MEMORY.


Section 51.

In direct connection with the association of ideas is our recollection
and memory, which are only next to perception in legal importance in the
knowledge of the witness. Whether the witness wants to tell the truth
is, of course, a question which depends upon other matters; but whether
he can tell the truth depends upon perception and memory. Now the latter
is a highly complicated and variously organized function which is
difficult to understand, even in the daily life, and much more so when
everything depends upon whether the witness has noticed anything, how,
how long, what part of the impression has sunk more deeply into his
mind, and in what direction his defects of memory are to be sought. It
would be inexcusable in the lawyer not to think about this and to make
equivalent use of all the phenomena that are presented to him. To
overlook the rich literature and enormous work that has been devoted to
this subject is to raise involuntarily the question, for whom was it all
done? Nobody needs a thorough-going knowledge of the essence of memory
more than the lawyer.

I advise every criminalist to study the literature of memory and
recommend the works of Münsterberg, Ribot, Ebbinghaus, Cattell,
Kräpelin, Lasson, Nicolai Lange, Arreat, Richet, Forel, Galton,
Biervliet, Paneth, Fauth, Sander, Koch, Lehmann, Féré, Jodl,[213] etc.


Section 52.(a) The Essence of Memory.

Our ignorance concerning memory is as great as its universal importance,
and as our indebtedness to it for what we are and possess. At best we
have, when explaining it, to make use of images.

Plato accounts for memory in the “Theaetetus” by the image of the seal
ring which impresses wax; the character and duration of the impression
depends upon the size, purity, and hardness of the wax. Fichte says,
“The spirit does not conserve its products,--the single ideas,
volitions, and feelings are conserved by the mind and constitute the
ground of its inexhaustibly retentive memory.... The possibility of
recalling what has once been independently done, this remains in the
spirit.” James Sully compares the receptivity of memory with the
infusion of dampness into an old MS. Draper also brings a physical
example: If you put a flat object upon the surface of a cold, smooth
metal and then breathe on the metal and, after the moisture has
disappeared, remove the object, you may recall its image months after,
whenever you breathe on the place in question. Another has called memory
the safe of the mind. It is the opinion of E. Hering[214] that what we
once were conscious of and are conscious of again, does not endure as
image but as echo such as may be heard in a tuning fork when it is
properly struck. Reid asserts that memory does not have present ideas,
but past things for its object. Natorp explains recollection as an
identification of the unidentical, of not-now with now. According to
Herbart and his school,[215] memory consists in the possibility of
recognizing the molecular arrangements which had been left by past
impressions in the ganglion cells, and in reading them in identical
fashion. According to Wundt and his pupils, the problem is one of the
disposition of the central organs. And it is the opinion of James Mill
that the content of recollection is not only the idea of the remembered
object, but also the idea that the object had been experienced before.
Both ideas together constitute the whole of that state of mind which we
denote as memory. Spinoza[216] deals freely with memory, and asserts
that mankind does not control it inasmuch as all thoughts, ideas,
resolutions of spirits, are bare results of memories, so that human
freedom is excluded. Uphues[217] distinguishes between memory and the
conception which is presupposed in the recognition of an object
different from that conception. This is the theory developed by
Aristotle.

According to Berkeley and Hume recognition is not directed upon a
different object, nor does it presuppose one; the activity of
recognition consists either in the exhibition or the creation of the
object. Recognition lends the idea an independence which does not belong
to it and in that way turns it into a thing, objectifies it, and posits
it as substantial. Maudsley makes use of the notion that it is possible
to represent any former content of consciousness as attended to so that
it may again come into the center of the field of consciousness.
Dorner[218] explains recognition as follows: “The possible is not only
the merely possible in opposition to the actual; it is much more proper
to conceive being as possible, i.e., as amenable to logical thinking;
without this there could be no recognition.” Külpe[219] concerns himself
with the problem of the difference between perceptive images and memory
images and whether the latter are only weaker than the former as English
philosophers and psychologists assert. He concludes that they are not
so.

When we take all these opinions concerning memory together we conclude
that neither any unity nor any clear description of the matter has been
attained. Ebbinghaus’s sober statement may certainly be correct: “Our
knowledge of memory rises almost exclusively from the observation of
extreme, especially striking cases. Whenever we ask about more special
solutions concerning the detail of what has been counted up, and their
other relations of dependence, their structure, etc., there are no
answers.”

Nobody has as yet paid attention to the simple daily events which
constitute the routine of the criminalists. We find little instruction
concerning them, and our difficulties as well as our mistakes are
thereby increased. Even the modern repeatedly cited experimental
investigations have no direct bearing upon our work.

We will content ourselves with viewing the individual conceptions of
memory and recollection as occurring in particular cases and with
considering them, now one, now the other, according to the requirements
of the case. We shall consider the general relation of “reproduction” to
memory. “Reproduction” we shall consider in a general sense and shall
subsume under it also the so-called involuntary reproductions which rise
in the forms and qualities of past events without being evoked, i.e.,
which rise with the help of unconscious activity through the more or
less independent association of ideas. Exactly this unconscious
reproduction, this apparently involuntary activity, is perhaps the most
fruitful, and we therefore unjustly meet with unexceptionable distrust
the later sudden “occurrence,” especially when these occurrences happen
to defendant and his witnesses. It is true that they frequently deceive
us because behind the sudden occurrence there often may be nothing more
than a better training and instruction from experienced cell-mates;
though very often the circumstances are such that the suspect has
succeeded through some released prisoner, or by a blackened letter, in
sending a message from his prison, by means of which false witnesses of
alibi, etc., are provided. Distrust is in any event justified, when his
most important witnesses suddenly “occur” to the accused. But this does
not always happen, and we find in our own experience evidence of the
fact that memory and the capacity to recall something often depend upon
health, feeling, location, and chance associations which can not be
commanded, and happen as accidentally as anything in life can. That we
should remember anything at all depends upon the point of time.
Everybody knows how important twilight may be for memory. Indeed,
twilight has been called the visiting-hour of recollection, and it is
always worth while to observe the situation when anybody asserts that
some matter of importance occurred to him in the twilight. Such an
assertion merits, at least, further examination. Now, if we only know
how these occurrences constitute themselves, it would not be difficult
to study them out and to estimate their probability. But we do not know,
and we have to depend, primarily, on observation and test. Not one of
the theories applied is supported by experience altogether.

They may be divided into three essential groups.

1. What is received, fades away, becomes a “trace,” and is more or less
overlaid by new perceptions. When these latter are ever set aside, the
old trace comes into the foreground.

2. The ideas sink, darken, and disintegrate. If they receive support and
intensification they regain complete clearness.

3. The ideas crumble up, lose their parts. When anything occurs that
reunites them and restores what is lost, they become whole again.

Ebbinghaus maintains, correctly enough, that not one of these
explanations is universally satisfactory, but it must be granted that
now one, now another is useful in controlling this or that particular
case. The processes of the destruction of an idea, may be as various as
those of the destruction and restoration of a building. If a building is
destroyed by fire, I certainly can not explain the image given by merely
assuming that it was the victim of the hunger of time. A building which
has suffered because of the sinking of the earth I shall have to image
by quite other means than those I would use if it had been destroyed by
water.

For the same reason when, in court, somebody asserts a sudden
“occurrence,” or when we want to help him and something occurs to him,
we shall have to proceed in different fashion and determine our action
empirically by the conditions of the moment. We shall have to go back,
with the help of the witness, to the beginning of the appearance of the
idea in question and study its development as far as the material
permits us. In a similar manner we must make use of every possibility of
explanation when we are studying the disappearance of ideas. At one
point or another we shall find certain connections. One chief mistake in
such reconstructive work lies in overlooking the fact that no individual
is merely passive when he receives sensations; he is bound to make use
of a certain degree of activity. Locke and Bonnet have already mentioned
this fact, and anybody may verify it by comparing his experiments of
trying to avoid seeing or hearing, and trying actively to see or to
hear. For this reason it is foolish to ask anybody how it happened that
he perceived less than another, because both have equally good senses
and were able to perceive as much. On the other hand, the grade of
activity each has made use of in perception is rarely inquired into, and
this is the more unfortunate because memory is often proportionate to
activity. If, then, we are to explain how various statements concerning
contemporaneous matters, observed a long time ago, are to be combined,
it will not be enough to compare the memory, sensory acuteness, and
intelligence of the witnesses. The chief point of attention should be
the activity which has been put in motion during the sense-perception in
question.


Section 53. (b) The Forms of Reproduction.

Kant analyzes memory:

1. As apprehending something in memory.

2. As retaining it for a long time.

3. As immediately recalling it.

One might, perhaps add, as 4: that the memory-image is most conformable
to the actual one. This is not identical with the fact that we recollect
at all. It is to be assumed that the forms of memory-images vary very
much with different persons, because each individual verifies his images
of various objects variously. I know two men equally well for an equal
time, and yet have two memory-images of them. When I recall one, a
life-sized, moving, and moved figure appears before me, even the very
man himself; when I think of the other, I see only a small, bare
silhouette, foggy and colorless, and the difference does not require
that the first shall be an interesting and the second a boresome
individual. This is still clearer in memory of travels. One city appears
in recollection with size, color and movement, real; the other, in which
I sojourned for the same length of time and only a few days later, under
similar conditions of weather, etc., appears like a small, flat
photograph. Inquiry reveals that this is as true of other people as of
me, and that the problem of memory is much differentiated by the method
of recollection. In fact, this is so little in doubt that at some
periods of time there are more images of one sort than of another and
what is a rule for one kind of individual is an exception for another.

Now there is a series of phenomena for which we possess particular types
of images which often have little to do with the things themselves. So
Exner says: “We might know the physiognomy of an individual very
accurately, be able to pick him out among a thousand, without being
clear about the differences between him and another; indeed, we often do
not know the color of his eyes and hair, yet marvel when it suddenly
becomes different.”

Kries[220] calls attention to another fact: “When we try to mark in
memory the contour of a very well-known coin, we deceive ourselves,
unbelievably--when we see the coin the size we imagine it to be, we
wonder still more.”

Lotze shows correctly that memory never brings back a blinding flash of
light, or the over-powering blow of an explosion with the intensity of
the image in proper relation to the impression. I believe that it is not
necessary to go so far, for example, and hold that not even the
sparkling of a star, the crack of a pistol, etc., are kept in memory
with more than partial implication of the event. Maudsley points out
correctly that we can have no memory of pain--“because the disturbance
of nervous elements disappears just as soon as their integrity is again
established.” Perhaps, also, because when the pain has disappeared, the
tertium comparationis is lacking. But one need not limit oneself to
pain, but may assert that we lack memory of all unpleasant sensations.
The first time one jumps into the water from a very high spring-board,
the first time one’s horse rises over a hurdle, or the first time the
bullets whistle past one’s ear in battle, are all most unpleasant
experiences, and whoever denies it is deceiving himself or his friends.
But when we think of them we feel that they were not so bad, that one
merely was very much afraid, etc. But this is not the case; there is
simply no memory for these sensations.

This fact is of immense importance in examination and I believe that no
witness has been able effectively to describe the pain caused by a body
wound, the fear roused by arson, the fright at a threat, not, indeed,
because he lacked the words to do so, but because he had not sufficient
memory for these impressions, and because he has nothing to-day with
which to compare them. Time, naturally, in such cases makes a great
difference, and if a man were to describe his experiences shortly after
their uncomfortable occurrence he would possibly remember them better
than he would later on. Here, if the examiner has experienced something
similar, years ago, he is likely to accuse the witness of exaggeration
under the belief that his own experience has shown the thing to be not
so bad. Such an accusation will be unjust in most instances. The
differences in conception depend to a large degree on differences in
time, and consequent fading in memory. Several other particular
conditions may be added.

Kant, e.g., calls attention to the power we have over our fancy: “In
memory, our will must control our imagination and our imagination must
be able to determine voluntarily the reproduction of ideas of past
time.”

But these ideas may be brought up not only voluntarily; we have also a
certain degree of power in making these images clearer and more
accurate. It is rather foolish to have the examiner invite the witness
to “exert his memory, to give himself the trouble, etc.” This effects
nothing, or something wrong. But if the examiner is willing to take the
trouble, he may excite the imagination of the witness and give him the
opportunity to exercise his power over the imagination. How this is done
depends naturally upon the nature and education of the witness, but the
judge may aid him just as the skilful teacher may aid the puzzled pupil
to remember. When the pianist has completely forgotten a piece of music
that he knew very well, two or three chords may lead him to explicate
these chords forward or backward, and then--one step after another--he
reproduces the whole piece. Of course the chords which are brought to
the mind of the player must be properly chosen or the procedure is
useless.

There are rules for the selection of these clews. According to
Ebbinghaus: “The difference in the content of the recollected is due to
discoverable causes. Melodies may become painful because of their
undesirable obstinacy in return. Forms and colors do not usually recur,
and if they do, they do so with noticeable claims on distinctness and
certainty. Past emotional conditions are reproduced only with effort, in
comparatively pallid schemes, and often only by means of the
accompanying movements.” We may follow these clews, in some directions
at least, to our advantage. Of course, nobody will say that one should
play tunes to witnesses in order to make them remember, because the
tunes have sunk into the memory with such undesirable obstinacy as to be
spurs to recollection. It is just as futile to operate with forms and
colors, or to excite emotional conditions. But what has been said leads
us back to the ancient rule of working so far as is possible with the
constantly well-developed sense of location. Cicero already was aware of
this: “Tanta vis admonitionis inest in locis, id quidem infinitum in hac
urbe, quocumque enim ingredimur, in aliquam historiam vestigium
possumus.” Indeed he deduces his whole doctrine of memory from the sense
of location, or he at least justifies those who do so.

If, then, we bring a witness, who in our court house recollects nothing,
in locum rei sitae, all the mentioned conditions act favorably.[221]
The most influential is the sense of location itself, inasmuch as every
point at which something significant occurred not only is the content of
an association, but is also the occasion of one. It is, moreover, to be
remembered that reproduction is a difficult task, and that all
unnecessary additional difficulties which are permitted to accrue,
definitely hinder it. Here, too, there is only a definite number of
units of psychical energy for use, and the number which must be used for
other matters is lost to the principal task. If, e.g., I recall an event
which had occurred near the window of a definite house, I should have
considerable difficulty to recall the form of the house, the location of
the window, its appearance, etc., and by the time this attempt has
barely begun to succeed, I have made so much effort that there is not
sufficient power left for the recollection of the event we are really
concerned with. Moreover, a mistake in the recollection of extraneous
objects and the false associations thereby caused, may be very
disturbing to the correctness of the memory of the chief thing. If,
however, I am on the spot, if I can see everything that I had seen at
the time in question, all these difficulties are disposed of.

We have still to count in the other conditions mentioned above. If
acoustic effects can appear anywhere, they can appear in the locality
where they first occurred. The same bell ringing, or a similar noise,
may occur accidentally, the murmur of the brook is the same, the rustle
of the wind, determined by local topography, vegetation, especially by
trees, again by buildings, varies with the place. And even if only a
fine ear can indicate what the difference consists of, every normal
individual senses that difference unconsciously. Even the “universal
noise,” which is to be found everywhere, will be differentiated and
characteristic according to locality, and that, together with all these
other things, is extraordinarily favorable to the association of ideas
and the reproduction of the past. Colors and forms are the same, similar
orders may occur, and possibly the same attitudes are awakened, since
these depend in so great degree upon external conditions. Now, once
these with their retrospective tendencies are given, the recollection of
any contemporary event increases, as one might say, spontaneously.
Whatever may especially occur to aid the memory of an event, occurs best
at the place where the event itself happened, and hence, one can not too
insistently advise the examination of witnesses, in important cases,
only in loco rei sitae. Incidentally, the judge himself learns the real
situation and saves himself, thereby, much time and effort, for he is
enabled in a few words to render the circumstantial descriptions which
have to be composed with so much difficulty when the things are not seen
and must be derived from the testimonies of the witnesses themselves.

Whoever does not believe in the importance of conducting the examination
at the place of an event, needs only to repeat his examination twice,
once at the court, and again at the place--then he certainly will doubt
no more. Of course the thing should not be so done that the event should
be discussed with the witness at the place of its occurrence and then
the protocol written in the house of the mayor, or in an inn half an
hour away--the protocol must to the very last stroke of the pen be
written then and there, in order that every impression may be renewed
and every smallest doubt studied and corrected. Then the differences
between what has passed, what has been later added, and what is found
to-day can be easily determined by sticking to the rule of Uphues, that
the recognition of the present as present is always necessary for the
eventual recognition of the past. Kant has already suggested what
surprising results such an examination will give: “There are many ideas
which we shall never again in our lives be conscious of, unless some
occasion cause them to spring up in the memory.” But such a particularly
powerful occasion is locality, inasmuch as it brings into play all the
influences which our senses are capable of responding to.[222]

Of course the possibility of artificially-stimulated memory disappears
like all memory, with the lapse of time. As a matter of fact, we know
that those of our experiences which concern particular persons and
things, and which are recalled at the sight of those persons and things,
become, later on, when the connections of images have been broken,
capable only of awakening general notions, even though the persons or
things are as absolutely present as before. But very unfavorable
circumstances must have been at work before such a situation can
develop.

It is characteristic, as is popularly known, that memory can be
intensified by means of special occasions. It is Höfler’s opinion that
the Spartan boys were whipped at the boundary stones of their country in
order that they might recall their position, and even now-a-days our
peasants have the custom, when setting up new boundary stones, of
grasping small boys by the ears and hair in order that they shall the
better remember the position of the new boundary mark when, as grown
men, they will be questioned about it. This being the case, it is safer
to believe a witness when he can demonstrate some intensely influential
event which was contemporaneous with the situation under discussion, and
which reminds him of that situation.


Section 54. (c) The Peculiarities of Reproduction.

The differences in memory which men exhibit are not, among their other
human qualities, the least. As is well known, this difference is
expressed not only in the vigor, reliability, and promptness of their
memory, but also in the field of memory, in the accompaniment of rapid
prehensivity by rapid forgetfulness, or slow prehensivity and slow
forgetfulness, or in the contrast between narrow, but intense memory,
and broad but approximate memory.

Certain special considerations arise with regard to the field of
greatest memory. As a rule, it may be presupposed that a memory which
has developed with especial vigor in one direction has generally done
this at the cost of memory in another direction. Thus, as a rule, memory
for numbers and memory for names exclude each other. My father had so
bad a memory for names that very frequently he could not quickly recall
my Christian name, and I was his own son. Frequently he had to repeat
the names of his four brothers until he hit upon mine, and that was not
always a successful way.[223] When he undertook an introduction it was
always: “My honored m--m--m,”--“The dear friend of my youth m--m--m.” On
the other hand, his memory for figures was astounding. He noted and
remembered not only figures that interested him for one reason or
another, but also those that had not the slightest connection with him,
and that he had read merely by accident. He could recall instantaneously
the population of countries and cities, and I remember that once, in the
course of an accidental conversation, he mentioned the production of
beetroot in a certain country for the last ten years, or the factory
number of my watch that he had given me fifteen years before and had
never since held in his hand. He often said that the figures he carried
in his head troubled him. In this regard the symptom may be mentioned
that he was not a good mathematician, but so exceptional a card player
that nobody wanted to play with him. He noticed every single card dealt
and could immediately calculate what cards each player had, and was able
to say at the beginning of the game how many points each must have.

Such various developments are numerous and of importance for us because
we frequently are unwilling to believe the witness testifying in a
certain field for the reason that his memory in another field had shown
itself to be unreliable. Schubert and Drobisch cite examples of this
sort of thing, but the observations of moderns, like Charcot and Binet,
concerning certain lightning calculators (Inaudi, Diamandi, etc.),
confirm the fact that the memory for figures is developed at the expense
of other matters. Linné tells that Lapps, who otherwise note nothing
whatever, are able to recognize individually each one of their
numberless reindeer. Again, the Dutch friend of flowers, Voorhelm, had a
memory only for tulips, but this was so great that he could recognize
twelve hundred species of tulips merely from the dry bulbs.

These fields seem to be of a remarkably narrow extent. Besides
specialists (numismatists, zoologists, botanists, heralds, etc.) who,
apart from their stupendous memory for their particular matters, appear
to have no memory for other things, there are people who can remember
only rhymes, melodies, shapes, forms, titles, modes, service,
relationships, etc. V. Volkmar has devoted some space to showing this.
He has also called attention to the fact that the semi-idiotic have an
astounding memory for certain things. This has been confirmed by other
students. One of them, Du Potet,[224] who is perhaps the expert in the
popular mind of the Austrian Alps, has made it especially clear. As in
all mountainous regions there are a great number of those unfortunate
idiots who, when fully developed, are called cretins, and in their
milder form are semi-human, but do not possess intelligence enough to
earn their own living. Nevertheless, many of them possess astounding
memories for certain things. One of them is thoroughly conversant with
the weather prophecy in the calendar for the past and the present year,
and can cite it for each day. Another knows the day and the history of
every saint of the Catholic church. Another knows the boundaries of
every estate, and the name, etc., of its owner. Another knows each
particular animal in a collective herd of cattle, knows to whom it
belongs, etc. Of course not one of these unfortunates can read. Drobisch
mentions an idiotic boy, not altogether able to speak, who, through the
untiring efforts of a lady, succeeded finally in learning to read. Then
after hasty reading of any piece of printed matter, he could reproduce
what he had read word for word, even when the book had been one in a
foreign and unknown tongue. Another author mentions a cretin who could
tell exactly the birthdays and death-days of the inhabitants of his town
for a decade.

It is a matter of experience that the semi-idiotic have an excellent
memory and can accurately reproduce events which are really impressive
or alarming, and which have left effects upon them. Many a thing which
normal people have barely noticed, or which they have set aside in their
memory and have forgotten, is remembered by the semi-idiotic and
reproduced. On the contrary, the latter do not remember things which
normal people do, and which in the latter frequently have a disturbing
influence on the important point they may be considering. Thus the
semi-idiotic may be able to describe important things better than normal
people. As a rule, however, they disintegrate what is to be remembered
too much, and offer too little to make any effective interpretation
possible. If such a person, e.g., is witness of a shooting, he notices
the shot only, and gives very brief attention to what precedes, what
follows, or what is otherwise contemporary. Until his examination he not
only knows nothing about it, but even doubts its occurrence. This is the
dangerous element in his testimony. Generally it is right to believe his
kind willingly. “Children and fools tell the truth,” what they say bears
the test, and so when they deny an event there is a tendency to overlook
the fact that they have forgotten a great deal and hence to believe that
the event had really not occurred.

Similar experiences are yielded in the case of the memory of children.
Children and animals live only in the present, because they have no
historically organic ideas in mind. They react directly upon stimuli,
without any disturbance of their idea of the past. This is valid,
however, only for very small children. At a later age children make good
witnesses, and a well-brought-up boy is the best witness in the world.
We have only to keep in mind that later events tend in the child’s mind
to wipe out earlier ones of the same kind.[225] It used to be said that
children and nations think only of the latest events. And that is
universally true. Just as children abandon even their most precious toys
for the sake of a new one, so they tell only the latest events in their
experience. And this is especially the case when there are a great many
facts--e.g., repeated mal-treatment or thefts, etc. Children will tell
only of the very last, the earlier one may absolutely have disappeared
from the memory.

Bolton,[226] who has made a systematic study of the memory of children,
comes to the familiar conclusion that the scope of memory is measured by
the child’s capacity of concentrating its attention. Memory and acute
intelligence are not always cognate (the latter proposition, true not
for children alone, was known to Aristotle). As a rule girls have better
memory than boys (it might also be said that their intelligence is
generally greater, so long as no continuous intellectual work, and
especially the creation of one’s own ideas, is required). Of figures
read only once, children will retain a maximum of six. (Adults, as a
rule, also retain no more.) The time of forgetting in general has been
excellently schematized by Ebbinghaus. He studied the forgetting of a
series of thirteen nonsense syllables, previously learned, in such a way
as to be able to measure the time necessary to re-learn what was
forgotten. At the end of an hour he needed half the original time, at
the end of eight hours two-thirds of that time. Then the process of loss
became slower. At the end of twenty-four hours he required a third, at
the end of six days a fourth, at the end of a month a clear fifth, of
the time required at first.

I have tested this in a rough way on various and numerous persons, and
invariably found the results to tally. Of course, the measure of time
alters with the memory in question, but the relations remain identical,
so that one may say approximately how much may be known of any subject
at the end of a fixed time, if only one ratio is tested. To criminalists
this investigation of Ebbinghaus’ is especially recommended.

The conditions of prehensivity of particular instances are too uncertain
and individual to permit any general identifications or
differentiations. There are certain approximating propositions--e.g.,
that it is easier to keep in mind rhymed verse than prose, and definite
rows and forms than block masses. But, on the one hand, what is here
involved is only the ease of memory, not the content of memory, and on
the other hand there are too many exceptions--e.g., there are many
people who retain prose better than verse. Hence, it is not worth while
to go further in the creation of such rules. Forty or fifty years ago,
investigations looking toward them had been pursued with pleasure, and
they are recorded in the journals of the time.

That aged persons have, as is well known, a good memory for what is long
past, and a poor one for recent occurrences is not remarkable. It is to
be explained by the fact that age seems to be accompanied with a
decrease of energy in the brain, so that it no longer assimilates
influences, and the imagination becomes dark and the judgment of facts
incorrect. Hence, the mistakes are those of apperception of new
things,--what has already been perceived is not influenced by this loss
of energy.

Again, it should not rouse astonishment that so remarkable and
delicately organized a function as memory should be subject to anomalies
and abnormalities of all kinds. We must take it as a rule not to assume
the impossibility of the extraordinary phenomena that appear and to
consult the expert about them.[227] The physician will explain the
pathological and pathoformic, but there is a series of memory-forms
which do not appear to be diseased, yet which are significantly rare and
hence appear improbable. Such forms will require the examination of an
experienced expert psychologist who, even when unable to explain the
particular case, will still be able to throw some light on it from the
literature of the subject. This literature is rich in examples of the
same thing; they have been eagerly collected and scientifically studied
in the earlier psychological investigations. Modern psychology,
unfortunately, does not study these problems, and in any event, its task
is so enormous that the practical problems of memory in the daily life
must be set aside for a later time. We have to cite only a few cases
handled in literature.

The best known is the story of an Irish servant girl, who, during fever,
recited Hebrew sentences which she had heard from a preacher when a
child. Another case tells of a very great fool who, during fever,
repeated prolonged conversations with his master, so that the latter
decided to make him his secretary. But when the servant got well he
became as foolish as ever. The criminalist who has the opportunity of
examining deeply wounded, feverish persons, makes similar, though not
such remarkable observations. These people give him the impression of
being quite intelligent persons who tell their stories accurately and
correctly. Later on, after they are cured, one gets a different opinion
of their intelligence. Still more frequently one observes that these
feverish, wounded victims know more, and know more correctly about the
crime than they are able to tell after they have recovered. What they
tell, moreover, is quite reliable, provided, of course, they are not
delirious or crazy.

The cases are innumerable in which people have lost their memory for a
short time, or for ever. I have already elsewhere mentioned an event
which happened to a friend of mine who received a sudden blow on the
head while in the mountains and completely lost all memory of what had
occurred a few minutes before the blow. After this citation I got a
number of letters from my colleagues who had dealt with similar cases. I
infer, therefore, that the instances in which people lose their memory
of what has occurred before the event by way of a blow on the head, are
numerous.[228]

Legally such cases are important because we would not believe statements
in that regard made by accused, inasmuch as there seems to be no reason
why the events _before_ the wound should disappear, just as if each
impression needed a fixative, like a charcoal drawing. But as this
phenomenon is described by the most reliable persons, who have no axe to
grind in the matter, we must believe it, other things being equal, even
when the defendant asserts it. That such cases are not isolated is shown
in the fact that people who have been stunned by lightning have later
forgotten everything that occurred shortly before the flash. The case is
similar in poisoning with carbonic-acid gas, with mushrooms, and in
strangulation. The latter cases are especially important, inasmuch as
the wounded person, frequently the only witness, has nothing to say
about the event.

I cannot omit recalling in this place a case I have already mentioned
elsewhere, that of Brunner. In 1893 in the town of Dietkirchen, in
Bavaria, the teacher Brunner’s two children were murdered, and his wife
and servant girl badly wounded. After some time the woman regained
consciousness, seemed to know what she was about, but could not tell the
investigating justice who had been sent on to take charge of the case,
anything whatever concerning the event, the criminal, etc. When he had
concluded his negative protocol she signed it, Martha Guttenberger,
instead of Martha Brunner. Fortunately the official noted this and
wanted to know what relation she had to the name Guttenberger. He was
told that a former lover of the servant girl, an evil-mouthed fellow,
was called by that name. He was traced to Munich and there arrested. He
immediately confessed to the crime. And when Mrs. Brunner became quite
well she recalled accurately that she had definitely recognized
Guttenberger as the murderer.[229]

The psychological process was clearly one in which the idea,
“Guttenberger is the criminal,” had sunk into the secondary sphere of
consciousness, the subconsciousness,--so that it was only clear to the
real consciousness that the name Guttenberger had something to do with
the crime. The woman in her weakened mental condition thought she had
already sufficiently indicated this fact, so that she overlooked the
name, and hence wrote it unconsciously. Only when the pressure on her
brain was reduced did the idea that Guttenberger was the murderer pass
from the subconscious to the conscious. Psychiatrists explain the case
as follows:

The thing here involved is retrograde amnesia. It is nowadays believed
that this phenomenon in the great majority of cases occurs according to
the rule which defines traumatic hysteria, i.e., as ideogen. The
ideational complexes in question are forced into the subconsciousness,
whence, on occasion, by aid of associative processes, hypnotic
concentration, and such other similar elements, they can be raised into
consciousness. In this case, the suppressed ideational complex
manifested itself in signing the name.

All legal medicine discusses the fact that wounds in the head make
people forget single words. Taine, Guerin, Abercrombie, etc., cite many
examples, and Winslow tells of a woman who, after considerable bleeding,
forgot all her French. The story is also told that Henry Holland had so
tired himself that he forgot German. When he grew stronger and recovered
he regained all he had forgotten.

_Now would we believe a prisoner who told us any one of these things?_

The phenomena of memories which occur in dying persons who have long
forgotten and never even thought of these memories, are very
significant. English psychologists cite the case of Dr. Rush, who had in
his Lutheran congregation Germans and Swedes, who prayed in their own
language shortly before death, although they had not used it for fifty
or sixty years. I can not prevent myself from thinking that many a
death-bed confession has something to do with this phenomenon.[230]

At the boundary between incorrect perception and forgetting are those
cases in which, under great excitement, important events do not reach
consciousness. I believe that the responsibility is here to be borne by
the memory rather than by sense-perception. There seems to be no reason
for failing to perceive with the senses under the greatest excitement,
but there is some clearness in the notion that great excitement causes
what has just been perceived to be almost immediately forgotten. In my
“Manual” I have discussed a series of cases of this sort, and show how
the memory might come into play. None of the witnesses, e.g., had seen
that Mary Stuart received, when being executed, two blows. In the case
of an execution of many years ago, not one of those present could tell
me the color of the gloves of the executioner, although everyone had
noticed the gloves. In a train wreck, a soldier asserted that he had
seen dozens of smashed corpses, although only one person was harmed. A
prison warden who was attacked by an escaping murderer, saw in the
latter’s hand a long knife, which turned out to be a herring. When
Carnot was murdered, neither one of the three who were in the carriage
with him, nor the two foot-men, saw the murderer’s knife or the delivery
of the blow, etc.

How often may we make mistakes because the witnesses--in their
excitement--have forgotten the most important things!


Section 55. (d) Illusions of Memory.

Memory illusion, or paramnesia, consists in the illusory opinion of
having experienced, seen, or heard something, although there has been no
such experience, vision, or sound. It is the more important in criminal
law because it enters unobtrusively and unnoticed into the circle of
observation, and not directly by means of a demonstrated mistake. Hence,
it is the more difficult to discover and has a disturbing influence
which makes it very hard to perceive the mistakes that have occurred in
consequence of it.

It may be that Leibnitz meant paramnesia with his “perceptiones
insensibiles.” Later, Lichtenberg must have had it in mind when he
repeatedly asserted that he must have been in the world once before,
inasmuch as many things seemed to him so familiar, although, at the
time, he had not yet experienced them. Later on, Jessen concerned
himself with the question, and Sander[231] asserts him to have been the
first. According to Jessen, everybody is familiar with the phenomenon in
which the sudden impression occurs, that what is experienced has
already been met with before so that the future might be predicted.
Langwieser asserts that one always has the sensation that the event
occurred a long time ago, and Dr. Karl Neuhoff finds that his sensation
is accompanied with unrest and contraction. The same thing is discussed
by many other authors.[232]

Various explanations have been offered. Wigand and Maudsley think they
see in paramnesia a simultaneous functioning of both relations. Anje
believes that illusory memory depends on the differentiation which
sometimes occurs between perception and coming-into-consciousness.
According to Külpe, these are the things that Plato interpreted in his
doctrine of pre-existence.

Sully,[233] in his book on illusions, has examined the problem most
thoroughly and he draws simple conclusions. He finds that vivacious
children often think they have experienced what is told them. This,
however, is retained in the memory of the adult, who continues to think
that he has actually experienced it. The same thing is true when
children have intensely desired anything. Thus the child-stories given
us by Rousseau, Goethe, and De Quincey, must come from the airy regions
of the dream life or from waking revery, and Dickens has dealt with this
dream life in “David Copperfield.” Sully adds, that we also generate
illusions of memory when we assign to experiences false dates, and
believe ourselves to have felt, as children, something we experienced
later and merely set back into our childhood.

So again, he reduces much supposed to have been heard, to things that
have been read. Novels may make such an impression that what has been
read or described there appears to have been really experienced. A name
or region then seems to be familiar because we have read of something
similar.

It will perhaps be proper not to reduce all the phenomena of paramnesia
to the same conditions. Only a limited number of them seem to be so
reducible. Impressions often occur which one is inclined to attribute to
illusory memory, merely to discover later that they were real but
unconscious memory; the things had been actually experienced and the
events had been forgotten. So, for example, I visit some region for the
first time and get the impression that I have seen it before, and since
this, as a matter of fact, is not the case, I believe myself to have
suffered from an illusion of memory. Later, I perceive that perhaps in
early childhood I had really been in a country that resembled this one.
Thus my memory was really correct; I had merely forgotten the experience
to which it referred.

Aside from these unreal illusions of memory, many, if not all others,
are explicable, as Sully indicates, by the fact that something similar
to what has been experienced, has been read or heard, while the fact
that it has been read or heard is half forgotten or has sunk into the
subconsciousness. Only the sensation has remained, not the recollection
that it was read, etc. Another part of this phenomenon may possibly be
explained by vivid dreams, which also leave strong impressions without
leaving the memory of their having been dreams. Whoever is in the habit
of dreaming vividly will know how it is possible to have for days a
clear or cloudy feeling of the discovery of something excellent or
disturbing, only to find out later that there has been no real
experience, only a dream. Such a feeling, especially the memory of
things seen or heard in dreams, may remain in consciousness. If, later,
some similar matter is really met with, the sensation may appear as a
past event.[234] This is all the easier since dreams are never
completely rigid, but easily modeled and adaptable, so that if there is
the slightest approximation to similarity, memory of a dream lightly
attaches itself to real experience.

All this may happen to anybody, well or ill, nervous or stolid. Indeed,
Kräpelin asserts that paramnesia occurs only under normal circumstances.
It may also be generally assumed that a certain fatigued condition of
the mind or of the body renders this occurrence more likely, if it does
not altogether determine it. So far as self-observation throws any light
on the matter, this statement appears to be correct. I had such
illusions of memory most numerously during the Bosnian war of occupation
of 1878, when we made our terrible forced marches from Esseg to
Sarajevo. The illusions appeared regularly after dinner, when we were
quite tired. Then the region which all my preceding life I had not seen,
appeared to be pleasantly familiar, and when once, at the very
beginning, I received the order to storm a village occupied by Turks, I
thought it would not be much trouble, I had done it so frequently and
nothing had ever happened. At that time we were quite exhausted. Even
when we had entered the otherwise empty village this extraordinary
circumstance did not impress me, and I thought that the inside of a
village always looked like that--although I had never before seen such a
Turkish street-hotel “in natura” or pictured.

Another mode of explanation may be mentioned, i.e., explanation by
heredity. Hering[235] and Sully have dealt with it. According to the
latter, especially, we may think that we have undergone some experience
that really belongs to some ancestor. Sully believes that this
contention can not be genetically contradicted because a group of
skilled activities (nest-building, food-seeking, hiding from the enemy,
migration, etc.) have been indubitably inherited from the animals, but
on the other hand, that paramnesia is inherited memory can be proved
only with, e.g., a child which had been brought up far from the sea but
whose parents and grandparents had been coast-dwellers. If that child
should at first sight have the feeling that he is familiar with the sea,
the inheritance of memory would be proved. So long as we have not a
larger number of such instances the assumption of hereditary influence
is very suggestive but only probable.

With regard to the bearing of memory-illusions on criminal cases I shall
cite only one possible instance. Somebody just waking from sleep has
perceived that his servant is handling his purse which is lying on the
night-table, and in consequence of the memory-illusion he believes that
he has already observed this many times before. The action of the
servant was perhaps harmless and in no way directed toward theft. Now
the evidence of the master is supposed to demonstrate that this has
repeatedly occurred, then perhaps no doubt arises that the servant has
committed theft frequently and has had the intention of doing so this
time.

To generalize this situation would be to indicate that illusions of
memory are always likely to have doubtful results when they have
occurred only once and when the witness in consequence of paramnesia
believes the event to have been repeatedly observed. It is not difficult
to think of numbers of such cases but it will hardly be possible to say
how the presence of illusions of memory is to be discovered without the
knowledge _that_ they exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

When we consider all the qualities and idiosyncrasies of memory, this so
varied function of the mind, we must wonder that its estimation in
special cases is frequently different, although proceeding from a second
person or from the very owner of the questionable memory. Sully finds
rightly, that one of the keenest tricks in fighting deep-rooted
convictions is to attack the memory of another with regard to its
reliability. Memory is the private domain of the individual. From the
secret council-chamber of his own consciousness, into which no other may
enter, it draws all its values.

The case is altered, however, when a man speaks of his personal memory.
It must then assume all the deficiencies which belong to other mental
powers. We lawyers, especially, hear frequently from witnesses: “My
memory is too weak to answer this question,” “Since receiving the wound
in question my memory has failed,” “I am already too old, my memory is
leaving me,” etc. In each of these cases, however, it is not the memory
that is at fault. As a matter of fact the witness ought to have said “I
am too stupid to answer this question,” “Since the wound in question, my
intellectual powers have failed,” “I am already old, I am growing
silly,” etc. But of course no one will, save very rarely, underestimate
his good sense, and it is more comfortable to assign its deficiencies to
the memory. This occurs not only in words but also in construction. If a
man has incorrectly reproduced any matter, whether a false observation,
or a deficient combination, or an unskilled interpretation of facts, he
will not blame these things but will assign the fault to memory. If he
is believed, absolutely incorrect conclusions may result.


Section 56. (e) Mnemotechnique.

Just a few words concerning mnemotechnique, mnemonic, and anamnestic.
The discovery of some means of helping the memory has long been a human
purpose. From Simonides of Chios, to the Sophist Hippias of Elis,
experiments have been made in artificial development of the memory, and
some have been remarkably successful. Since the middle ages a large
group of people have done this. We still have the figures of the valid
syllogisms in logic, like Barbara, etc. The rules for remembering in the
Latin grammar, etc., may still be learned with advantage. The books of
Kothe and others, have, in their day, created not a little discussion.

As a rule, modern psychology pays a little attention to memory devices.
In a certain sense, nobody can avoid mnemonic, for whenever you tie a
knot in your handkerchief, or stick your watch into your pocket upside
down, you use a memory device. Again, whenever you want to bear anything
in mind you reduce difficulties and bring some kind of order into what
you are trying to retain.

Thus, some artificial grip on the object is applied by everybody, and
the utility and reliability of this grip determines the trustworthiness
of a man’s memory. This fact may be important for the criminal lawyer in
two ways. On the one hand, it may help to clear up misunderstandings
when false mnemonic has been applied. Thus, once somebody called an
aniline dye, which is soluble in water and is called “nigrosin,” by the
name “moorosin,” and asked for it under that name in the store. In order
to aid his memory he had associated it with the word for black man =
niger = negro = moor, and thus had substituted moor for nigro in the
construction of the word he wanted. Again, somebody asked for the “Duke
Salm” or the “Duke Schmier.” The request was due to the fact that in the
Austrian dialect _salve_ is pronounced like salm and the colloquial for
“salm” is “schmier” (to wipe). Dr. Ernst Lohsing tells me that he was
once informed that a Mr. Schnepfe had called on him, while, as a matter
of fact the gentleman’s name was Wachtel. Such misunderstandings,
produced by false mnemonic, may easily occur during the examination of
witnesses. They are of profound significance. If once you suspect that
false memory has been in play, you may arrive at the correct idea by
using the proper synonyms and by considering similarly-pronounced words.
If attention is paid to the determining conditions of the special case,
success is almost inevitable.

The second way in which false mnemotechnique is important is that in
which the technique was correct, but in which the key to the system has
been lost, i.e., the witness has forgotten how he proceeded. Suppose,
for example, that I need to recall the relation of the ages of three
people to each other. Now, if I observe that M is the oldest, N the
middle one, and O the youngest, I may suppose, in order to help my
memory, that their births followed in the same order as their initials,
M, N, O. Now suppose that at another time, in another case I observe the
same relation but find the order of the initials reversed O, N, M. If
now, in the face of the facts, I stop simply with this technique, I may
later on substitute the two cases for each other. Hence, when a witness
says anything which appears to have been difficult to remember, it is
necessary to ask him _how_ he was able to remember it. If he assigns
some aid to memory as the reason, he must be required to explain it, and
he must not be believed unless it is found reliable. If the witness in
the instance above, for example, says, “I never make use of converse
relations,” then his testimony will seem comparatively trustworthy. And
it is not difficult to judge the degree of reliability of any aid to
memory whatever.

Great liars are frequently characterized by their easy use of the most
complicated mnemotechnique. They know how much they need it.


Topic 7. THE WILL.


Section 57.

Of course, we do not intend to discuss here either the “will” of the
philosopher, or the “malice” or “ill-will” of criminal law, nor yet the
“freedom of the will” of the moralist. We aim only to consider a few
facts that may be of significance to the criminal lawyer. Hence, we
intend by “will” only what is currently and popularly meant. I take will
to be the inner effect of the more powerful impulses, while action is
the _external_ effect of those impulses. When Hartmann says that will is
the transposition of the ideal into the real, he sounds foolish, but in
one sense the definition is excellent. You need only understand by ideal
that which does not yet exist, and by real that which is a fact and
actual. For when I voluntarily compel myself to think about some
subject, something has actually happened, but this event is not “real”
in the ordinary sense of that word. We are to bear in mind, however,
that Locke warned us against the contrast between intelligence and will,
as real, spiritual essences, one of which gives orders and the other of
which obeys. From this conception many fruitless controversies and
confusions have arisen. In this regard, we criminalists must always
remember how often the common work of will and intelligence opposes us
in witnesses and still more so in defendants, causing us great
difficulties. When the latter deny their crime with iron fortitude and
conceal their guilt by rage, or when for months they act out most
difficult parts with wonderful energy, we must grant that they exhibit
aspects of the will which have not yet been studied. Indeed, we can make
surprising observations of how effectively prisoners control the muscles
of their faces, which are least controllable by the will. The influence
the will may have on a witness’s power even to flush and grow pale is
also more extensive than may be established scientifically. This can be
learned from quite remote events. My son happens to have told me that at
one time he found himself growing pale with cold, and as under the
circumstance he was afraid of being accused of lacking courage to pursue
his task, he tried with all his power to suppress his pallor, and
succeeded perfectly. Since then, at court, I have seen a rising blush or
beginning pallor suppressed completely; yet this is theoretically
impossible.

But the will is also significant in judging the man as a whole.
According to Drobisch,[236] the abiding qualities and ruling “set” of a
man’s volition constitute his character. Not only inclination, and
habits, and guiding principles determine the character, but also
meanings, prejudices, convictions, etc. of all kinds. Since, then, we
can not avoid studying the character of the individual, we must trace
his volitions and desires. This in itself is not difficult; the idea of
his character develops spontaneously when so traced. But the will
contains also the characteristic signs of difference which are important
for our purposes. We are enabled to work intelligently and clearly only
by our capacity for distinguishing indifferent, from criminal and
logically interpretable deeds. Nothing makes our work so difficult as
the inconceivably superfluous mass of details. Not every deed or
activity is an action; only those are such which are determined by will
and knowledge. So Abegg[237] teaches us, what is determined by means of
the will may be discovered by analysis.

Of course, we must find the proper approach to this subject and not get
lost in the libertarian-deterministic quarrel, which is the
turning-point in contemporary criminal law. Forty years ago Renan said
that the error of the eighteenth century lay generally in assigning to
the free and self-conscious will what could be explained by means of the
natural effects of human powers and capacities. That century understood
too little the theory of instinctive activity. Nobody will claim that in
the transposition of willing into the expression of human capacity, the
question of determinism is solved. The solution of this question is not
our task. We do get an opening however through which we can approach the
criminal,--not by having to examine the elusive character of his will,
but by apprehending the intelligible expression of his capacity. The
weight of our work is set on the application of the concept of
causality, and the problem of free-will stands or falls with that.

Bois-Reymond in his “Limits of the Knowledge of Nature” has brought some
clearness into this problem: “Freedom may be denied, pain and desire may
not; the appetite which is the stimulus to action necessarily precedes
sense-perception. The problem, therefore, is that of sense-perception,
and not as I had said a minute ago, that of the freedom of the will. It
is to the former that analytic mechanics may be applied.” And the study
of sense-perception is just what we lawyers may be required to
undertake.

Of course, it is insufficient merely to study the individual
manifestations of human capacities, for these may be accidental results
or phenomena, determined by unknown factors. Our task consists in
attaining abstractions in accord with careful and conscientious
perceptions, and in finding each determining occasion in its particular
activities.

According to Drobisch, “maxims and the subjective principles of
evolution are, as Kant calls them, laws of general content required to
determine our own volitions and actions. Then again, they are rules of
our own volition and action which we ourselves construct, and which
hence are subjectively valid. When these maxims determine our future
volitions and actions they are postulates.” We may, therefore, say that
we know a man when we know his will, and that we know his will when we
know his maxims. By means of his maxims we are able to judge his
actions.

But we must not reconstruct his maxims theoretically. We must study
everything that surrounds, alters, and determines him, for it is at this
point that a man’s environments and relationships most influence him. As
Grohmann said, half a century ago, “If you could find an elixir, which
could cause the vital organs to work otherwise, if you could alter the
somatic functions of the body, you would be the master of the will.”
Therefore it is never superfluous to study the individual’s
environmental conditions, surroundings, all his outer influences. That
the effort required in such a study is great, is of course obvious, but
the criminal lawyer must make it if he is to perform his task
properly.[238]


Topic 8. EMOTION.


Section 58.

Little as emotion, as generally understood, may have to do with the
criminalist, it is, in its intention, most important for him. The motive
of a series of phenomena and events, both in prisoners and witnesses, is
emotion. In what follows, therefore, we shall attempt to show that
feeling, in so far as we need to consider it, need not be taken as an
especial function. This is only so far significant as to make our work
easier by limiting it to fewer subjects. If we can reduce some one
psychic function to another category we can explain many a thing even
when we know only the latter. In any event, the study of a single
category is simpler than that of many.[239]

Abstractly, the word emotion is the property or capacity of the mind to
be influenced pleasantly or unpleasantly by sensations, perceptions, and
ideas. Concretely, it means the conditions of desire or disgust which
are developed by the complex of conditions thereby aroused. We have
first to distinguish between the so-called animal and the higher
emotions. We will assume that this distinction is incorrect, inasmuch as
between these classes there is a series of feelings which may be counted
as well with one as with the other, so that the transition is incidental
and no strict differentiation is possible. We will, however, retain the
distinction, as it is easier by means of it to pass from the simpler to
the more difficult emotions. The indubitably animal passions we shall
take to be hunger, thirst, cold, etc. These are first of all purely
physiological stimuli which act on our body. But it is impossible to
imagine one of them, without, at the same time, inevitably bringing in
the idea of the defense against this physiological stimulus. It is
impossible to think of the feeling of hunger without sensing also the
strain to find relief from this feeling, for without this sensation
hunger would not appear as such. If I am hungry I go for food; if I am
cold I seek for warmth; if I feel pain I try to wipe it out. How to
satisfy these desiderative actions is a problem for the understanding,
whence it follows that successful satisfaction, intelligent or
unintelligent, may vary in every possible degree. We see that the least
intelligent--real cretins--sometimes are unable to satisfy their hunger,
for when food is given the worst of them, they stuff it, in spite of
acute sensations of hunger, into their ears and noses, but not into
their mouths. We must therefore say that there is always a demand for a
minimum quantity of intelligence in order to know that the feeling of
hunger may be vanquished by putting food into the mouth.

One step further: In the description of the conduct of anthropoid apes
which are kept in menageries, etc., especial intelligence is assigned to
those who know how to draw a blanket over themselves as protection
against cold. The same action is held to be a sign of intelligence in
very young children.

Still more thoroughly graded is the attitude toward pain, inasmuch as
barely a trace of intelligence is required, in order to know that it is
necessary to wipe away a hot liquid drop that has fallen on the body.
Every physiological text-book mentions the fact that a decapitated frog
makes such wiping movements when it is wet with acid. From this
unconscious activity of the understanding to the technically
highest-developed treatment of a burn, a whole series of progressively
higher expressions of intelligence may be interpolated, a series so
great as to defy counting.

Now take another, still animal, but more highly-developed feeling, for
example, the feeling of comfort. We lay a cat on a soft bolster--she
stretches herself, spreads and thins herself out, in order to bring as
many nerve termini as possible into contact with the pleasant stimuli of
the bolster. This behavior of the cat may be construed as instinctive,
also as the aboriginal source of the sense of comfort and as leading to
luxury in comfort, the stage of comfort which Roscher calls highest. (I.
Luxury in eating and drinking. II. Luxury in dress. III. Luxury in
comfort.)

Therefore we may say that the reaction of the understanding to the
physiological stimulus aims to set it aside when it is unpleasant, and
to increase and exhaust it when it is pleasant, and that in a certain
sense both coincide (the ousting of unpleasant darkness is equivalent to
the introduction of pleasant light). We may therefore say generally,
that feeling is a physiological stimulus indivisibly connected with the
understanding’s sensitive attitude thereto. Of course there is a far cry
from instinctive exclusion and inclusion to the most refined defensive
preparation or interpretation, but the differences which lie next to
each, on either side, are only differences in degree.

Now let us think of some so-called higher feeling and consider a special
case of it. I meet for the first time a man who is unpleasantly marked,
e.g., with badly colored hair. This stimulates my eyes disagreeably, and
I seek either by looking away or by wishing the man away to protect
myself from this physiologically-inimical influence, which already
eliminates all feeling of friendship for this harmless individual. Now I
see that the man is torturing an animal,--I do not like to see this, it
affects me painfully; hence I wish him out of the way still more
energetically. If he goes on so, adding one disagreeable characteristic
to another, I might break his bones to stop him, bind him in chains to
hinder him; I even might kill him, to save myself the unpleasant
excitation he causes me. I strain my intelligence to think of some means
of opposing him, and clearly, in this case, also, physiological
stimulus and activity of the understanding are invincibly united.

The emotion of anger is rather more difficult to explain. But it is not
like suddenly-exploding hatred, for it is acute, while hatred is
chronic. I might be angry with my beloved child. But though at the
moment of anger, the expression is identical with that of hatred, it is
also transitive. In the extremest cases the negating action aims to
destroy the stimulus. This is the most radical means of avoiding
physiological excitation, and hence I tear in pieces a disagreeable
letter, or stamp to powder the object on which I have hurt myself. Where
persons are involved, I proceed either directly or symbolically when I
can not, or may not, get my hands on the responsible one.

The case is the same with feeling of attraction. I own a dog, he has
beautiful lines which are pleasant to my eye, he has a bell-like bark
that stimulates my ear pleasantly, he has a soft coat which is pleasant
to my stroking hand, I know that in case of need the dog will protect me
(and that is a calming consideration), I know that he may be otherwise
of use to me--in short my understanding tells me all kinds of pleasant
things about the beast. Hence I like to have him near me; i.e., I like
him. The same explanation may be applied to all emotions of inclination
or repulsion. Everywhere we find the emotion as physiological stimulus
in indivisible union with a number of partly known, partly unknown
functions of the understanding. The unknown play an important rôle. They
are serial understandings, i.e., inherited from remote ancestors, and
are characterized by the fact that they lead us to do the things we do
when we recognize intelligently any event and its requirements.

When one gets thirsty, he drinks. Cattle do the same. And they drink
even when nobody has told them to, because this is an inherited action
of countless years. If a man is, however, to proceed intelligently about
his drinking, he will say, “By drying, or other forms of segregation,
the water will be drawn from the cells of my body, they will become
arid, and will no longer be sufficiently elastic to do their work. If,
now, by way of my stomach, through endosmosis and exosmosis, I get them
more water, the proper conditions will return.” The consequences of this
form of consideration will not be different from the instinctive action
of the most elementary of animals--the wise man and the animal drink. So
the whole content of every emotion is physiological stimulation and
function of the understanding.

And what good is all this to the criminal lawyer? Nobody doubts that
both prisoners and witnesses are subject to the powerful influence of
emotional expression. Nobody doubts that the determination,
interpretation, and judgment of these expressions are as difficult as
they are important to the judge. And when we consider these emotions as
especial conditions of the mind it is indubitable that they are able to
cause still greater difficulty because of their elusiveness, their very
various intensity, and their confused effect. Once, however, we think of
them as functions of the understanding, we have, in its activities,
something better known, something rather more disciplined, which offers
very many fewer difficulties in the judgment concerning the fixed form
in which it acts. Hence, every judgment of an emotional state must be
preceded by a reconstruction in terms of the implied functions of the
understanding. Once this is done, further treatment is no longer
difficult.


Topic 9. THE FORMS OF GIVING TESTIMONY.


Section 59.

Wherever we turn we face the absolute importance of language for our
work. Whatever we hear or read concerning a crime is expressed in words,
and everything perceived with the eye, or any other sense, must be
clothed in words before it can be put to use. That the criminalist must
know this first and most important means of understanding, completely
and in all its refinements, is self-evident. But still more is required
of him. He must first of all undertake a careful investigation of the
essence of language itself. A glance over literature shows how the
earliest scholars have aimed to study language with regard to its
origins and character. Yet, who needs this knowledge? The lawyer. Other
disciplines can find in it only a scientific interest, but it is
practically and absolutely valuable only for us lawyers, who must, by
means of language, take evidence, remember it, and variously interpret
it. A failure in a proper understanding of language may give rise to
false conceptions and the most serious of mistakes. Hence, nobody is so
bound as the criminal lawyer to study the general character of language,
and to familiarize himself with its force, nature, and development.
Without this knowledge the lawyer may be able to make use of language,
but failing to understand it, will slip up before the slightest
difficulty. There is an exceedingly rich literature open to
everybody.[240]


Section 60. (a) General Study of Variety in Forms of Expression.

Men being different in nature and bringing-up on the one hand, and
language, being on the other, a living organism which varies with its
soil, i.e., with the human individual who makes use of it, it is
inevitable that each man should have especial and private forms of
expression. These forms, if the man comes before us as witness or
prisoner, we must study, each by itself. Fortunately, this study must be
combined with another that it implies, i.e., the character and nature of
the individual. The one without the other is unthinkable. Whoever aims
to study a man’s character must first of all attend to his ways of
expression, inasmuch as these are most significant of a man’s qualities,
and most illuminating. A man is as he speaks. It is not possible, on the
other hand, to study modes of expression in themselves. Their
observation requires the study of a group of other conditions, if the
form of speech is to be explained, or its analysis made even possible.
Thus, one is involved in the other, and once you know clearly the tricks
of speech belonging to an individual, you also have a clear conception
of his character and conversely. This study requires, no doubt,
considerable skill. But that is at the command of anybody who is devoted
to the lawyer’s task.

Tylor is correct in his assertion, that a man’s speech indicates his
origin much less than his bringing-up, his education, and his power.
Much of this fact is due to the nature of language as a living growth
and moving organism which acquires new and especial forms to express new
and especial events in human life. Geiger[241] cites the following
example of such changes in the meaning of words. “Mriga” means in
Sanscrit, “wild beast;” in Zend it means merely “bird,” and the
equivalent Persian term “mrug” continues to mean only “bird,” so that
the barnyard fowls, song-birds, etc., are now called “mrug.” Thus the
first meaning, “wild animal” has been transmuted into its opposite,
“tame animal.” In other cases we may incorrectly suppose certain
expressions to stand for certain things. We say, “to bake bread, to bake
cake, to bake certain meats,” and then again, “to roast apples, to roast
potatoes, to roast certain meats.” We should laugh if some foreigner
told us that he had “roasted” bread.

These forms of expression have, as yet, no relation to character, but
they are the starting-point of quite characteristic modes which
establish themselves in all corporations, groups, classes, such as
students, soldiers, hunters, etc., as well as among the middle classes
in large cities. Forms of this kind may become so significant that the
use of a single one of them might put the user in question into
jeopardy. I once saw two old gentlemen on a train who did not know each
other. They fell into conversation and one told the other that he had
seen an officer, while jumping from his horse, trip over his sword and
fall. But instead of the word sword he made use of the old
couleur-student slang word “speer,” and the other old boy looked at him
with shining eyes and cried out “Well, brother, what color?”

Still more remarkable is the mutation and addition of new words of
especially definite meaning among certain classes. The words become more
modern, like so much slang.

The especial use of certain forms is individual as well as social. Every
person has his private usage. One makes use of “certainly,” another of
“yes, indeed,” one prefers “dark,” another “darkish.” This fact has a
double significance. Sometimes a man’s giving a word a definite meaning
may explain his whole nature. How heartless and raw is the statement of
a doctor who is telling about a painful operation, “The patient sang!”
In addition, it is frequently necessary to investigate the connotation
people like to give certain words, otherwise misunderstandings are
inevitable. This investigation is, as a rule, not easy, for even when it
is simple to bring out what is intended by an expression, it is still
quite as simple to overlook the fact that people use peculiar
expressions for ordinary things. This occurs particularly when people
are led astray by the substitution of similars and by the repetition of
such a substitution. Very few persons are able to distinguish between
identity and similarity; most of them take these two characters to be
equivalent. If A and B are otherwise identical, save that B is a little
bigger, so that they appear similar, there is no great mistake if I hold
them to be equivalent and substitute B for A. Now I compare B with C, C
with D, D with E, etc., and each member of the series is progressively
bigger than its predecessor. If now I continue to repeat my first
mistake, I have in the end substituted for A the enormously bigger E and
the mistake has become a very notable one. I certainly would not have
substituted E for A at the beginning, but the repeated substitution of
similars has led me to this complete incommensurability.

Such substitutions occur frequently during the alterations of meanings,
and if you wish to see how some remarkable signification of a term has
arisen you will generally find it as a progression through gradually
remoter similarities to complete dissimilarity. All such extraordinary
alterations which a word has undergone in the course of long usage, and
for which each linguistic text-book contains numerous examples, may,
however, develop with comparative speed in each individual speaker, and
if the development is not traced may lead, in the law-court, to very
serious misunderstandings.

Substitutions, and hence, sudden alterations, occur when the material of
language, especially in primitive tongues, contains only simple
differentiations. So Tylor mentions the fact, that the language of the
West African Wolofs contains the word “da_goú_,” to go, “_dá_gou,” to
stride proudly; “dágana,” to beg dejectedly; “dagána,” to demand. The
Mpongwes say, “mì tonda,” I love, and “mi tônda,” I do not love. Such
differentiations in tone our own people make also, and the mutation of
meaning is very close. But who observes it at all?

Important as are the changes in the meanings of words, they fall short
beside the changes of meaning of the conception given in the mode of
exposition. Hence, there are still greater mistakes, because a single
error is neither easily noticeable nor traceable. J. S. Mill says,
justly, that the ancient scientists missed a great deal because they
were guided by linguistic classification. It scarcely occurred to them
that what they assigned abstract names to really consisted of several
phenomena. Nevertheless, the mistake has been inherited, and people who
nowadays name abstract things, conceive, according to their
intelligence, now this and now that phenomenon by means of it. Then they
wonder at the other fellow’s not understanding them. The situation being
so, the criminalist is coercively required, whenever anything abstract
is named, first of all to determine accurately what the interlocutor
means by his word. In these cases we make the curious discovery that
such determination is most necessary among people who have studied the
object profoundly, for a technical language arises with just the persons
who have dealt especially with any one subject.

As a rule it must be maintained that time, even a little time, makes an
essential difference in the conception of any object. Mittermaier, and
indeed Bentham, have shown what an influence the interval between
observation and announcement exercises on the form of exposition. The
witness who is immediately examined may, perhaps, say the same thing
that he would say several weeks after--but his presentation is
different, he uses different words, he understands by the different
words different concepts, and so his testimony becomes altered.

A similar effect may be brought about by the conditions under which the
evidence is given. Every one of us knows what surprising differences
occur between the statements of the witness made in the silent office of
the examining justice and his secretary, and what he says in the open
trial before the jury. There is frequently an inclination to attack
angrily the witnesses who make such divergent statements. Yet more
accurate observation would show that the testimony is essentially the
same as the former but that the manner of giving it is different, and
hence the apparently different story. The difference between the members
of the audience has a powerful influence. It is generally true that
reproductive construction is intensified by the sight of a larger number
of attentive hearers, but this is not without exception. In the words
“attentive hearers” there is the notion that the speaker is speaking
interestingly and well, for otherwise his hearers would not be
attentive, and if anything is well done and is known to be well done,
the number of the listeners is exciting, inasmuch as each listener is
reckoned as a stimulating admirer. This is invariably the case. If
anybody is doing a piece of work under observation he will feel pleasant
when he knows that he is doing it well, but he will feel disturbed and
troubled if he is certain of his lack of skill. So we may grant that a
large number of listeners increases reproductive constructivity, but
only when the speaker is certain of his subject and of the favor of his
auditors. Of the latter, strained attention is not always evidence. When
a scholar is speaking of some subject chosen by himself, and his
audience listens to him attentively, he has chosen his subject
fortunately, and speaks well; the attention acts as a spur, he speaks
still better, etc. But this changes when, in the course of a great trial
which excites general interest, the witness for the government appears.
Strained attention will also be the rule, but it does not apply to him,
it applies to the subject. He has not chosen his topic, and no
recognition for it is due him--it is indifferent to him whether he
speaks ill or well. The interest belongs only to the subject, and the
speaker himself receives, perhaps, the undivided antipathy, hatred,
disgust, or scorn, of all the listeners. Nevertheless, attention is
intense and strained, and inasmuch as the speaker knows that this does
not pertain to him or his merits, it confuses and depresses him. It is
for this reason that so many criminal trials turn out quite contrary to
expectation. Those who have seen the trial only, and were not at the
prior examination, understand the result still less when they are told
that “nothing” has altered since the prior examination--and yet much has
altered; the witnesses, excited or frightened by the crowd of listeners,
have spoken and expressed themselves otherwise than before until, in
this manner, the whole case has become different.

In a similar fashion, some fact may be shown in another light by the
manner of narration used by a particular witness. Take, as example, some
energetically influential quality like humor. It is self-evident that
joke, witticism, comedy, are excluded from the court-room, but if
somebody has actually introduced real, genuine humor by way of the dry
form of his testimony, without having crossed in a single word the
permissible limit, he may, not rarely, narrate a very serious story so
as to reduce its dangerous aspect to a minimum. Frequently the testimony
of some funny witness makes the rounds of all the newspapers for the
pleasure of their readers. Everybody knows how a really humorous person
may so narrate experiences, doubtful situations of his student days,
unpleasant traveling experiences, difficult positions in quarrels, etc.,
that every listener must laugh. At the same time, the events told of
were troublesome, difficult, even quite dangerous. The narrator does not
in the least lie, but he manages to give his story the twist that even
the victim of the situation is glad to laugh at.[242] As Kräpelin says,
“The task of humor is to rob a large portion of human misfortune of its
wounding power. It does so by presenting to us, with our fellows as
samples, the comedy of the innumerable stupidities of human life.”

Now suppose that a really humorous witness tells a story which involves
very considerable consequences, but which he does not really end with
tragic conclusions. Suppose the subject to be a great brawl, some really
crass deception, some story of an attack on honor, etc. The attitude
toward the event is altered with one turn, even though it would seem to
have been generated progressively by ten preceding witnesses and the new
view of the matter makes itself valid at least mildly in the delivery of
the sentence. Then whoever has not heard the whole story understands the
results least of all.

In the same way we see really harmless events turned into tragedies by
the testimony of a black-visioned, melancholy witness, without his
having used, in this case or any other, a single untrue word. In like
manner the bitterness of a witness who considers his personal
experiences to be generally true, may color and determine the attitude
of some, not at all serious, event. Nor is this exaggeration. Every man
of experience will, if he is only honest enough, confirm the fact, and
grant that he himself was among those whose attitude has been so
altered; I avoid the expression--“duped.”

It is necessary here, also, to repeat that the movements of the hands
and other gestures of the witnesses while making their statements will
help much to keep the correct balance. Movements lie much less
frequently than words.[243]

Another means of discovering whether a witness is not seduced by his
attitude and his own qualities is the careful observation of the
impression his narrative makes on himself. Stricker has controlled the
conditions of speech and has observed that so long as he continued to
bring clearly described complexes into a causal relation, _satisfactory
to him_, he could excite his auditors; as soon as he spoke of a relation
which _did not_ satisfy him the attitude of the audience altered. We
must invert this observation; we are the auditors of the witness and
must observe whether his own causal connections satisfy him. So long as
this is the case, we believe him. When it fails to be so he is either
lying, or he himself knows that he is not expressing himself as he ought
to make us correctly understand what he is talking about.


Section 61. (b) Dialect Forms.

What every criminal lawyer must unconditionally know is the dialect of
those people he has most to deal with. This is so important that I
should hold it conscienceless to engage in the profession of criminology
without knowing the dialects. Nobody with experience would dispute my
assertion that nothing is the cause of so great and so serious
misunderstandings, of even inversions of justice, as ignorance of
dialects, ignorance of the manner of expression of human groups. Wrongs
so caused can never be rectified because their primary falsehood starts
in the protocol, where no denial, no dispute and redefinition can change
them.

It is no great difficulty to learn dialects, if only one is not seduced
by comic pride and foolish ignorance of his own advantage into believing
that popular speech is something low or common. Dialect has as many
rights as literary language, is as living and interesting an organism as
the most developed form of expression. Once the interest in dialect is
awakened, all that is required is the learning of a number of meanings.
Otherwise, there are no difficulties, for the form of speech of the real
peasant (and this is true all over the world), is always the simplest,
the most natural, and the briefest. Tricks, difficult construction,
circumlocutions are unknown to the peasant, and if he is only left to
himself he makes everything definite, clear, and easily intelligible.

There are many more difficulties in the forms of expression of the
uncultivated city man, who has snapped up a number of uncomprehended
phrases and tries to make use of them because of their suppositious
beauty, regardless of their fitness. Unpleasant as it is to hear such a
screwed and twisted series of phrases, without beginning and without
end, it is equally difficult to get a clear notion of what the man
wanted to say, and especially whether the phrases used were really
brought out with some purpose or simply for the sake of showing off,
because they sound “educated.”

In this direction nothing is more significant than the use of the
imperfect in countries where its use is not customary and where as a
rule only the perfect is used; not “I was going,” but “I have gone”
(went). In part the reading of newspapers, but partly also the
unfortunate habit of our school teachers, compel children to the use of
the imperfect, which has not an iota more justification than the
perfect, and which people make use of under certain circumstances, i.e.,
when they are talking to educated people, and then only before they have
reached a certain age.

I confess that I regularly mistrust a witness who makes use of an
imperfect or some other form not habitual to him. I presuppose that he
is a weak-minded person who has allowed himself to be persuaded; I
believe that he is not altogether reliable because he permits untrue
forms to express his meaning, and I fear that he neglects the content
for the sake of the form. The simple person who quietly and without
shame makes use of his natural dialect, supplies no ground for mistrust.

There are a few traits of usage which must always be watched. First of
all, all dialects are in certain directions poorer than the literary
language. E. g., they make use of fewer colors. The blue grape, the red
wine, may be indicated by the word black, the light wine by the word
white. Literary language has adopted the last term from dialect. Nobody
says water-colored or yellow wine, although nobody has ever yet seen
white wine. Similarly, no peasant says a “brown dog,” a “brown-yellow
cow”--these colors are always denoted by the word red. This is important
in the description of clothes. There is, however, no contradiction
between this trait and the fact that the dialect may be rich in terms
denoting objects that may be very useful, e.g. the handle of a tool may
be called handle, grasp, haft, stick, clasp, etc.

When foreign words are used it is necessary to observe in what tendency,
and what meaning their adoption embodies.[244]

The great difficulty of getting uneducated people to give their
testimony in direct discourse is remarkable. You might ask for the words
of the speaker ten times and you always hear, “He told me, I should
enter,” you never hear “He told me, ‘Go in.’” This is to be explained by
the fact, already mentioned, that people bear in mind only the meaning
of what they have heard. When the question of the actual words is
raised, the sole way to conquer this disagreeable tendency is to develop
dialogue and to say to the witness, “Now you are A and I am B; how did
it happen?” But even this device may fail, and when you finally do
compel direct quotation, you can not be certain of its reliability, for
it was too extraordinary for the witness to quote directly, and the
extraordinary and unhabitual is always unsafe.

What especially wants consideration in the real peasant is his silence.
I do not know whether the reasons for the silence of the countrymen all
the world over have ever been sought, but a gossiping peasant is rare to
find. This trait is unfortunately exhibited in the latter’s failure to
defend himself when we make use of energetic investigation. It is said
that not to defend yourself is to show courage, and this may, indeed, be
a kind of nobility, a disgust at the accusation, or certainty of
innocence, but frequently it is mere incapacity to speak, and
inexperienced judges may regard it as an expression of cunning or
conviction. It is wise therefore, in this connection, not to be in too
great a hurry, and to seek to understand clearly the nature of the
silent person. If we become convinced that the latter is by nature
uncommunicative, we must not wonder that he does not speak, even when
words appear to be quite necessary.

In certain cases uneducated people must be studied from the same point
of view as children. Geiger[245] speaks of a child who knew only one
boy, and all the other boys were Otho to him because this first boy was
called Otho. So the recruit at the Rhine believed that in his country
the Rhine was called Donau. The child and the uneducated person can not
subordinate things under higher concepts. Every painted square might be
a bon-bon, and every painted circle a plate. New things receive the
names of old ones. And frequently the skill of the criminalists consists
in deriving important material from apparently worthless statements, by
way of discovering the proper significance of simple, inartistic, but in
most cases excellently definitive images. It is of course self-evident
that one must absolutely refrain from trickery.


Section 62. (c) Incorrect Forms of Expression.

If it is true that by the earnest and repeated study of the meanings of
words we are likely to find them in the end containing much deeper sense
and content than at the beginning, we are compelled to wonder that
people are able to understand each other at all. For if words do not
have that meaning which is obvious in their essential denotation, every
one who uses them supplies according to his inclination, and status the
“deeper and richer sense.” As a matter of fact many more words are used
pictorially than we are inclined to think. Choose at random, and you
find surprisingly numerous words with exaggerated denotations. If I say,
“I posit the case, I press through, I jump over, the proposition, etc.,”
these phrases are all pictures, for I have posited nothing, I have
pressed through no obstacle, and have jumped over no object. My words,
therefore, have not stood for anything real, but for an image, and it is
impossible to determine the remoteness of the latter from the former, or
the variety of direction and extent this remoteness may receive from
each individual. Wherever images are made use of, therefore, we must, if
we are to know what is meant, first establish how and where the use
occurred. How frequently we hear, e.g., of a “four-cornered” table
instead of a square table; a “very average” man, instead of a man who is
far below the average. In many cases this false expression is
half-consciously made for the purpose of beautifying a request or making
it appear more modest. The smoker says: “May I have some light,”
although you know that it is perfectly indifferent whether much or
little light is taken from the cigar. “May I have just a little piece of
roast,” is said in order to make the request that the other fellow
should pass the heavy platter seem more modest. And again: “Please give
me a little water,” does not modify the fact that the other fellow must
pass the whole water flask, and that it is indifferent to him whether
afterwards you take much or little water. So, frequently, we speak of
borrowing or lending, without in the remotest thinking of returning. The
student says to his comrade, “Lend me a pen, some paper, or some ink,”
but he has not at all any intention of giving them back. Similar things
are to be discovered in accused or witnesses who think they have not
behaved properly, and who then want to exhibit their misconduct in the
most favorable light. These beautifications frequently go so far and may
be made so skilfully that the correct situation may not be observed for
a long time. Habitual usage offers, in this case also, the best
examples. For years uncountable it has been called a cruel job to earn
your living honestly and to satisfy the absolute needs of many people by
quickly and painlessly slaughtering cattle. But, when somebody, just for
the sake of killing time, because of ennui, shoots and martyrs harmless
animals, or merely so wounds them that if they are not retrieved they
must die terrible deaths, we call it noble sport. I should like to see a
demonstration of the difference between killing an ox and shooting a
stag. The latter does not require even superior skill, for it is much
more difficult to kill an ox swiftly and painlessly than to shoot a stag
badly, and even the most accurate shot requires less training than the
correct slaughter of an ox. Moreover, it requires much more courage to
finish a wild ox than to destroy a tame and kindly pheasant. But usage,
once and for all, has assumed this essential distinction between men,
and frequently this distinction is effective in criminal law, without
our really seeing how or why. The situation is similar in the difference
between cheating in a horse trade and cheating about other commodities.
It occurs in the distinction between two duellists fighting according to
rule and two peasant lads brawling with the handles of their picks
according to agreement. It recurs again in the violation of the law by
somebody “nobly inspired with champagne,” as against its violation by
some “mere” drunkard. But usage has a favoring, excusing intent for the
first series, and an accusing, rejecting intent for the latter series.
The different points of view from which various events are seen are the
consequence of the varieties of the usage which first distinguished the
view-points from one another.

There is, moreover, a certain dishonesty in speaking and in listening
where the speaker knows that the hearer is hearing a different matter,
and the hearer knows that the speaker is speaking a different matter. As
Steinthal[246] has said, “While the speaker speaks about things that he
does not believe, and the reality of which he takes no stock in, his
auditor, at the same time, knows right well what the former has said; he
understands correctly and does not blame the speaker for having
expressed himself altogether unintelligibly.” This occurs very
frequently in daily routine, without causing much difficulty in human
intercourse, but it ought, for this reason, to occur inversely in our
conversation with witnesses and accused. I know that the manner of
speaking just described is frequently used when a witness wants to
clothe some definite suspicion without expressing it explicitly. In such
cases, e.g., the examiner as well as the witness believes that X is the
criminal. For some reason, perhaps because X is a close relation of the
witness or of “the man higher up,” neither of them, judge nor witness,
wishes to utter the truth openly, and so they feel round the subject for
an interminable time. If now, both think the same thing, there results
at most only a loss of time, but no other misfortune. When, however,
each thinks of a different object, e.g., each thinks of another
criminal, but each believes mistakenly that he agrees with the other,
their separating without having made explicit what they think, may lead
to harmful misunderstandings. If the examiner then believes that the
witness agrees with him and proceeds upon this only apparently certain
basis, the case may become very bad. The results are the same when a
confession is discussed with a suspect, i.e., when the judge thinks that
the suspect would like to confess, but only suggests confession, while
the latter has never even thought of it. The one thing alone our work
permits of is open and clear speaking; any confused form of expression
is evil.

Nevertheless, confusions often occur involuntarily, and as they can not
be avoided they must be understood. Thus, it is characteristic to
understand something unknown in terms of some known example, i.e., the
Romans who first saw an elephant, called it “bos lucani.” Similarly
“wood-dog” = wolf; “sea-cat” = monkey, etc. These are forms of common
usage, but every individual is accustomed to make such identifications
whenever he meets with any strange object. He speaks, therefore, to some
degree in images, and if his auditor is not aware of the fact he can
not understand him. His speaking so may be discovered by seeking out
clearly whether and what things were new and foreign to the speaker.
When this is learned it may be assumed that he will express himself in
images when considering the unfamiliar object. Then it will not be
difficult to discover the nature and source of the images.

Similar difficulties arise with the usage of foreign terms. It is of
course familiar that their incorrect use is not confined to the
uneducated. I have in mind particularly the weakening of the meaning in
our own language. The foreign word, according to Volkmar, gets its
significance by robbing the homonymous native word of its definiteness
and freshness, and is therefore sought out by all persons who are
unwilling to call things by their right names. The “_triste_ position”
is far from being so sad as the “sad” position. I should like to know
how a great many people could speak, if they were not permitted to say
_malheur_, _méchant_, _perfide_, etc.--words by means of which they
reduce the values of the terms at least a degree in intensity of
meaning. The reason for the use of these words is not always the
unwillingness of the speaker to make use of the right term, but really
because it is necessary to indicate various degrees of intensity for the
same thing without making use of attributes or other extensions of the
term. Thus the foreign word is in some degree introduced as a technical
expression. The direction in which the native word weakens, however,
taken as that is intended by the individual who uses its substitute, is
in no sense universally fixated. The matter is entirely one of
individual usage and must be examined afresh in each particular case.

The striving for abbreviated forms of expression,--extraordinary enough
in our gossipy times,--manifests itself in still another direction. On
my table, e.g., there is an old family journal, “From Cliff to Sea.”
What should the title mean? Obviously the spatial distribution of the
subject of its contents and its subscribers--i.e., “round about the
whole earth,” or “Concerning all lands and all peoples.” But such titles
would be too long; hence, they are synthesized into, “From Cliff to
Sea,” without the consideration that cliffs often stand right at the
edge of the sea, so that the distance between them may be only the
thickness of a hair:--cliff and sea are not local opposites.

Or: my son enters and tells me a story about an “old semester.” By “old
semester” he means an old student who has spent many terms, at least
more than are required or necessary, at the university. As this
explanation is too long, the whole complex is contracted into “old
semester,” which is comfortable, but unintelligible to all people not
associated with the university. These abbreviations are much more
numerous than, as a rule, they are supposed to be, and must always be
explained if errors are to be avoided. Nor are silent and monosyllabic
persons responsible for them; gossipy individuals seek, by the use of
them, to exhibit a certain power of speech. Nor is it indifferent to
expression when people in an apparently nowise comfortable fashion give
approximate circumlocutive figures, e.g., _half-a-dozen_, four
syllables, instead of the monosyllable _six_; or “the bell in the dome
at St. Stephen’s has as many nicks as the year has days,” etc. It must
be assumed that these circumlocutive expressions are chosen, either
because of the desire to make an assertion general, or because of the
desire for some mnemonic aid. It is necessary to be cautious with such
statements, either because, as made, they only “round out” the figures
or because the reliability of the aid to memory must first be tested.
Finally, it is well-known that foreign words are often changed into
senseless words of a similar sound. When such unintelligible words are
heard, very loud repeated restatement of the word will help in finding
the original.




TITLE B. DIFFERENTIATING CONDITIONS OF GIVING TESTIMONY.


Topic 1. GENERAL DIFFERENCES.

(a) Woman.


Section 63. (1) _General Considerations._[247]

One of the most difficult tasks of the criminalist who is engaged in
psychological investigation is the judgment of woman. Woman is not only
somatically and psychically rather different from man; man never is able
wholly and completely to put himself in her place. In judging a male the
criminalist is dealing with his like, made of the same elements as he,
even though age, conditions of life, education, and morality are as
different as possible. When the criminalist is to judge a gray-beard
whose years far outnumber his own, he still sees before him something
that he may himself become, built as he, but only in a more advanced
stage. When he is studying a boy, he knows what he himself felt and
thought as boy. For we never completely forget attitudes and judgments,
no matter how much time has elapsed--we no longer grasp them en masse,
but we do not easily fail to recall how they were constructed. Even when
the criminalist is dealing with a girl before puberty he is not without
some point of approach for his judgment, since boys and girls are at
that period not so essentially different as to prevent the drawing of
analogous inferences by the comparison of his own childhood with that of
the girl.

But to the nature of woman, we men totally lack avenues of approach. We
can find no parallel between women and ourselves, and the greatest
mistakes in criminal law were made where the conclusions would have been
correct if the woman had been a man.[248] We have always estimated the
deeds and statements of women by the same standards as those of men, and
we have always been wrong. That woman is different from man is testified
to by the anatomist, the physician, the historian, the theologian, the
philosopher; every layman sees it for himself. Woman is different in
appearance, in manner of observation, of judgment, of sensation, of
desire, of efficacy,--but we lawyers punish the crimes of woman as we do
those of man, and we count her testimony as we do that of man. The
present age is trying to set aside the differences in sex and to level
them, but it forgets that the law of causation is valid here also. Woman
and man have different bodies, hence they must have different minds. But
even when we understand this, we proceed wrongly in the valuation of
woman. We can not attain proper knowledge of her because we men were
never women, and women can never tell us the truth because they were
never men.

Just as a man is unable to discover whether he and his neighbor call the
same color red, so, eternally, will the source of the indubitably
existent differences in the psychic life of male and female be
undiscovered. But if we can not learn to understand the essence of the
problem of the eternal feminine, we may at least study its
manifestations and hope to find as much clearness as the difficulty of
the subject will permit. An essential, I might say, unscientific
experience seems to come to our aid here. In this matter, we trust the
real researches, the determinations of scholars, much less than the
conviction of the people, which is expressed in maxims, legal
differences, usage, and proverbs. We instinctively feel that the popular
conception presents the experience of many hundreds of years,
experiences of both men and women. So that we may assume that the
mistakes of the observations of individuals have corrected each other
as far as has been possible, and yield a kind of average result. Now,
even if averages are almost always wrong, either because they appear too
high or too low, the mistake is not more than half a mistake. If in a
series of numbers the lowest was 4, the highest 12, and the average 8,
and if I take the latter for the individual problem, I can at most have
been mistaken about four, never about eight, as would have been the case
if I had taken 4 or 12 for each other. The attitude of the people gives
us an average and we may at least assume that it would not have
maintained itself, either as common law or as proverb, if centuries had
not shown that the mistake involved was not a very great one.

In any event, the popular method was comparatively simple. No delicate
distinctions were developed. A general norm of valuation was applied to
woman and the result showed that woman is simply a less worthy creature.
This conception we find very early in the history of the most civilized
peoples, as well as among contemporary backward nations and tribes. If,
now, we generally assume that the culture of a people and the position
of its women have the same measure, it follows only that increasing
education revealed that the simple assumption of the inferiority of
woman was not correct, that the essential difference in psyche between
man and woman could not be determined, and that even today, the old
conception half unconsciously exercises an influence on our valuation of
woman, when in any respect we are required to judge her. Hence, we are
in no wise interested in the degree of subordination of woman among
savage and half-savage peoples, but, on the other hand, it is not
indifferent for us to know what the situation was among peoples and
times who have influenced our own culture. Let us review the situation
hastily.

A number of classical instances which are brought together by Fink[249]
and Smith,[250] show how little the classic Greek thought of woman, and
W. Becker[251] estimates as most important the fact that the Greek
always gave precedence to children and said, “τἑχνα χαἱ γυναἱχας.” The
Greek naturalists, Hippocrates and Aristotle, modestly held woman to be
half human, and even the poet Homer is not free from this point of view
(cf. the advice of Agamemnon to Odysseus). Moreover, he speaks mostly
concerning the scandalmongering and lying of women, while later,
Euripides directly reduces the status of women to the minimum (cf.
Iphigenia).

The attention of ancient Rome is always directed upon the puzzling,
sphinx-like, unharmonious qualities in woman. Horace gives it the
clearest expression, e.g., “Desinite in piscem mulier formosa superne.”

The Orientals have not done any better for us. The Chinese assert that
women have no souls. The Mohammedan believes that women are denied
entrance to paradise, and the Koran (xliii, 17) defines the woman as a
creature which grows up on a soil of finery and baubles, and is always
ready to nag. How well such an opinion has sustained itself, is shown by
the Ottomanic Codex 355, according to which the testimony of two women
is worth as much as the testimony of one man. But even so, the Koran has
a higher opinion of women than the early church fathers. The problem,
“An mulier habeat animam,” was often debated at the councils. One of
them, that of Macon, dealt earnestly with the MS. of Acidalius,
“Mulieres homines non esse.” At another, women were forbidden to touch
the Eucharist with bare hands. This attitude is implied by the content
of countless numbers of evil proverbs which deal with the inferior
character of woman, and certainly by the circumstance that so great a
number of women were held to be witches, of whom about 100,000 were
burned in Germany alone. The statutes dealt with women only in so far as
their trustworthiness as witnesses could be depreciated. The
Bambergensis (Art. 76), for example, permits the admission of young
persons and women only in special cases, and the quarrels of the older
lawyers concerning the value of feminine testimony is shown by
Mittermaier.[252]

If we discount Tacitus’ testimony concerning the high status of women
among the Germanic tribes on the basis that he aimed at shaming and
reforming his countrymen, we have a long series of assertions, beginning
with that of the Norseman Havamál,--which progressively speaks of women
in depreciatory fashion, and calls them inconstant, deceitful, and
stupefying,--to the very modern maxim which brings together the extreme
elevation and extreme degradation of woman: “Give the woman wings and
she is either an angel or a beast.” Terse as this expression is, it
ought to imply the proper point of view--women are either superior or
inferior to us, and may be both at the same time. There are women who
are superior and there are women who are inferior, and further, a
single woman may be superior to us in some qualities and inferior in
others, but she is not like us in any. The statement that woman is as
complete in her own right as man is in his, agrees with the attitude
above-mentioned if we correlate the superiority and inferiority of women
with “purposefulness.” We judge a higher or lower organism from our
standpoint of power to know, feel, and do, but we judge without
considering whether these organisms imply or not the purposes we assume
for them. Thus a uniform, monotonous task which is easy but requires
uninterrupted attention can be better performed by an average, patient,
unthinking individual, than by a genial fiery intellect. The former is
much more to the purpose of this work than the latter, but he does not
stand higher. The case is so with woman. For many of the purposes
assigned to her, she is better constructed. But whether this
construction, from our standpoint of knowing and feeling, is to be
regarded as higher or lower is another question.

Hence, we are only in a sense correct, when calling some feminine trait
which does not coincide with our own a poorer, inferior quality. We are
likely to overlook the fact that this quality taken in itself, is the
right one for the nature and the tasks of woman, whereas we ought with
the modern naturalist assume that every animal has developed correctly
for its own purposes. If this were not the case with woman she would be
the first exception to the laws of natural evolution. Hence, our task is
not to seek out peculiarities and rarities in woman, but to study her
status and function as given her by nature. Then we shall see that what
we would otherwise have called extraordinary appears as natural
necessity. Of course many of the feminine qualities will not bring us
back to the position which has required them. Then we may or may not be
able to infer it according to the laws of general co-existence, but
whether we establish anything directly or indirectly must be for the
time, indifferent; we do know the fact before us. If we find only the
pelvis of a human skeleton we should be able to infer from its broad
form that it belonged to a woman and should be able to ground this
inference on the business of reproduction which is woman’s. But we shall
also be able, although we have only the pelvis before us, to make
reliable statements concerning the position of the bones of the lower
extremities of _this_ individual. And we shall be able to say just what
the form of the thorax and the curve of the vertebral column were. This,
also, we shall have in our power, more or less, to ground on the
child-bearing function of woman. But we might go still further and say
that this individual, who, according to its pelvic cavity, was a woman,
must have had a comparatively smaller skull, and although we can not
correlate the present mark with the child-bearing function or any other
special characteristic of woman, we may yet infer it safely, because we
know that this smaller skull capacity stands in regular relation to the
broad pelvis, etc. In a like manner it will be possible to bring
together collectively various psychical differences of woman, to define
a number of them as directly necessary, and to deduce another number
from their regular co-existence. The certainty here will be the same as
in the former case, and once it is attained we shall be able
satisfactorily to interpret the conduct, etc., of woman.

Before turning to feminine psychology I should like briefly to touch
upon the use of the literature in our question and indicate that the
poets’ results are not good for us so long as we are trying to satisfy
our particular legal needs. We might, of course, refer to the poet for
information concerning the feminine heart,--woman’s most important
property,--but the historically famous knowers of the woman’s heart
leave us in the lurch and even lead us into decided errors. We are not
here concerned with the history of literature, nor with the solution of
the “dear riddle of woman;” we are dry-souled lawyers who seek to avoid
mistakes at the expense of the honor and liberty of others, and if we do
not want to believe the poets it is only because of many costly
mistakes. Once we were all young and had ideals. What the poets told us
we supposed to be the wisdom of life--nobody else ever offers any--and
we wanted compulsorily to solve the most urgent of human problems with
our poetical views. Illusions, mistakes, and guiltless remorse, were the
consequence of this topsy-turvy work.

Of course I do not mean to drag our poets to court and accuse them of
seducing our youth with false gods--I am convinced that if the poets
were asked they would tell us that their poetry was intended for all
save for physicians and criminalists. But it is conceivable that they
have introduced points of view that do not imply real life. Poetical
forms do not grow up naturally, and then suddenly come together in a
self-originated idea. The poet creates the idea first, and in order that
this may be so the individual form must evolve according to sense. The
more natural and inevitable this process becomes the better the poem,
but it does not follow that since we do not doubt it because it seems so
natural, it mirrors the process of life. Not one of us criminalists has
ever seen a form as described in a poem--least of all a woman.
Obviously, in our serious and dry work, we may be able to interpret many
an observation and assertion of the poet as a golden truth, but only
when we have tested its correctness for the daily life. But it must be
understood that I am not saying here, that we ourselves might have been
able to make the observation, or to abstract a truth from the flux of
appearances, or at least to set it in beautiful, terse, and I might say
convincing, form. I merely assert, that we must be permitted to examine
whether what has been beautifully said may be generalized, and whether
we then have found the same, or a similar thing, in the daily life.
Paradoxical as it sounds, we must never forget that there is a kind of
evidentiality in the form of beauty itself. One of Klopstock’s
remarkable psalms begins: “Moons wander round the earth, earths round
suns, the whole host of suns wander round a greater sun, Our Father,
that art thou.” In this inexpressibly lofty verse there is essentially,
and only in an extremely intensified fashion, evidence of the existence
of God, and if the convinced atheist should read this verse he would, at
least for the moment, believe in his existence. At the same time, a real
development of evidence is neither presented nor intended. There are
magnificent images, unassailable true propositions: the moon goes round
about the earth, the earth about the sun, the whole system around a
central sun--and now without anything else, the fourth proposition
concerning the identity of the central sun with our heavenly Father is
added as true. And the reader is captivated for at least a minute! What
I have tried here to show by means of a drastic example occurs many
times in poems, and is especially evident where woman is the subject, so
that we may unite in believing that the poet can not teach us that
subject, that he may only lead us into errors.

To learn about the nature of woman and its difference from that of man
we must drop everything poetical. Most conscientiously we must drop all
cynicism and seek to find illumination only in serious disciplines.
These disciplines may be universal history and the history of culture,
but certainly not memoirs, which always represent subjective experience
and one-sided views. Anatomy, physiology, anthropology, and serious
special literature, presupposed, may give us an unprejudiced outlook,
and then with much effort we may observe, compare, and renew our tests
of what has been established, sine ira et studio, sine odio et gratia.

I subjoin a list of sources and of especial literature which also
contains additional references.[253]


Section 64. 2. _Difference between Man and Women._

There are many attempts to determine the difference between the feminine
and masculine psyche. Volkmar in his “Textbook of Psychology” has
attempted to review these experiments. But the individual instances show
how impossible is clear and definite statement concerning the matter.
Much is too broad, much too narrow; much is unintelligible, much at
least remotely correct only if one knows the outlook of the discoverer
in question, and is inclined to agree with him. Consider the following
series of contrasts.

      _Male_                        _Female_
  Individuality          Receptivity (Burdach, Berthold)
  Activity               Passivity (Daub, Ulrici, Hagemann)
  Leadership             Imitativeness (Schleiermacher)
  Vigor                  Sensitivity to stimulation (Beneke)
  Conscious activity     Unconscious activity (Hartmann)
  Conscious deduction    Unconscious induction (Wundt)
  Will                   Consciousness (Fischer)
  Independence           Completeness (Krause, Lindemann)
  Particularity          Generally generic (Volkmann)
  Negation               Affirmation (Hegel and his school)

None of these contrasts are satisfactory, many are unintelligible.
Burdach’s is correct only within limits and Hartmann’s is approximately
true if you accept his point of view. I do not believe that these
explanations would help anybody or make it easier for him to understand
woman. Indeed, to many a man they will appear to be saying merely that
the psyche of the male is masculine, that of the female feminine. The
thing is not to be done with epigrams however spirited. Epigrams merely
tend to increase the already great confusion.

Hardly more help toward understanding the subject is to be derived from
certain expressions which deal with a determinate and also with a
determining trait of woman. For example, the saying, “On forbidden
ground woman is cautious and man keen,” may, under some circumstances,
be of great importance in a criminal case, particularly when it is
necessary to fix the sex of the criminal. If the crime was cautiously
committed a woman may be inferred, and if swiftly, a man. But that maxim
is deficient in two respects. Man and woman deal in the way described,
not only in forbidden fields, but generally. Again, such characteristics
may be said to be ordinary but in no wise regulative: there are enough
cases in which the woman was much keener than the man and the man much
more cautious than the woman.

The greatest danger of false conceptions lies in the attribution of an
unproved peculiarity to woman, by means of some beautifully expressed,
and hence, apparently true, proverb. Consider the well known maxim: Man
forgives a beautiful woman everything, woman nothing. Taken in itself
the thing is true; we find it in the gossip of the ball-room, and in the
most dreadful of criminal cases. Men are inclined to reduce the conduct
of a beautiful sinner to the mildest and least offensive terms, while
her own sex judge her the more harshly in the degree of her beauty and
the number of its partisans. Now it might be easy in an attempt to draw
the following consequences from the correctness of this proposition: Men
are generally inclined to forgive in kindness, women are the unforgiving
creatures. This inference would be altogether unjustified, for the maxim
only incidentally has woman for its subject; it might as well read:
Woman forgives a handsome man everything, man nothing. What we have at
work here is the not particularly remarkable fact that envy plays a
great rôle in life.

Another difficulty in making use of popular truths in our own
observations, lies in their being expressed in more or less definite
images. If you say, for example, “Man begs with words, woman with
glances,” you have a proposition that might be of use in many criminal
cases, inasmuch as things frequently depend on the demonstration that
there was or was not an amour between two people (murder of a husband,
relation of the widow with a suspect).

Now, of course, the judge could not see how they conversed together, how
he spoke stormily and she turned her eyes away. But suppose that the
judge has gotten hold of some letters--then if he makes use of the
maxim, he will observe that the man becomes more explicit than the
woman, who, up to a certain limit, remains ashamed. So if the man speaks
very definitely in his letters, there is no evidence contradictory to
the inference of their relationship, even though nothing similar is to
be found in her letters. The thing may be expressed in another maxim:
What he wants is in the lines; what she wants between the lines.

The great difficulty of distinguishing between man and woman is
mentioned in “Levana oder Erziehungslehre,” by Jean Paul, who says, “A
woman can not love her child and the four continents of the world at the
same time. A man can.” But who has ever seen a man love four continents?
“He loves the concept, she the appearance, the particular.” What lawyer
understands this? And this? “So long as woman loves, she loves
continuously, but man has lucid intervals.” This fact has been otherwise
expressed by Grabbe, who says: “For man the world is his heart, for
woman her heart is the world.” And what are we to learn from this? That
the love of woman is greater and fills her life more? Certainly not. We
only see that man has more to do than woman, and this prevents him from
depending on his impressions, so that he can not allow himself to be
completely captured by even his intense inclinations. Hence the old
proverb: Every new affection makes man more foolish and woman wiser,
meaning that man is held back from his work and effectiveness by every
inclination, while woman, each time, gathers new experiences in life. Of
course, man also gets a few of these, but he has other and more valuable
opportunities of getting them, while woman, who has not his position in
the midst of life, must gather her experiences where she may.

Hence, it remains best to stick to simple, sober discoveries which may
be described without literary glamour, and which admit of no exception.
Such is the statement by Friedreich[254]: “Woman is more excitable, more
volatile and movable spiritually, than man; the mind dominates the
latter, the emotions the former. Man thinks more, woman senses more.”
These ungarnished, clear words, which offer nothing new, still contain
as much as may be said and explained. We may perhaps supplement them
with an expression of Heusinger’s, “Women have much reproductive but
little productive imaginative power. Hence, there are good landscape and
portrait painters among women, but as long as women have painted there
has not been any great woman-painter of history. They make poems,
romances, and sonnets, but not one of them has written a good tragedy.”
This expression shows that the imaginative power of woman is really more
reproductive than productive, and it may be so observed in crimes and
in the testimony of witnesses.

In crimes, this fact will not be easy to observe in the deed itself, or
in the manner of its execution; it will be observable in the nature of
the plan used. To say that the plan indicates productive creation would
not be to call it original. Originality can not be indicated, without
danger of misunderstanding, by means of even a single example; we have
simply to cling to the paradigm of Heusinger, and to say, that when the
plan of a criminal act appears more independent and more completely
worked out, it may be assumed to be of masculine origin; if it seeks
support, however, if it is an imitation of what has already happened, if
it aims to find outside assistance during its execution, its originator
was a woman. This truth goes so far that in the latter case the woman
must be fixed upon as the intellectual source of the plan, even though
the criminal actually was a man. The converse inference could hardly be
held with justice. If a man has thought out a plan which a woman is to
execute, its fundamental lines are wiped out and the woman permits the
productive aspect of the matter to disappear, or to become so indefinite
that any sure conclusion on the subject is impossible.

Our phenomenon is equally important in statements by witnesses. In many
a case in which we suppose the whole or a portion of a witness’s
testimony to be incorrect, intentionally invented, or involuntarily
imagined, we may succeed in extracting a part of the testimony as
independent construction, and thus determining what might be incorrect
in it. If, when this happens, the witness is a man and his lies show
themselves in productive form, and if the witness is a woman and her
lies appear to be reproduced, it is possible, at least, that we are
being told untruths. The procedure obviously does not in itself contain
anything evidential, but it may at least excite suspicion and thus
caution, and that, in many cases, is enough. I may say of my own work
that I have often gained much advantage from this method. If there were
any suspicion that the testimony of a witness, especially the conception
of some committed crime, was untrue, I recalled Heusinger, and asked
myself “If the thing is untrue, is it a sonnet or a tragedy?” If the
answer was “tragedy” and the witness a man, or, if the answer was
“sonnet” and the witness a woman, I concluded that everything was
possibly invented, and grew quite cautious. If I could come to no
conclusion, I was considerably helped by Heusinger’s other proposition,
asking myself, “Flower-pictures or historical subjects?” And here again
I found something to go by, and the need to be suspicious. I repeat, no
evidence is to be attained in this way, but we frequently win when we
are warned beforehand.


(3) _Sexual Peculiarities._


Section 65. (a) General Considerations.

Even if we know that hunger and love are not the only things that
sustain impulse, we also know the profound influence that love and all
that depends upon it exercise from time immemorial on the course of
events. This being generally true, the question of the influence of sex
on woman is more important than that of its influence on man, for a
large number of profound conditions are at work in the former which are
absent in the latter. Hence, it is in no way sufficient to consider only
the physiological traits of the somatic life of woman, i.e.,
menstruation, pregnancy, child-birth, the suckling period, and finally
the climacterium. We must study also the possibly still more important
psychical conditions which spring from the feminine nature and are
developed by the demands of civilization and custom. We must ask what it
means to character when an individual is required from the moment
puberty begins, to conceal something for a few days every month; what it
means when this secrecy is maintained for a long time during pregnancy,
at least toward children and the younger people. Nor can it be denied
that the custom which demands more self-control in women must exercise a
formative influence on their natures. Our views do not permit the woman
to show without great indirection whom she hates or whom she likes; nor
may she indicate clearly whom she loves, nor must she appear solicitous.
Everything must happen indirectly, secretly, and approximately, and if
this need is inherited for centuries, it must, as a characteristic,
impart a definite expression to the sex. This expression is of great
importance to the criminalist; it is often enough to recall these
circumstances in order to find explanation for a whole series of
phenomena. What differences the modern point of view and modern
tendencies will make remains to be seen.

Let us now consider particular characteristics.


Section 66. (b) Menstruation.

We men, in our own life, have no analogy, not even a remote one, to this
essentially feminine process. In the mental life of woman it is of
greater importance than we are accustomed to suppose. In most cases in
which it may be felt that the fact of menstruation influences a crime or
a statement of facts, it will be necessary to make use of the court
physician, who must report to the judge. The latter absolutely must
understand the fact and influence of menstruation. Of course he must
also have general knowledge of the whole matter, but he must require the
court physician definitely to tell him when the event began and whether
any diseased conditions were apparent. Then it is the business of the
judge to interpret the physician’s report psychologically--and the judge
knows neither more nor less psychology, according to his training, than
the physician. Any text-book on physiology will give the important facts
about menstruation. It is important for us to know that menses begin, in
our climate, from the thirteenth to the fifteenth year, and end between
the forty-fifth and the fiftieth year. The periods are normally a solar
month--from twenty-seven to twenty-eight days, and the menstruation
lasts from three to five days. After its conclusion the sexual impulse,
even in otherwise frigid women, is in most cases intensified. It is
important, moreover, to note the fact that most women, during their
periods, show a not insignificant alteration of their mental lives,
often exhibiting states of mind that are otherwise foreign to them.

As in many cases it is impossible without other justification to ask
whether menses have begun, it is worth while knowing that most women
menstruate, according to some authorities, during the first quarter of
the moon, and that only a few menstruate during the new or full moon.
The facts are very questionable, but we have no other cues for
determining that menstruation is taking place. Either the popularly
credited signs of it (e.g., a particular appearance, a significant
shining of the eyes, bad odor from the mouth, or susceptibility to
perspiration) are unreliable, or there are such signs as feeling unwell,
tension in the back, fatigue in the bones, etc., which are much more
simply and better discovered by direct interrogation, or examination by
a physician.

If there is any suspicion that menstruation has influenced testimony or
a crime, and if the other, especially the above-mentioned facts, are not
against it, we are called upon to decide whether we are considering a
mental event, due to the influence of menstruation. Icard[255] has
written the best monograph on this subject.

Considering the matter in detail, our attention is first called to the
importance of the beginning of menstruation. Never is a girl more
tender or quiet, never more spiritual and attractive, nor more inclined
to good sense, than in the beginning of puberty, generally a little
before the menstrual periods have begun, or have become properly
ordered. At this time, then, the danger that the young girl may commit a
crime is very small, perhaps smaller than at any other time. And hence,
it is the more to be feared that such a creature may become the victim
of the passions of a roué, or may cause herself the greatest harm by
mistaken conduct. This is the more possible when the circumstances are
such that the child has little to do, though naturally gifted. Unused
spiritual qualities, ennui, waking sensitivity and charm, make a
dangerous mixture, which is expressed as a form of interest in exciting
experiences, in the romantic, or at least the unusual. Sexual things are
perhaps wholly, or partly not understood, but their excitation is
present and the results are the harmless dreams of extraordinary
experiences. The danger is in these, for from them may arise fantasies,
insufficiently justified principles, and inclination to deceit. Then all
the prerequirements are present which give rise to those well-known
cases of unjust complaints, false testimony about seduction, rape,
attempts at rape and even arson, accusing letters, and slander.[256]
Every one of us is sufficiently familiar with such accusations, every
one of us knows how frequently we can not sufficiently marvel how such
and such an otherwise quiet, honest, and peaceful girl could perform
things so incomprehensible. If an investigation had been made to see
whether the feat did not occur at the time of her first mensis; if the
girl had been watched during her next mensis to determine whether some
fresh significant alteration occurred, the police physician might
possibly have been able to explain the event. I know many cases of
crimes committed by half-grown girls who would under no circumstances
have been accused of them; among them arson, lese majeste, the writing
of numerous anonymous letters, and a slander by way of complaining of a
completely fanciful seduction. In one of these cases we succeeded in
showing that the girl in question had committed her crime at the time of
her first mensis; that she was otherwise quiet and well conducted, and
that she showed at her next mensis some degree of significant unrest and
excitement. As soon as the menses got their proper adjustment not one of
the earlier phenomena could be observed, and the child exhibited no
further inclination to commit crimes.[257]

Creatures like her undergo similar danger when they have to make
statements about perceptions which are either interesting in themselves,
or have occurred in an interesting way. Here caution must be exercised
in two directions. First: Discover whether the child in question was
passing through her monthly period at the time when she saw the event
under discussion, or when she was telling about it. In the former case,
she has told of more than could have been perceived; in the second case
she develops the delusion that she had seen more than she really had.
How unreliable the testimony of youthful girls is, and what mistakes it
has caused, are familiar facts, but too little attention is paid to the
fact that this unreliability is not permanent with the individuals, and
in most cases changes into complete trustworthiness. As a rule, the
criminal judge is almost never in a position to determine the
inconsistencies in the testimony of a menstruating girl, inasmuch as he
sees her, at most, just a few times, and can not at those times observe
differences in her love for truth. Fortunately the statements of newly
menstruating girls, when untrue, are very characteristic, and present
themselves in the form of something essentially romantic, extraordinary,
and interesting. If we find this tendency of transforming simple daily
events into extraordinary experiences, then, if the testimony of the
girl does not agree with that of other witnesses, etc., we are warned.
Still greater assurance is easy to gain, by examining persons who know
the girl well on her trustworthiness and love of truth before this time.
If their statements intensify the suspicion that menses have been an
influence, it is not too much to ask directly, to re-examine, and, if
necessary, to call in medical aid in order to ascertain the truth. The
direct question is in a characteristically great number of cases
answered falsely. If in such cases we learn that the observation was
made or the testimony given at the menstrual period, we may assume it
probably justifiable to suspect great exaggeration, if not pure
invention.

The menstrual period tends, at all ages from the youngest child to the
full-grown woman, to modify the quality of perception and the truth of
description. Von Reichenbach[258] writes that sensitivity is intensified
during the menstrual period, and even if this famous discoverer has said
a number of crazy things on the subject, his record is such that he must
be regarded as a clever man and an excellent observer. There is no doubt
that his sensitive people were simply very nervous individuals who
reacted vigorously to all external stimulations, and inasmuch as his
views agree with others, we may assume that his observation shows at
least how emotional, excitable, and inclined to fine perceptions
menstruating women are. It is well-known how sharpened sense-perception
becomes under certain conditions of ill-health. Before you get a cold in
the head, the sense of smell is regularly intensified; certain headaches
are accompanied with an intensification of hearing so that we are
disturbed by sounds that otherwise we should not hear at all; every
bruised place on the body is very sensitive to touch. All in all, we
must believe that the senses of woman, especially her skin sensations,
the sensations of touch, are intensified during the menstrual period,
for at that time her body is in a “state of alarm.” This fact is
important in many ways. It is not improbable that one menstruating woman
shall have heard, seen, felt, and smelt, things which others, and she
herself, would not have perceived at another time. Again, if we trace
back many a conception of menstruating women we learn that the boundary
between more delicate sensating and sensibility can not be easily drawn.
Here we may see the universal transition from sensibility to acute
excitability which is a source of many quarrels. The witness, the
wounded, or accused are all, to a considerable degree, under its
influence. It is a generally familiar fact that the incomparably larger
number of complaints of attacks on women’s honor, fall through. It would
be interesting to know just how such complaints of menstruating women
occur. Of course, nobody can determine this statistically, but it is a
fact that such trials are best conducted, never exactly four weeks after
the crime, nor four weeks after the accusation. For if most of the
complaints of menstruating women are made at the period of their menses,
they are just as excited four weeks later, and opposed to every attempt
at adjustment. This is the much-verified fundamental principle! I once
succeeded by its use in helping a respectable, peace-loving citizen of a
small town, whose wife made uninterrupted complaints of inuriam causa,
and got the answer that his wife was an excellent soul, but, “gets the
devil in her during her monthlies, and tries to find occasions for
quarrels with everybody and finds herself immediately much insulted.”

A still more suspicious quality than the empty capacity for anger is
pointed out by Lombroso,[259] who says that woman during menstruation is
inclined to anger and to falsification. In this regard Lombroso may be
correct, inasmuch as the lie may be combined with the other qualities
here observed. We often note that most honorable women lie in the most
shameless fashion. If we find no other motive and we know that the woman
periodically gets into an abnormal condition, we are at least justified
in the presupposition that the two are coordinate, and that the periodic
condition is cause of the otherwise rare feminine lie. Here also, we are
required to be cautious, and if we hear significant and not otherwise
confirmed assertions from women, we must bear in mind that they may be
due to menstruation.

But we may go still further. Du Saulle[260] asserts on the basis of
far-reaching investigations, that a significant number of thefts in
Parisian shops are committed frequently by the most elegant ladies
during their menstrual period, and this in no fewer than 35 cases out of
36, while 10 more cases occurred at the beginning of the period.

Other authorities[261] who have studied this matter have shown how the
presentation of objects women much desire leads to theft. Grant that
during her mensis the woman is in a more excitable and less actively
resisting condition, and it may follow she might be easily overpowered
by the seductive quality of pretty jewelry and other knickknacks. This
possibility leads us, however, to remoter conclusions. Women desire more
than merely pretty things, and are less able to resist their desires
during their periods. If they are less able to resist in such things,
they are equally less able to resist in other things. In handling those
thefts which were formerly called kleptomaniac, and which, in spite of
the refusal to use this term, are undeniable, it is customary, if they
recur repeatedly, to see whether pregnancy is not the cause. It is well
to consider also the influence of menstruation.

Menstruation may bring women even to the most terrible crimes. Various
authors cite numerous examples in which otherwise sensible women have
been driven to the most inconceivable things--in many cases to murder.
Certainly such crimes will be much more numerous if the abnormal
tendency is unknown to the friends of the woman, who should watch her
carefully during this short, dangerous period.

The fact is familiar that the disturbances of menstruation lead to
abnormal psychoses. This type of mental disease develops so quietly
that in numerous cases the maladies are overlooked, and hence it is more
easily possible, since they are transitive, to interpret them commonly
as “nervous excitement,” or to pay no attention to them, although they
need it.[262]


Section 67. (c) Pregnancy.

We may speak of the conditions and effects of pregnancy very briefly.
The doubt of pregnancy will be much less frequent than that of
menstruation, for the powerful influence of pregnancy on the psychic
life of woman is well-known, and it is hence the more important to call
in the physician in cases of crimes committed by pregnant women, or in
cases of important testimony to be given by such women. But, indeed, the
frequently obvious remarkable desires, the significant conduct, and the
extraordinary, often cruel, impulses, which influence pregnant women,
and for the appearance of which the physician is to be called in, are
not the only thing. The most difficult and most far-reaching conditions
of pregnancy are the purely psychical ones which manifest themselves in
the sometimes slight, sometimes more obvious alterations in the woman’s
point of view and capacity for producing an event. In themselves they
seem of little importance, but they occasion such a change in the
attitude of an individual toward a happening which she must describe to
the judge, that the change may cause a change in the judgment. I repeat
here also, that it may be theoretically said, “The witness must tell us
facts, and only facts,” but this is not really so. Quite apart from the
fact that the statement of any perception contains a judgment, it
depends also and always on the point of view, and this varies with the
emotional state. If, then, we have never experienced any of the
emotional alteration to which a pregnant woman is subject, we must be
able to interpret it logically in order to hit on the correct thing. We
set aside the altered somatic conditions of the mother, the disturbance
of the conditions of nutrition and circulation; we need clearly to
understand what it means to have assumed care about a developing
creature, to know that a future life is growing up fortunately or
unfortunately, and is capable of bringing joy or sorrow, weal or woe to
its parents. The woman knows that her condition is an endangerment of
her own life, that it brings at least pains, sufferings, and
difficulties (as a rule, over-estimated by the pregnant woman).
Involuntarily she feels, whether she be educated or uneducated, the
secrecy, the elusiveness of the growing life she bears, the life which
is to come out into the world, and to bring its mother’s into jeopardy
thereby. She feels nearer death, and the various tendencies which are
attached to this feeling are determined by the nature and the conditions
of each particular future mother’s sensations. How different may be the
feeling of a poor abandoned bride who is expecting a child, from that of
a young woman who knows that she is to bring into the world the
eagerly-desired heir of name and fortune. Consider the difference
between the feeling of a sickly proletarian, richly blessed with
children, who knows that the new child is an unwelcome superfluity whose
birth may perhaps rob the other helpless children of their mother, with
the feeling of a comfortable, thoroughly healthy woman, who finds no
difference between having three or having four children.

And if these feelings are various, must they not be so intense and so
far-reaching as to influence the attitude of the woman toward some event
she has observed? It may be objected that the subjective attitude of a
witness will never influence a judge, who can easily discover the
objective truth in the one-sided observation of an event. But let us not
deceive ourselves, let us take things as they are. Subjective attitude
may become objective falsehood in spite of the best endeavor of the
witness, and the examiner may fail altogether to distinguish between
what is truth and what poetry. Further, in many instances the witness
must be questioned with regard to the impression the event made on her.
Particularly, if the event can not be described in words.

We must ask whether the witness’s impression was that an attack was
dangerous, a threat serious, a blackmail conceivable, a brawl
intentional, a gesture insulting, an assault premeditated. In these, and
thousands of other cases, we must know the point of view, and are
compelled to draw our deductions from it. And finally, who of us
believes himself to be altogether immune to emotional induction? The
witness describes us the event in definite tones which are echoed to us.
If there are other witnesses the incomplete view may be corrected, but
if there is only one witness, or one whom for some reason we believe
more than others, or if there are several, but equally-trusted
witnesses, the condition, view-point, and “fact,” remain inadequate in
us. Whoever has before him a pregnant woman with her impressions
altered in a thousand ways, may therefore well be “up in the air!”[263]

The older literature which develops an elaborate casuistic concerning
cases in which pregnant women exhibited especial desires, or abnormal
changes in their perceptions and expressions, is in many directions of
considerable importance. We must, however, remember that the old
observations are rarely exact and were always made with less knowledge
than we nowadays possess.


Section 68. (d) Erotic.

A question which is as frequent as it is idle, concerns the degree of
sexual impulse in woman. It is important for the lawyer to know
something about this, of course, for many a sexual crime may be more
properly judged if it is known how far the woman encouraged the man, and
in similar cases the knowledge might help us to presume what attitude
feminine witnesses might take toward the matter. First of all, the needs
of individual women are as different as those of individual men, and as
varied as the need for food, drink, warmth, rest, and a hundred other
animal requirements. We shall be unable to find any standard by
determining even an average. It is useless to say that sexual
sensibility is less in woman than in man; because specialists contradict
each other on this matter. We are not aided either by Sergi’s[264]
assertion, that the sensibility is less than the irritability in woman,
or by Mantegazza’s statement, that women rarely have such powerful
sexual desire that it causes them pain. We can learn here, also, only by
means of the interpretation of good particular observations. When, for
example, the Italian positivists repeatedly assert that woman is less
erotic and more sexual, they mean that man cares more about the
satisfaction of the sexual impulse, woman about the maternal instinct.
This piece of information may help us to explain some cases; at least we
shall understand many a girl’s mistake without needing immediately to
presuppose rape, seduction by means of promises of marriage, etc. Once
we have in mind soberly what fruits dishonor brings to a girl,--scorn
and shame, the difficulties of pregnancy, alienation from relatives,
perhaps even banishment from the paternal home, perhaps the loss of a
good position, then the pains and sorrows of child-birth, care of the
child, reduction of earnings, difficulties and troubles with the child,
difficulties in going about, less prospect of care through
wedlock,--these are of such extraordinary weight, that it is impossible
to adduce so elementary a force to the sexual impulse as to enable it to
veil the outlook upon this outcome of its satisfaction.

The well-known Viennese gynaecologist, Braun, said, “If it were
naturally so arranged that in every wedlock man must bear the second
child, there would be no more than three children in any family.” His
intention is, that even if the woman agrees to have the third child, the
man would be so frightened at the pains of the first child-birth that he
never again would permit himself to bear another. As we can hardly say
that we have any reason for asserting that the sexual needs of woman are
essentially greater, or that woman is better able to bear more pain than
man, we are compelled to believe that there must be in woman an impulse
lacking in man. This impulse must be supposed to be so powerful that it
subdues, let us say briefly, all the fear of an illegitimate or
otherwise undesirable child-birth, and this is the impulse we mean by
sexuality, by the maternal instinct.

It would seem as if nature, at least in isolated cases, desires to
confirm this view. According to Icard there are women who have children
simply for the pleasure of suckling them, the suckling being a pleasant
sensation. If, now, nature has produced a sexual impulse purely for the
sake of preserving the species, she has given fuller expression to
sexuality and the maternal instinct when she has endowed it with an
especial impulse in at least a few definite cases. This impulse will
explain to the criminalist a large number of phenomena, especially the
accommodation of woman to man’s desires; and from this alone he may
deduce a number of otherwise difficultly explainable psychical
phenomena.

There is, of course, a series of facts which deny the existence of this
impulse--but they only seem to. Child-murder, the very frequent cruelty
of mothers to their children, the opposition of very young women to
bearing and bringing up children (cf. the educated among French and
American women), and similar phenomena seem to speak against the
maternal instinct. We must not forget, however, that all impulses come
to an end where the opposed impulse becomes stronger, and that under
given circumstances even the most powerful impulse, that of
self-preservation, may be opposed. All actions of despair, tearing the
beard, beating hands and feet together, rage at one’s own health, and
finally suicide may ensue. If the mother kills her own child, this
action belongs to the same series as self-damage through despair. The
more orderly and numerous actions and feelings in this direction, e.g.,
the disinclination of women toward bearing children, may be explained
also by the fact that it is the consequence of definite conditions of
civilization. If we recall what unnatural, senseless, and half crazy
habits with regard to nutrition, dressing, social adjustments, etc.,
civilization and fashion have forced upon us, we do not need to adduce
real perversity in order to understand how desire for comfort, how
laziness and the scramble for wealth lead to suppression of the maternal
instinct. This may also be called degeneration. There are still other
less important circumstances that seem to speak against the maternal
instinct. These consist primarily in the fact that the sexual impulse
endures to a time when the mother is no longer young enough to bear a
child. We know that the first gray hair in no sense indicates the last
lover, and according to Tait, a period of powerful sex-impulsion ensues
directly after the climacterium. Now of what use, so far as child-birth
is concerned, can such an impulse be?

But because natural instincts endure beyond their period of purposive
efficiency, it does not follow that they are unconnected with that
efficiency; we eat and drink also when the food is superfluous as
nourishment. Wonderfully as nature has adjusted the instincts and
functions to definite purposes, she still has at no point drawn fixed
boundaries and actually destroyed her instrument where the need for it
ceased. Just because nature is elsewhere parsimonious, she seems
frequently extravagant; yet that extravagance is the cheapest means of
attaining the necessary end. Thus, when woman’s passion is no longer
required for the function of motherhood, its impulsion may yet be
counted on for the psychological explanation of more than one criminal
event.

What is important, is to count the maternal instinct as a factor in
criminal situations. If we have done so, we find explanations not only
of sexual impropriety, but of the more subtle questions of the more or
less pure relation between husband and wife. What attitude the woman
takes toward her husband and children, what she demands of them, what
she sacrifices for them, what makes it possible for her to endure an
apparently unendurable situation; what, again, undermines directly and
suddenly, in spite of seemingly small value, her courage in life;--these
are all conditions which appear in countless processes as the
distinguishing and explaining elements, and they are to be understood in
the single term, “maternal instinct.” For a long time the
inexplicability of love and sexual impulse were offered as excuses, but
these otherwise mighty factors had to be assigned such remarkable and
self-contradictory aspects that only one confusion was added to another
and called explanation. Now suppose we try to explain them by means of
the maternal instinct.


Section 69. (e) Submerged Sexual Factors.

The criminal psychologist finds difficulties where hidden impulses are
at work without seeming to have any relation to their results. In such
cases the starting-point for explanation is sought in the wrong
direction. I say starting-point, because “motive” must be conscious, and
“ground” might be misunderstood. We know of countless criminal cases
which we face powerless because we do indeed know the criminal but are
unable to explain the causal connection between him and the crime, or
because, again, we do not know the criminal, and judge from the facts
that we might have gotten a clew if we had understood the psychological
development of the crime. If we seek for “grounds,” we may possibly
think of so many of them as never to approach the right one; if we seek
motives, we may be far misled because we are able only to bring the
criminal into connection with his success, a matter which he must have
had in mind from the beginning. It is ever easy for us when motive and
crime are in open connection: greed, theft; revenge, arson; jealousy,
murder; etc. In these cases the whole business of examination is an
example in arithmetic, possibly difficult, but fundamental. When,
however, from the deed to its last traceable grounds, even to the
attitude of the criminal, a connected series may be discovered and yet
no explanation is forthcoming, then the business of interpretation has
reached its end; we begin to feel about in the dark. If we find nothing,
the situation is comparatively good, but it is exceedingly bad in the
numerous cases in which we believe ourselves to have sighted and pursued
the proper solution.

Such a hidden source or starting-point of very numerous crimes is sex.
That it often works invisibly is due to the sense of shame. Therefore it
is more frequent in women. The hidden sexual starting-point plays its
part in the little insignificant lie of an unimportant woman witness, as
well as in the poisoning of a husband for the sake of a paramour still
to be won. It sails everywhere under a false flag; nobody permits the
passion to show in itself; it must receive another name, even in the
mind of the woman whom it dominates.

The first of the forms which the sexual impulse takes is false piety,
religiosity. This is something ancient. Friedreich points to the
connection between religious activity and the sexual organization, and
cites many stories about saints, like that of the nun Blanbekin, of whom
it was said, “eam scire desiderasse cum lacrimis, et moerore maximo,
ubinam esset praeputium Christi.” The holy Veronica Juliani, in memory
of the lamb of God, took a lamb to bed with her and nursed it at her
breast. Similarly suggestive things are told of St. Catherine of Genoa,
of St. Armela, of St. Elizabeth, of the Child Jesus, etc. Reinhard says
correctly that sweet memories are frequently nothing more or less than
outbursts of hidden passion and attacks of sensual love. Seume is
mistaken in his assertion that mysticism lies mainly in weakness of the
nerves and colic--it lies a span deeper.

The use of this fact is simple. We must discover whether a woman is
morally pure or sensual, etc. This is important, not only in violations
of morality, but in every violation of law. The answers we receive to
questions on this matter are almost without exception worthless or
untrue, because the object of the question is not open to view, is
difficult to observe, and is kept hidden from even the nearest. Our
purpose is, therefore, best attained by directing the question to
religious activity, religiosity, and similar traits. These are not only
easy to perceive, but are openly exhibited because of their nature.
Whoever assumes piety, does so for the sake of other people, therefore
does not hide it. If religious extravagance can be reliably confirmed by
witnesses, it will rarely be a mistake to assume inclination to more or
less stifled sexual pleasure.

Examples of the relationship are known to every one of us, but I want to
cite two out of my own experience as types. In one of them the question
turned on the fact that a somewhat old, unmarried woman had appropriated
certain rather large trust sums and had presented them to her servant.
At first every suspicion of the influence of sex was set aside. Only the
discovery of the fact that in her ostentatious piety she had set up an
altar in her house, and compelled her servant to pray at it in her
company, called attention to the deep interest of this very moral maiden
in her servant.

The second case dealt with the poisoning of an old, impotent husband by
his young wife. The latter was not suspected by anybody, but at her
examination drew suspicion to herself by her unctuous, pious appearance.
She was permitted to express herself at length on religious themes and
showed so very great a love of saints and religious secrets that it was
impossible to doubt that a glowing sensuality must be concealed
underneath this religious ash. Adultery could not be proved, she must
have for one reason or another avoided it, and that her impotent husband
was unsatisfactory was now indubitable. The supposition that she wanted
to get rid of him in order to marry somebody else was now inevitable;
and as this somebody else was looked for and discovered, the adduction
of evidence of her guilt was no longer difficult.

How captious it is to prove direct passion and to attach reasonable
suspicion thereto, and how necessary it is, first of all, to establish
what the concealing material is, is shown in a remark of Kraus,[265] who
asserts that the wife never affects to be passionate with her husband;
her desire is to seduce him and she could not desire that if she were
not passionate. This assertion is only correct in general. It is not,
however, true that woman has no reason for affectation, for there are
enough cases in which some woman, rendered with child by a poor man,
desires to seduce a man of wealth in order to get a wealthy father for
her child. In such and similar cases, the woman could make use of every
trick of seduction without needing to be in the least passionately
disposed.

Another important form of submerged sexuality is ennui. Nobody can say
what ennui is, and everybody knows it most accurately. Nobody would say
that it is burdensome, and yet everybody knows, again, that a large
group of evil deeds spring from ennui. It is not the same as idleness; I
may be idle without being bored, and I may be bored although I am busy.
At best, boredom may be called an attitude which the mind is thrown into
because of an unsatisfied desire for different things. We speak of a
tedious region, a tedious lecture, and tedious company only by way of
metonymy--we always mean the emotional state they put us into. The
internal condition is determinative, for things that are boresome to one
may be very interesting to another. A collection, a library, a lecture,
are all tedious and boresome by transposition of the emotional state to
the objective content, and in this way the idea of boredom gets a wide
scope. We, however, shall speak of boredom as an emotional state. We
find it most frequently among girls, young women, and among undeveloped
or feminine men as a very significant phenomenon. So found, it is that
particular dreamful, happy, or unhappy attitude expressed in desire for
something absent, in quiet reproaches concerning the lack of the
satisfaction of that desire, with the continually recurring wish for
filling out an inner void. The basis of all this is mainly sex. It can
not be proved as such mathematically, but experience shows that the
emotional attitude occurs only in the presence of sexual energy, that it
is lacking when the desires are satisfied, but that otherwise, even the
richest and best substitution can offer no satisfaction. It is not
daring, therefore, to infer the erotic starting-point. Again we see how
the moralizing and training influence of rigidly-required work
suppresses all superfluous states which themselves make express demands
and might want complete satisfaction.

But everything has its limits, and frequently the gentle, still power of
sweet ennui is stronger than the pressure and compulsion of work. When
this power is present, it never results in good, rarely in anything
indifferent, and frequently forbidden fruit ripens slowly in its shadow.
Nobody will assert that ennui is the cause of illicit relations, of
seduction, of adultery and all the many sins that depend on it--from
petty misappropriations for the sake of the beloved, to the murder of
the unloved husband. But ennui is for the criminal psychologist a sign
that the woman was unsatisfied with what she had and wanted something
else. From wishing to willing, from willing to asking, is not such a
great distance. But if we ask the repentant sinner when she began to
think of her criminal action we always learn that she suffered from
incurable ennui, in which wicked thoughts came and still more wicked
plans were hatched. Any experienced criminal psychologist will tell you,
when you ask him, whether he has been much subject to mistakes in trying
to explain women’s crimes from the starting-point of their ennui. The
neighborhood knows of the periods of this ennui, and the sinner thinks
that they are almost discovered if she is asked about them. Cherchez la
femme, cherchez l’amour; cherchez l’ennui; and hundreds of times you
find the solution.

Conceit, too, may be caused by hidden sexuality. We need only to use the
word denotatively, for when we speak of the conceit of a scholar, an
official, or a soldier, we mean properly the desire for fame, the
activity of getting oneself praised and recognized. Conceit proper is
only womanish or a property of feminine men, and just as, according to
Darwin, the coloration of birds, insects, and even plants serves only
the purposes of sexual selection and has, therefore, sexual grounds, so
also the conceit of woman has only sexual purpose. She is conceited for
men alone even though through the medium of other women. As Lotze wrote
in his “Mikrokosmus,” “Everything that calls attention to her person
without doing her any harm is instinctively used by woman as a means in
sexual conflict.” There is much truth in the terms “means” and “sexual
conflict.” The man takes the battle up directly, and if we deal with
this subject without frills we may not deny that animals behave just as
men do. The males battle directly with each other for the sake of the
females, who are compelled to study how to arouse this struggle for
their person, and thus hit upon the use of conceit in sexual conflict.
That women are conceited does not much matter to us criminal
psychologists; we know it and do not need to be told. But the forms in
which their conceit expresses itself are important; its consequences and
its relation to other conditions are important.

To make use of feminine conceit in the court-room is not an art but an
unpermissible trick which might lead too far. Whoever wants to succeed
with women, as Madame de Rieux says, “must bring their self-love into
play.” And St. Prospère: “Women are to be sought not through their
senses--their weakness is in their heart and conceit.” These properties
are, however, so powerful that they may easily lead to deception. If the
judge does not understand how to follow this prescription it does no
good, but if he does understand it he has a weapon with which woman may
be driven too far, and then wounded pride, anger, and even suggestion
work in far too vigorous a manner. For example, a woman wants to defend
her lover before the judge. Now, if the latter succeeds by the
demonstration of natural true facts in wounding her conceit, in
convincing her that she is betrayed, harmed, or forgotten by her
protected lover, or if she is merely made to believe this, she goes, in
most cases, farther than she can excuse, and accuses and harms him as
much as possible; tries, if she is able, to destroy him--whether rightly
or wrongly she does not care. She has lost her lover and nobody else
shall have him. “Feminine conceit,” says Lombroso, “explains itself
especially in the fact that the most important thing in the life of
woman is the struggle for men.” This assertion is strengthened by a long
series of examples and historical considerations and can serve as a
guiding thread in many labyrinthine cases. First of all, it is important
to know in many trials whether a woman has already taken up this
struggle for men, i.e., whether she has a lover, or wishes to have a
lover. If it can be shown that she has suddenly become conceited, or her
conceit has been really intensified, the question has an unconditionally
affirmative answer. Frequently enough one may succeed even in
determining the particular man, by ascertaining with certainty the time
at which this conceit first began, and whether it had closer or more
distant reference to some man. If these conditions, once discovered, are
otherwise at all confirmed, and there are no mistakes in observation,
the inference is inevitably certain.

We learn much concerning feminine conceit when we ask how a man could
have altered the inclination of a woman whose equal he in no sense was.
It is not necessary in such cases to fuss about the insoluble riddle of
the female heart and about the ever-dark secrets of the feminine soul.
Vulpes vult fraudem, lupus agnum, femina laudem--this illuminates every
profundity. The man in question knew how to make use of laudem--he knew
how to excite feminine conceit, and so vanquished others who were worth
much more than he.

This goes so far that by knowing the degree of feminine conceit we know
also the vivacity of feminine sexuality, and the latter is
criminologically important. Heinroth[266] says, “The feminine
individual, so long as it has demands to make, or believes itself to
have them, has utmost self-confidence. Conceit is the sexual
characteristic.” And we may add, “and the standard of sexuality.” As
soon as the child has the first ribbon woven into its hair, sexuality
has been excited. It increases with the love of tinsel and glitter and
dies when the aging female begins to neglect herself and to go about
unwashed. Woman lies when she asserts that everything is dead in her
heart, and sits before you neatly and decoratively dressed; she lies
when she says that she still loves her husband, and at the same time
shows considerable carelessness about her body and clothes; she lies
when she assures you that she has always been the same and her conceit
has come or gone. These statements constitute unexceptionable rules. The
use of them involves no possible error.

We have now the opportunity to understand what feminine knowledge is
worth and in what degree it is reliable. This is no place to discuss the
capacity of the feminine brain, and to venture into the dangerous field
which Schopenhauer and his disciples and modern anthropologists have
entered merely to quarrel in. The judge’s business is the concrete case
in which he must test the expressions of a woman when they depend upon
real or apparent knowledge, either just as he must test the testimony of
any other witness, or by means of experts. We shall therefore indicate
only the symptomatic value of feminine knowledge with regard to feminine
conceit. According to Lotze, women go to theater and to church only to
show their clothes and to appear artistic and pious; while M.
d’Arconville says, that women learn only that it may be said of them,
“They are scholars,” but for knowledge they care not at all.

This is important because we are likely, with regard to knowledge in the
deepest sense of the word, to be frequently unjust to women. We are
accustomed to suppose that the accumulation of some form of knowledge
must have some definite, hence causally related, connection with
purpose. We ask why the scholar is interested in his subject, why he has
sought this knowledge? And in most cases we find the right reason when
we have found the logical connection and have sought it logically. This
might have explained difficult cases, but not where the knowledge of
women is concerned. Women are interested in art, literature, and
science, mainly out of conceit, but they care also for hundreds of other
little things in order, by the knowledge of them, to show off as
scholars. Conceit and curiosity are closely related. Women therefore
often attain information that might cause them to be listed as suspects
if it could not be harmlessly explained by conceit. Conceit, however,
has itself to be explained by the struggle for men, because woman knows
instinctively that she can use knowledge in this struggle. And this
struggle for the other sex frequently betrays woman’s own crime, or the
crime of others. Somebody said that Eve’s first thought after eating the
apple was: “How does my fig-leaf fit?” It is a tasteful notion, that
Eve, who needed only to please her Adam, thought only of this after all
the sorrow of the first sin! But it is true, and we may imagine Eve’s
state of mind to be as follows: “Shall I now please him more or less?”
It is characteristic that the question about dress is said to have been
the _first_ question. It shows the power of conceit, the swiftness with
which it presses to the front. Indeed, of all crimes against property
half would have remained undiscovered if the criminals had been
self-controlled enough to keep their unjustly acquired gains dark for a
while. That they have not, constitutes the hope of every judge for the
discovery of the criminal, and the hope is greater with the extent of
the theft. It may be assumed that the criminal exhibits the fruits of
his crime, but that it is difficult to discover when there is not much
of it. This general rule is much more efficacious among women than
among men, for which reason a criminalist who suspects some person
thinks rather of arresting this person’s wife or mistress than himself.
When the apprentice steals something from his master, his girl gets a
new shawl, and that is not kept in the chest but immediately decorates
the shoulders of the girl. Indeed, women of the profoundest culture can
not wait a moment to decorate themselves with their new gauds, and we
hear that gypsies, who have been caught in some fresh crime, are
betrayed mainly by the fact that the women who had watched the house to
be robbed had been trying on bits of clothing while the men were still
inside cleaning the place up. What was most important for the women was
to meet the men already decorated anew when the men would finally come
back.

The old maid is, from the sexual standpoint, legally important because
she is in herself rather different from other women, and hence must be
differently understood. The properties assigned to these very pitiful
creatures are well-known. Many of the almost exclusively unpleasant
peculiarities assigned to them they may be said really to possess. The
old maid has failed in her natural function and thus exhibits all that
is implied in this accident; bitterness, envy, unpleasantness, hard
judgment of others’ qualities and deeds, difficulty in forming new
relationships, exaggerated fear and prudery, the latter mainly as
simulation of innocence. It is a well-known fact that every experienced
judge may confirm that old maids (we mean here, always, childless,
unmarried women of considerable age--not maids in the anatomical sense)
as witnesses, always bring something new. If you have heard ten
mutually-corroborating statements and the eleventh is made by an old
maid, it will be different. The latter, according to her nature, has
observed differently, introduces a collection of doubts and suggestions,
introduces nasty implications into harmless things, and if possible,
connects her own self with the matter. This is as significant as
explicable. The poor creature has not gotten much good out of life, has
never had a male protector, was frequently enough defenseless against
scorn and teasing, the amenities of social life and friendship were
rarely her portion. It is, therefore, almost inevitable that she should
see evil everywhere. If she has observed some quarrel from her window
she will testify that the thing was provoked in order to disturb her; if
a coachman has run over a child, she suggests that he had been driving
at her in order to frighten her; the thief who broke into her neighbor’s
house really wanted to break into hers because she is without
protection and therefore open to all attacks, so that it is conceivable
that he should want to hurt her. As a rule there will be other
witnesses, or the old maid will be so energetic in her testimonies that
her “perceptions” will not do much damage, but it is always wise to be
cautious.

Of course, there are exceptions, and it is well-known that exceptions
occur by way of extreme contrast. If an old maid does not possess the
unpleasant characteristics of her breed, she is extraordinarily kind and
lovable, in such a way generally, that her all too mild and rather blind
conceptions of an event make her a dangerous witness. It is also true
that old maids frequently are better educated and more civilized than
other women, as De Quincey shows. They are so because, without the care
of husband and children, they have time for all kinds of excellences,
especially when they are inclined thereto. It is notable that the
founders of women’s charitable societies are generally old maids or
childless widows, who have not had the joys and tasks of motherhood. We
must take care, therefore, in judging the kindness of a woman, against
being blinded by her philanthropic activity. That may be kindness, but
as a rule it may have its source in the lack of occupation, and in
striving for some form of motherhood. In judging old maids we deceive
ourselves still more easily because, as Darwin keenly noted, they always
have some masculine quality in their external appearance as well as in
their activity and feeling. Now that kind of woman is generally strange
to us. We start wrong when we judge her by customary standards and miss
the point when, in the cases of such old maids, we presuppose only
feminine qualities and overlook the very virile additions. We may add to
these qualities the intrinsic productivity of old maids. Benneke, in his
“Pragmatische Psychologie,” compares the activity of a very busy
housewife with that of an unmarried virgin, and thinks the worth of the
former to be higher, while the latter accomplishes more by way of
“erotic fancies, intrigues, inheritances, winnings in the lottery, and
hypochondriac complaints.” This is very instructive from the
criminological point of view. For the criminalist can not be too
cautious when he has an old maid to examine. Therefore, when a case
occurs containing characteristic intrigues, fanciful inheritances, and
winnings in the lottery, it will be well to seek out the old maid behind
these things. She may considerably help the explanation.

Both professional and popular judgment agree that the largest majority
of women have great fear of becoming old maids. We are told how this
fear expresses itself in foreign countries. In Spain, e.g., it is said
that a Spanish woman who has passed her first bloom takes the first
available candidate for her hand in order to avoid old-maidenhood; and
in Russia every mature girl who is able to do so, goes abroad for a
couple of years in order to return as “widow.” Everybody knows the
event, nobody asks for particulars about it. Some such process is
universal, and many an unfortunate marriage and allied crime may be
explained by it. Girls who at seventeen or eighteen were very particular
and had a right to be, are modest at twenty, and at twenty-six marry at
any price, in order not to remain old maids. That this is not
love-marriage and is often contrary to intelligence, is clear, and when
neither heart nor head rule, the devil laughs, and it is out of such
marriages that adultery, the flight of the wife, cruelty, robbery from
the spouse, and worse things, arise. Therefore it will be worth while to
study the history of the marriage in question. Was it a marriage in the
name of God, i.e., the marriage of an old maid? Then double caution must
be used in the study of the case.

There is some advantage in knowing the popular conception of when a girl
becomes an old maid, for old-maidenhood is a matter of a point of view;
it depends on the opinion of other people. Belles-lettres deals
considerably with this question, for it can itself determine the popular
attitude to the unmarried state. So Brandes discovers that the heroines
of classical novelists, of Racine, Shakespeare, Moliere, Voltaire,
Ariosto, Byron, Lesage, Scott, are almost always sixteen years of age.
In modern times, women in novels have their great love-adventure in the
thirties. How this advance in years took place we need not bother to
find out, but that it has occurred, we must keep in mind.

Before concluding the chapter on sexual conditions, we must say a word
about hysteria, which so very frequently has deceived the judge.
Hysteria was named by the ancients, as is known, from ἡ ὑστἑρα, the
womb,--and properly--for most of the causes of evil are there hidden.
The hysterics are legally significant in various ways. Their fixed ideas
often cause elaborate unreasonable explanations; they want to attract
attention, they are always concerned with themselves, are always wildly
enthusiastic about somebody else; often they persecute others with
unwarranted hatred, and they are the source of the coarsest
denunciations, particularly with regard to sexual crimes. Incidentally,
most of them are smart and have a diseased acuity of the senses. Hearing
and smell in particular, are sometimes remarkably alert, although not
always reliable, for hysterics frequently discover more than is there.
On the other hand, they often are useful because of their delicate
senses, and it is never necessary to show the correctness of their
perception out of hand. Bianchi rightly calls attention to the fact,
that hysterics like to write anonymous letters. Writers of these are
generally women, and mainly hysterical women; if a man writes them, he
is indubitably feminine in nature.

Most difficulties with hysterics occur when they suffer some
damage,[267] for they not only add a number of dishonest phenomena, but
also actually feel them. I might recall by way of example Domrich’s
story, that hysterics regularly get cramps laughing, when their feet get
cold. If this is true it is easy to conceive what else may happen.

All this, clearly, is a matter for the court physician, who alone should
be the proper authority when a hysteric is before the court. We lawyers
have only to know what significant dangers hysterics threaten, and
further, that the physician is to be called whenever one of them is
before us. Unfortunately there are no specific symptoms of hysteria
which the layman can make use of. We must be satisfied with the little
that has just been mentioned. Hysteria, I had almost said _fortunately_,
is nowadays so widespread that everybody has some approximate knowledge
of how it affects its victims.


(4) _Particular Feminine Qualities._


Section 70. (a) Intelligence.


Feminine intelligence properly deserves a separate section. Intelligence
is a function that has in both sexes some basis and purpose and proceeds
according to the same rules, but the meaning of intelligence must be
abandoned if we are to suppose it so rigid and so difficult to hold,
that the age-long differences between man and woman could have had no
influence on it. The fundamentally distinct bodies, the very different
occupations of both sexes, their different destinies, must have had
profound mutative influence on their intelligence. Moreover, we must
always start with a difference of attitude in the two sexes, in which
the purely positive belongs to one only, and we must see whether it is
not intensified by the negative of the other. When one body presses on
another the resulting impression is due, not only to the hardness of the
first, but also to the softness of the second, and when we hear about
the extraordinary wit of a woman we must blame the considerable idiocy
of the men she associates with. How many women are to be trusted for
intelligence, is a question of great importance for the criminalist,
inasmuch as right judgment depends on the attitude and good sense of the
witnesses, and must determine the value of the material presented us.

We wish to make no detailed sub-divisions in what follows. We shall
merely consider in their general aspects those functions which we are
accustomed to find in our own work.


Section 71. 1. Conception.

Concerning feminine sense-perception we have already spoken. There is no
significant difference between the two sexes, although in conceptual
power we find differences very distinct.

It may be generally said, as the daily life shows, that women conceive
differently from men. Whatever a dozen men may agree on conceptually,
will be differently thought of by any one woman. Now what is significant
in this fact is, that generally the woman is correct, that she has a
better conception,--and still under the same circumstances we continue
to conceive in the same way, even for the tenth time. This fact
demonstrates that a different form of organization, i.e., an essential
difference in nature, determines the character of conception in the two
sexes. If we compare values, the result will be different according to
sex, even with regard to the very material compared, or to the manner in
which it has been discovered. In the apprehension of situations, the
perception of attitudes, the judgment of people in certain relations, in
all that is called tact, i.e., in all that involves some abstraction or
clarification of confused and twisted material, and finally, in all that
involves human volitions, women are superior, and more reliable
individually, then ten men together. But the manner in which the woman
obtains her conception is less valuable, being the manner of pure
instinct. Or suppose that we call it more delicate feeling--the name
does not matter--the process is mainly unconscious, and is hence of less
value only, if I may say so, as requiring less thought. In consequence,
there is not only not a decrease in the utility of feminine testimony;
also its reliability is very great. There may be hundreds of errors in
the dialectical procedure of a man, while there is much more certainty
in the instinctive conception and the direct reproduction of a woman.
Hence, her statements are more reliable.

We need not call the source of this instinct God’s restitution for
feminine deficiency in other matters; we can show that it is due to
natural selection, and that the position and task of woman requires her
to observe her environment very closely. This need sharpened the inner
sense until it became unconscious conception. Feminine interest in the
environment is what gives female intuition a swiftness and certainty
unattainable in the meditations of the profoundest philosophers. The
swiftness of the intuition, which excludes all reflection, and which
merely solves problems, is the important thing. Woman perceives clearly,
as Spencer says somewhere, the mental status of her personal
environment; while Schopenhauer has incorrectly suggested that women
differ from men intellectually because they are lazy and want short-cuts
to attain their purpose. In point of fact, they do not want
short-cuts--they simply avoid complicated inference and depend upon
intuition, as they very safely may. Vision is possible only where
perception is possible, i.e., when things are near. The distant and the
veiled can not be seen, but must be inferred; hence, women let inference
alone and do what they can do better. This suggests the value of these
different interpretations of the feminine mode of conception. As lawyers
we may believe women where intuition is involved; where inference is a
factor we must be very careful. Sensory conception is to be understood
in the same way as intellectual conception. According to
Mantegazza,[268] woman has a particularly good eye for the delicate
aspects of things but has no capacity for seeing things on the horizon.
A remote, big object does not much excite her interest. This is
explained by the supposed fact that women as a rule can not see so far
as men, and are unable to distinguish the distant object so well. This
is no explanation because it would be as valid of all short-sighted
people. The truth is, that the definition of distant objects requires
more or less reason and inference. Woman does not reason and infer, and
if things miss her intuition, they do not exist for her.

Objectivity is another property that women lack. They tend always to
think in personalities, and they conceive objects in terms of personal
sympathies. Tell a woman about a case so that her interest will be
excited without your naming the individuals save as A and B, and it will
be impossible to get her to take a stand or to make a judgment. Who are
the people, what are they, how old are they, etc.? These questions must
be answered first. Hence the divergent feminine conceptions of a case
before and after the names are discovered. The personalizing tendency
results in some extraordinary things. Suppose a woman is describing a
brawl between two persons, or two groups. If the sides were equally
matched in strength and weapons, and if the witness in question did not
know any of the fighters before, she will nevertheless redistribute sun
and wind in her description if one of the brawlers happens accidentally
to have interested her, or has behaved in a “knightly” fashion, though
under other circumstances he might have earned only her dislike. In such
cases the fairy tale about telling mere facts recurs, and I have to
repeat that nobody tells mere facts--that judgment and inference always
enter into statements and that women use them more than men. Of course
real facts and inferred ones can be distinguished,--infrequently
however, and never with certainty. It is best, therefore, to determine
whether the witness bears any relation to one of the parties, and what
it is. And this relation will be an element in most cases inasmuch as
one rarely is present at a quarrel without some share in it. But even if
the latter case should occur, it is necessary, first of all, to hear
every detail so as to get the woman’s attitude clearly in mind. The
evidence of the woman’s mode of conception is of more importance than
the evidence concerning the fact itself. And finding the former is easy
enough if the woman is for a short time allowed to speak generally. When
her attitude is known, the standard for adjusting her excuses of one and
accusations of another, is easily discovered.

The same is true in purely individual cases. In the eyes of woman the
same crime committed by one man is black as hell; committed by another,
it is in all respects excusable. All that is necessary for this attitude
is the play of sympathies and antipathies generated from whatever
source. Just as the woman reader of romances favors one hero and hates
another, so the woman witness behaves toward her figures. And it may
happen that she finds one of them to have murdered with such “exciting
excellence,” and the victim to have been “such a boresome Philistine,”
that she excuses the crime. Caution is here the most necessary thing. Of
course women are not alone in taking such attitudes, but they are never
so clear, so typical, nor so determined as when taken by women.


Section 72. 2. Judgment.

Avenarius tells of an English couple who were speaking about angels’
wings. It was the man’s opinion that this angelic possession was
doubtful, the woman’s that it could not be. Many a woman witness has
reminded me of this story, and I have been able to explain by use of it
many an event. Woman says, “that must be” when she knows of no reason;
“that must be” when her own arguments bore her; “that must be” when she
is confused; when she does not understand the evidence of her opponent,
and particularly when she desires something. Unfortunately, she hides
this attitude under many words, and one often wishes for the simple
assertion of the English woman, “that must be.” In consequence, when we
want to learn their ratio sciendi from women, we get into difficulties.
They offer us a collection of frequently astonishing and important
things, but when we ask for the source of this collection we get “that
must be,” in variations, from a shrug of the shoulders to a flood of
words. The inexperienced judge may be deceived by the positiveness of
such expressions and believe that such certainty must be based on
something which the witness can not utter through lack of skill. If,
now, the judge is going to help the “unaided” witness with “of course
you mean because,” or “perhaps because,” etc., the witness, if she is
not a fool, will say “yes.” Thus we get apparently well-founded
assertions which are really founded on nothing more than “that must be.”

Cases dealing with divisions, distinctions and analysis rarely contain
ungrounded assertions by women. Women are well able to analyse and
explain data, and what one is capable of and understands, one succeeds
in justifying. Their difficulty is in synthetic work, in progressive
movement, and there they simply assert. The few observations of this
characteristic confirm this statement. For example, Lafitte says that at
medical examinations women are unable to do anything which requires
synthetic power. Women’s judgments of men further confirm this position,
for they are said to be more impressed with a minimal success, than with
a most magnificent effort. Now there is no injustice, no superficiality
in this observation; its object is simply parallel to their incapacity
for synthesis. Inasmuch as they are able to follow particular things
they will understand a single success, but the growth of efficiency
toward the future requires composition and wide horizon, hence they can
not understand it. Hence, also, the curious contradictions in women’s
statements as suspicion rises and falls. A woman, who to-day knows of a
hundred reasons for the guilt of some much-compromised prisoner, tries
to turn everything the other way when she later learns that the prisoner
has succeeded in producing some apparent alibi. So again, if the
prosecution seems to be successful, the women witnesses for the defence
often become the most dangerous for the defenders.

But here, also, women find a limit, perhaps because like all weaklings
they are afraid to draw the ultimate conclusions. As Leroux says in “De
l’Humanité,” “If criminals were left to women they would kill them all
in the first burst of anger, and if one waited until this burst had
subsided they would release them all.” The killing points to the easy
excitability, the passionateness, and the instinctive sense of justice
in women which demands immediate revenge for evil deeds. The liberation
points to the fact that women are afraid of every energetic deduction of
ultimate consequences, i.e., they have no knowledge of real justice.
“Men look for reasons, women judge by love; women can love and hate, but
they can not be just without loving, nor can they ever learn to value
justice.” So says Schiller, and how frequently do we not hear the
woman’s question whether the accused’s fate is going to depend on her
evidence. If we say yes, there is as a rule a restriction of testimony,
a titillation and twisting of consequences, and this circumstance must
always be remembered. If you want to get truth from a woman you must
know the proper time to begin, and what is more important, when to stop.
As the old proverb says, and it is one to take to heart: “Women are wise
when they act unconsciously; fools when they reflect.”

It is a familiar fact that women, committing crimes, go to extremes. It
may be correct to adduce, as modern writers do, the weakness of feminine
intelligence to social conditions, and it may, perhaps, be for this
reason that the future of woman lies in changing the feminine milieu.
But also with regard to environment she is an extremist. The most pious
woman, as Richelieu says, will not hesitate to kill a troublesome
witness. The most complicated crimes are characteristically planned by
women, and are frequently swelled with a number of absolutely
purposeless criminal deeds.

In this circumstance we sometimes find the explanation for an otherwise
unintelligible crime which, perhaps, indicates also, that the first
crime was committed by woman. It is as if she has in turpitude a certain
pleasure to which she abandons herself as soon as she has passed the
limit in her first crime.


Section 73. 3. Quarrels with Women.

This little matter is intended only for very young and inexperienced
criminal justices. There is nothing more exciting or instructive than a
quarrel with clever and trained women concerning worthy subjects; but
this does not happen in court, and ninety per cent. of our woman
witnesses are not to be quarrelled with. There are two occasions on
which a quarrel may arise. The first, when we are trying to show a
denying prisoner that her crime has already been proved and that her
denials are silly, and the second, when we are trying to show a witness
that she must know something although she refuses to know it, or when we
want to show her the incorrectness of her conclusion, or when we want to
lead her to a point where her testimony can have further value. Now a
verbal quarrel will hurt the case. This is a matter of ancient
experience, for whoever quarrels with women is, as Börne says, in the
condition of a man who must unceasingly polish lights.[269]

Women have an obstinacy, and it is no easy matter to be passive against
it. But in the interest of justice, the part of the wise is not to lose
any time by making an exhibition of himself through verbal quarrels with
women witnesses. The judge may be thoroughly convinced that his success
with the woman may help the case, but such success is very rare, and
when he thinks he has it, it is only apparent and momentary, or is
merely naïve self-deception. For women do like, for the sake of a
momentary advantage, to please men and to appear convinced, but the
judge for whom a woman does this is in a state that requires
consideration.

A few more particulars concerning feminine intelligence. They are,
however, only indirectly connected with it, and are as unintelligible as
the fact that left-handedness is more frequent and color-blindness less
frequent among women than among men. If, however, we are to explain
feminine intelligence at all we must do so by conceiving that women’s
intellectual functioning stops at a definite point and can not pass
beyond it.

Consider their attitude toward money. However distasteful Mammon may be
in himself, money is so important a factor in life itself that it is not
unintelligibly spoken of as the “majesty of cold cash.” But to make
incorrect use of an important thing is to be unintelligent. Whoever
wastes money is not intelligent enough to understand what important
pleasures he may provide for himself, and whoever hoards it does not
know its proper use. Now single women are either hoarders or wasters;
they rarely take the middle way and assume the prudence of the
housewife, which generally develops into miserliness. This is best
observable in the foolish bargaining of women at markets, in their
supposing that they have done great things by having reduced the price
of their purchase a few cents. Every dealer confirms the fact that the
first price he quotes a woman is increased in order to give her a chance
to bargain. But she does not bargain down to the proper price, she
bargains down to a sum above the proper price, and she frequently buys
unnecessary, or inferior things, simply because the dealer was smart
enough to captivate her by allowing reductions. This is indicated in a
certain criminal case,[270] in which the huckster-woman asserted that
she immediately suspected a customer of passing counterfeit coins
because she did not bargain.

Now this tendency to hoard is not essentially miserliness, for the chief
purpose of miserliness is to bring together and to own money; to enjoy
merely the look of it. This tendency is an unintelligent attitude toward
money, a failure to judge its value and properties. Now this failure is
one of the principal reasons for numerous crimes. A woman needing money
for her thousand several objects, demands it from her husband, and the
latter has to provide it without her asking whether he honestly can or
not. A wife is said to be uncurious only with regard to the source of
her husband’s money. She knows his income, she knows the necessary
annual expenses; she can immediately count up the fact that the two are
equal--but she calmly asks for more.

Of course, I am not referring to the courageous helpmeet who stands by
her husband in bearing the burdens of life. With her the criminalist has
nothing to do. I mean only those light-headed, pleasure-loving women,
who nowadays make the great majority, and that army of “lovers,” who
have cost the country a countless number of not unworthy men. The love
of women is the key to many a crime, even murder, theft, swindling, and
treachery. First, there is the woman’s unintelligible arithmetic, then
her ceaseless requirements, finally the man’s surrender to the limit of
his powers; then fresh demands, a long period of opposition, then
surrender, and finally one unlawful action. From that it is only a step
to a great crime. This is the simple theme of the countless variations
that are played in the criminal court. There are proverbs enough to show
how thoroughly the public understands this connection between love and
money.[271]

An apparently insignificant feminine quality which is connected with her
intelligence is her notorious, “never quite ready.” The criminalist
meets this when he is looking for an explanation of the failure of some
probably extraordinarily intelligent plan of crime. Or when a crime
occurs which might have been prevented by a step at the right minute,
women are always ten minutes behind the time. But these minutes would
not be gained if things were begun ten minutes earlier, and once a woman
suffers real damage through tardiness, she resolves to be ten minutes
ahead of time. But when she does so she fails in her resolution and this
failure is to be explained by lack of intelligence. The little fact that
women are never quite on time explains many a difficulty.

Feminine conservatism is as insignificant as feminine punctuality.
Lombroso shows how attached women are to old things. Ideas, jewelry,
verses, superstitions, and proverbs are better retained by women than by
men. Nobody would venture to assert that a conservative man must be less
intelligent than a liberal. Yet feminine conservatism indicates a
certain stupidity, less excitability and smaller capacity for accepting
new impressions. Women have a certain difficulty in assimilating and
reconstructing things, and because of this difficulty they do not like
to surrender an object after having received it. Hence, it is well not
to be too free with the more honorable attributes such as piety, love,
loyalty, respect to what they have already learned; closer investigation
discovers altogether too many instances of intellectual rigidity.

In our profession we meet the fact frequently that men pass much more
easily from honesty to dishonesty, and vice versa, that they more easily
change their habits, begin new plans, etc. Generalizations, of course,
can not be made; each case has to be studied on its merits. Yet, even
when questions of fact arise, e.g., in searching houses, it is well to
remember the distinction. Old letters, real corpora delicti, are much
more likely to be found in the woman’s box than in the man’s. The latter
has destroyed the thing long ago, but the former may “out of piety” have
preserved for years even the poison she once used to commit murder with.


Section 74. (b) Honesty.

We shall speak here only of the honesty of the sort of women the courts
have most to do with, and in this regard there is little to give us joy.
Not to be honest, and to lie, are two different things; the latter is
positive, the former negative, the dishonest person does not tell the
truth, the liar tells the untruth. It is dishonest to suppress a portion
of the truth, to lead others into mistakes, to fail to justify
appearances, and to make use of appearances. The dishonest person may
not have said a single untrue word and still have introduced many more
difficulties, confusions and deceptions than the liar. He is for this
reason more dangerous than the latter. Also, because his conduct is more
difficult to uncover and because he is more difficult to conquer than
the liar. Dishonesty is, however, a specially feminine characteristic,
and in men occurs only when they are effeminate. Real manliness and
dishonesty are concepts which can not be united. Hence, the popular
proverb says, “Women always tell the truth, but not the whole truth.”
And this is more accurate than the accusation of many writers, that
women lie. I do not believe that the criminal courts can verify the
latter accusation. I do not mean that women never lie--they lie
enough--but they do not lie more than men do, and none of us would
attribute lying to women as a sexual trait. To do so, would be to
confuse dishonesty with lying.

It would be a mistake to deal too sternly in court with the dishonesty
of women, for we ourselves and social conditions are responsible for
much of it. We dislike to use the right names of things and choose
rather to suggest, to remain in embarrassed silence, or to blush. Hence,
it is too much to ask that this round-aboutness should be set aside in
the courtroom, where circumstances make straight talking even more
difficult. According to Lombroso,[272] women lie because of their
weaknesses, and because of menstruation and pregnancy, for which they
have in conversation to substitute other illnesses; because of the
feeling of shame, because of the sexual selection which compels them to
conceal age, defects, diseases; because finally of their desire to be
interesting, their suggestibility, and their small powers of judgment.
All these things tend to make them lie, and then as mothers they have to
deceive their children about many things. Indeed, they are themselves no
more than children, Lombroso concludes. But it is a mistake to suppose
that these conditions lead to lying, for women generally acquire
silence, some other form of action, or the negative propagation of
error. But this is essentially dishonesty. To assert that deception,
lying, have become physiological properties of women is, therefore,
wrong. According to Lotze, women hate analysis and hence can not
distinguish between the true and the false, but then women hate
analysis only when it is applied to themselves. A woman does not want
to be analyzed herself simply because analysis would reveal a great deal
of dishonesty; she is therefore a stranger to thorough-going honest
activity. But for this men are to blame. Nobody, as Flaubert says, tells
women the truth. And when once they hear it they fight it as something
extraordinary. They are not even honest with themselves. But this is not
only true in general; it is true also in particular cases which the
court room sees. We ourselves make honesty difficult to women before the
court. Of course, I do not mean that to avoid this we are to be rude and
shameless in our conversation with women, but it is certain that we
compel them to be dishonest by our round-about handling of every
ticklish subject. Any half-experienced criminal justice knows that much
more progress can be made by simple and absolutely open discussion. A
highly educated woman with whom I had a frank talk about such a matter,
said at the end of this very painful sitting, “Thank God, that you spoke
frankly and without prudery--I was very much afraid that by foolish
questions you might compel me to prudish answers and hence, to complete
dishonesty.”

We have led women so far by our indirection that according to Stendhal,
to be honest, is to them identical with appearing naked in public.
Balzac asks, “Have you ever observed a lie in the attitude and manner of
woman? Deceit is as easy to them as falling snow in heaven.” But this is
true only if he means dishonesty. It is not true that it is easy for
women really to lie. I do not know whether this fact can be proven, but
I am sure the feminine malease in lying can be observed. The play of
features, the eyes, the breast, the attitude, betrays almost always even
the experienced female offender. Now, nothing can reveal the play of her
essential dishonesty. If a man once confesses, he confesses with less
constraint than a woman, and he is less likely, even if he is very bad,
to take advantage of false favorable appearances, while woman accepts
them with the semblance of innocence. If a man has not altogether given
a complete version, his failure is easy to recognize by his hesitation,
but the opinions of woman always have a definite goal, even though she
should tell us only a tenth of what she might know and say.

Even her simplest affirmation or denial is not honest. Her “no” is not
definite; e.g., her “no” to a man’s demands. Still further, when a man
affirms or denies and there is some limitation to his assertion. He
either announces it expressly or the more trained ear recognizes its
presence in the failure to conclude, in a hesitation of the tone. But
the woman says “yes” and “no,” even when only a small portion of one or
the other asserts a truth behind which she can hide herself, and this is
a matter to keep in mind in the courtroom.

Also the art of deception or concealment depends on dishonesty rather
than on pure deceit, because it consists much more in the use of
whatever is at hand, and in suppression of material, than on direct
lies. So, when the proverb says that a woman was ill only three times
during the course of the year, but each time for four months, it will be
unjust to say that she intentionally denies a year-long illness. She
does not, but as a matter of fact, she is ill at least thirteen times a
year, and besides, her weak physique causes her to feel frequently
unwell. So she does not lie about her illness. But then she does not
immediately announce her recovery and permits people to nurse and
protect her even when she has no need of it. Perhaps she does so
because, in the course of the centuries, she found it necessary to
magnify her little troubles in order to protect herself against brutal
men, and had, therefore, to forge the weapon of dishonesty. So
Schopenhauer agrees: “Nature has given women only one means of
protection and defence--hypocrisy; this is congenital with them, and the
use of it is as natural as the animal’s use of its claws. Women feel
they have a certain degree of justification for their hypocrisy.”

With this hypocrisy we have, as lawyers, to wage a constant battle.
Quite apart from the various ills and diseases which women assume before
the judge, everything else is pretended; innocence, love of children,
spouses, and parents; pain at loss and despair at reproaches; a breaking
heart at separation; and piety,--in short, whatever may be useful. This
subjects the examining justice to the dangers and difficulties of being
either too harsh, or being fooled. He can save himself much trouble by
remembering that in this simulation there is much dishonesty and few
lies. The simulation is rarely thorough-going, it is an intensification
of something actually there.

And now think of the tears which are wept before every man, and not
least, before the criminal judge. Popular proverbs tend to undervalue,
often to distrust tearful women. Mantegazza[273] points out that every
man over thirty can recall scenes in which it was difficult to determine
how much of a woman’s tears meant real pain, and how much was
voluntarily shed. In the notion that tears represent a mixture of poetry
and truth, we shall find the correct solution. It would be interesting
to question female virtuosos in tears (when women see that they can
really teach they are quite often honest) about the matter. The
questioner would inevitably learn that it is impossible to weep at will
and without reason. Only a child can do that. Tears require a definite
reason and a certain amount of time which may be reduced by great
practice to a minimum, but even that minimum requires some duration.
Stories in novels and comic papers in which women weep bitterly about a
denied new coat, are fairy tales; in point of fact the lady begins by
feeling hurt because her husband refused to buy her the thing, then she
thinks that he has recently refused to buy her a dress, and to take her
to the theatre; that at the same time he looks unfriendly and walks away
to the window; that indeed, she is really a pitiful, misunderstood,
immeasurably unhappy woman, and after this crescendo, which often occurs
presto prestissimo, the stream of tears breaks through. Some tiny
reason, a little time, a little auto-suggestion, and a little
imagination,--these can keep every woman weeping eternally, and these
tears can always leave us cold. Beware, however, of the silent tears of
real pain, especially of hurt innocence. These must not be mistaken for
the first. If they are, much harm may be done, for these tears, if they
do not represent penitence for guilt, are real evidences of innocence. I
once believed that the surest mark of such tears was the deceiving
attempt to beat down and suppress them; an attempt which is made with
elementary vigor. But even this attempt to fight them off is frequently
not quite real.

As with tears, so with fainting. The greater number of fainting fits are
either altogether false, or something between fainting and wakefulness.
Women certainly, whether as prisoners or witnesses, are often very
uncomfortable in court, and if the discomfort is followed immediately by
illness, dizziness, and great fear, fainting is natural. If only a
little exaggeration, auto-suggestion, relaxation, and the attempt to
dodge the unpleasant circumstance are added, then the fainting fit is
ready to order, and the effect is generally in favor of the fainter.
Although it is wrong to assume beforehand that fainting is a comedy, it
is necessary to beware of deception.

An interesting question, which, thank heaven, does not concern the
criminal justice, is whether women can keep their word. When a
criminalist permits a woman to promise not to tell anybody else of her
testimony, or some similar naïveté, he may settle his account with his
conscience. The criminalist must not accept promises at all, and he is
only getting his reward when women fool him. The fact is, that woman
does not know the definite line between right and wrong. Or better, she
draws the line in a different way; sometimes more sharply, but in the
main more broadly than man, and in many cases she does not at all
understand that certain distinctions are not permitted. This occurs
chiefly where the boundaries are really unstable, or where it is not
easy to understand the personality of the sufferer. Hence, it is always
difficult to make woman understand that state, community, or other
public weal, must in and for themselves be sacred against all harm. The
most honest and pious woman is not only without conscience with regard
to dodging her taxes, she also finds great pleasure in having done so
successfully. It does not matter what it is she smuggles, she is glad to
smuggle successfully, but smuggling is not, as might be supposed, a
sport for women, though women need more nervous excitement and sport
than men. Their attitude shows that they are really unable to see that
they are running into danger because they are violating the law. When
you tell them that the state is justified in forbidding smuggling, they
always answer that they have smuggled such a very little, that nobody
would miss the duties. Then the interest in smugglers and
smuggling-stories is exceedingly great. We once had a girl who was born
on the boundary between Italy and Austria. Her father was a notorious
smuggler, the chief of a band that brought coffee and silk across the
border. He grew rich in the trade, but he lost everything in an
especially great venture, and was finally shot by the customs-officers
at the boundary. If you could see with what interest, spirit, and
keenness the girl described her father’s dubious courses you would
recognize that she had not the slightest idea that there was anything
wrong in what he was doing.

Women, moreover, do not understand the least regulation. I frequently
have had cases in which even intelligent women could not see why it was
wrong to make a “small” change in a public register; why it was wrong to
give, in a foreign city, a false name at the hotel; or why the police
might forbid the shaking of dust-cloths over the heads of pedestrians,
even from her “own” house; why the dog must be kept chained; and what
good such “vexations” could do, anyway.

Again, tiny bits of private property are not safe from women. Note how
impossible it is to make women understand that private property is
despoiled when flowers or fruit are plucked from a private garden. The
point is so small, and as a rule, the property owner makes no
objections, but it must be granted that he has the right to do so. Then
their tendency to steal, in the country, bits of ground and boundaries
is well known. Most of the boundary cases we have, involved the activity
of some woman.

Even in their own homes women do not conceive property too rigidly. They
appropriate pen, paper, pencils, clothes, etc., without having any idea
of replacing what they have taken away. This may be confirmed by anybody
whose desk is not habitually sacrosanct, and he will agree that it is
not slovenliness, but defective sense of property that causes women to
do this, for even the most consummate housekeepers do so. This defective
property-sense is most clearly shown in the notorious fact that women
cheat at cards. According to Lombroso, an educated, much experienced
woman told him in confidence that it is difficult for her sex not to
cheat at cards. Croupiers in gambling halls know things much worse. They
say that they must watch women much more than men because they are not
only more frequent cheaters, but more expert. Even at croquet and
lawn-tennis girls are unspeakably smart about cheating if they can
thereby put their masculine opponents impudently at a disadvantage.

We find many women among swindlers, gamblers, and counterfeiters; and
moreover, we have the evidence of experienced housewives, that the
cleverest and most useful servants are frequently thievish. What is
instructive in all these facts is the indefiniteness of the boundary
between honesty and dishonesty, even in the most petty cases. The defect
in the sense of property with regard to little things explains how many
a woman became a criminal--the road she wandered on grew, step by step,
more extended. There being no definite boundary, it was inevitable that
women should go very far, and when the educated woman does nothing more
than to steal a pencil from her husband and to cheat at whist, her sole
fortune is that she does not get opportunities or needs for more serious
mistakes. The uneducated, poverty-stricken woman has, however, both
opportunity and need, and crime becomes very easy to her. Our life is
rich in experiment and our will too weak not to fail under the
exigencies of existence, if, at the outset, a slightest deviation from
the straight and narrow road is not avoided. If the justice is in doubt
whether a woman has committed a great crime against property, his study
will concern, not the deed, but the time when the woman was in
different circumstances and had no other opportunity to do wrong than
mere nibbling at and otherwise foolish abstractions from other people’s
property. If this inclination can be proved, then there is justification
for at least suspecting her of the greater crime.

The relation of women to such devilment becomes more instructive when it
has to be discovered through woman witnesses. As a rule, there is no
justification for the assumption that people are inclined to excuse
whatever they find themselves guilty of. On the contrary, we are
inclined to punish others most harshly where we ourselves are most
guilty. And there is still another side to the matter. When an honest,
well-conducted woman commits petty crimes, she does not consider them as
crimes, she is unaware of their immorality, and it would be illogical
for her to see as a crime in others that which she does not recognize as
a crime in herself. It is for this reason that she tends to excuse her
neighbor’s derelictions. Now, when we try to find out from feminine
witnesses facts concerning the objects on which we properly lay stress,
they do not answer and cause us to make mistakes. What woman thinks is
mere “sweet-tooth” in her servant girl, is larceny in criminal law; what
she calls “pin-money,” we call deceit, or violation of trust; for the
man whom the woman calls “the dragon,” we find in many cases quite
different terms. And this feminine attitude is not Christian charity,
but ignorance of the law, and with this ignorance we have to count when
we examine witnesses. Of course, not only concerning some theft by a
servant girl, but always when we are trying to understand some human
weakness.

From honesty to loyalty is but a step. Often these traits lie side by
side or overlap each other. Now, the criminal justice has, more
frequently than appears, to deal with feminine loyalty. Problems of
adultery are generally of subordinate significance only, but this
loyalty or disloyalty often plays the most important rôle in trials of
all conceivable crimes, and the whole problem of evidence takes a
different form according to the assumption that this loyalty does, or
does not, exist. Whether it is the murder of a husband, doubtful
suicide, physical mutilation, theft, perversion of trust, arson, the
case takes a different form if feminine disloyalty can be proved. The
rare reference to this important premise in the presentation of evidence
is due to the fact that we are ignorant of its significance, that its
determinative factors are hidden, and finally that its presentation is
as a rule difficult.

Public opinion on feminine loyalty is not flattering. Diderot asserts
that there is no loyal woman who has not ceased being so, at least, in
her imagination. Of course this does not mean much, for all of us have
ideally committed many sins, but if Diderot is right, one may assume a
feminine inclination to disloyalty. Most responsible for this is, of
course, the purely sexual character of woman, but we must not do her the
injustice, and ourselves the harm, of supposing that this character is
the sole regulative principle; the illimitable feminine need for change
is also responsible to a great degree. I doubt whether it could be
proved in any collection of cases worth naming that a woman grew
disloyal although her sexual needs were small; but that her sex does so
is certain, and thence we must seek other reasons for their disloyalty.
The love of change is fundamental and may be observed in recorded
criminal cases. “Even educated women,” says Goltz,[274] “can not bear
continuous and uniform good fortune, and feel an inconceivable impulse
to devilment and foolishness in order to get some variety in life.” Now
it will be much easier for the judge to determine whether the woman in
the case had at the critical time an especial inclination to this
“devilment,” than to discover whether her own husband was sexually
insufficient, or whatever similar secrets might be involved.

If woman, however, once has the impulse to seek variety, and the
harmless and permissible changes she may provide herself are no longer
sufficient or are lacking, the movement of her daily life takes a
questionable direction. Then there is a certain tendency to deceit which
is able to bring its particular consequences to bear. A woman has
married, let us say, for love, or for money, for spite, to please her
parents, etc., etc. Now come moments in her life in which she reflects
concerning “her” reason for marriage, and the cause of these moments
will almost always be her husband, i.e., he may have been ill-mannered,
have demanded too much, have refused something, have neglected her,
etc., and thus have wounded her so that her mood, when thinking of the
reason of her marriage, is decidedly bad, and she begins to doubt
whether her love was really so strong, whether the money was worth the
trouble, whether she ought not to have opposed her parents, etc. And
suppose she had waited, might she not have done better? Had she not
deserved better? Every step in her musing takes her farther from her
husband. A man is nothing to a woman to whom he is not everything, and
if he is nothing he deserves no especial consideration, and if he is
undeserving, a little disloyalty is not so terrible, and finally, the
little disloyalty gradually and naturally and smoothly leads to
adultery, and adultery to a chain of crimes. That this process is not a
thousand times more frequent, is merely due to the accident that the
right man is not at hand during these so-called weak moments. Millions
of women who boast of their virtue, and scorn others most nobly, have to
thank their boasted virtue only to this accident. If the right man had
been present at the right time they would have had no more ground for
pride. There is only a simple and safe method for discovering whether a
woman is loyal to her husband--lead her to say whether her husband
neglects her. Every woman who complains that her husband neglects her is
an adulteress or in the way of becoming one, for she seeks the most
thrifty, the really sound reason which would justify adultery. How close
she has come to this sin is easily discoverable from the degree of
intensity with which she accuses her husband.

Besides adultery, the disloyalty of widow and of bride, there is also
another sense in which disloyalty may be important. The first is
important only when we have to infer some earlier condition, and we are
likely to commit injustice if we judge the conduct of the wife by the
conduct of the widow. As a rule there are no means of comparison. In
numerous cases the wife loves her husband and is loyal to him even
beyond the grave, but these cases always involve older women whom lust
no longer affects. If the widow is at all young, pretty, and
comparatively rich, she forgets her husband. If she has forgotten him,
if after a very short time she has again found a lover and a husband,
whether for “the sake of the poor children,” or because “my first one,
of blessed memory, desired it,” or because “the second and the first
look so much alike,” or whatever other reason she might give, there is
still no ground for supposing that she did not love her first husband,
was disloyal to him, robbed and murdered him. She might have borne the
happiest relations with him; but he is dead, and a dead man is no man.
There are, again, cases in which the almost immediate marriage of a
new-made widow implies all kinds of things, and often reveals in the
person of the second husband the murderer of the first. When suspicions
of such a situation occur, it is obviously necessary to go very slowly,
but the first thing of importance is to keep tabs carefully on the
second husband. It is exceedingly self-contradictory in a man to marry a
woman he knows to have murdered her first husband--but if he had cared
only about being her lover there would not have been the necessity of
murdering the first.

The opposite of this type is anticipatory disloyalty of a woman who
marries a man in order to carry on undisturbed her love-affair with
another. That there are evil consequences in most cases is easy to see.
Such marriages occur very frequently among peasants. The woman, e.g., is
in love with the son of a wealthy widower. The son owns nothing, or the
father refuses his permission, so the woman makes a fool of the father
by marrying him and carries on her amour with the son, doubly sinful.
Instead of a son, the lover may be only a servant, and then the couple
rob the husband thoroughly--especially if the second wife has no
expectations of inheritance, there being children of a former marriage.
Variations on this central theme occur as the person of the lover
changes to neighbor, cousin, friend, etc., but the type is obvious, and
it is necessary to consider its possibilities whenever suspicion arises.

The disloyalty of a bride--well, we will not bother with this poetical
subject. Everybody knows how merciless a girl can be, how she leaves her
lover for practical, or otherwise ignoble reasons, and everybody knows
the consequences of such things.[275]


Section 75. (c) Love, Hate and Friendship.

If Emerson is right and love is no more than the deification of persons,
the criminalist does not need to bother about this very rare paroxysm of
the human soul. We might translate, at most, a girl’s description of her
lover who is possibly accused of some crime, from deified into human,
but that is all. However, we do not find that sort of love in the law
courts. The love we do find has to be translated into a simpler and more
common form than that of the poet. The sense of self-sacrifice, with
which Wagner endows his heroines, is not altogether foreign in our work;
we find it among the lowest proletarian women, who immolate themselves
for their husbands, follow them through the most tremendous distress,
nurse and sustain them with hungry heroism. This is more remarkable than
poetical self-sacrifice, but it is also different and is to be
differently explained. The conditions which cause love can be understood
in terms of the effects and forces of the daily life. And where we can
not see it differently we shall be compelled to speak of it as if it
were a disease. If disease is not sufficient explanation, we shall have
to say with the Italians, “l’amore é une castigo di Dio.”

Love is of greater importance in the criminal court than the statutes
allow, and we frequently make great mistakes because we do not count it
in. We have first of all to do our duty properly, to distinguish the
biological difference between the human criminal and the normal human
being, rather than to subsume every criminal case under its proper
statute. When a woman commits a crime because of jealousy, when in spite
of herself she throws herself away on a good-for-nothing; when she
fights her rival with unconquerable hatred; when she bears unbelievable
maltreatment; when she has done hundreds of other things--who counts her
love? She is guilty of crime; she is granted to have had a motive; and
she is punished. Has enough been done when the jury acquits a jealous
murderess, or a thrower of vitriol? Such cases are spectacular, but no
attention is paid to the love of the woman in the millions of little
cases where love, and love only, was the impulse, and the statute
sentencing her to so and so much punishment was the outcome.

Now, study the maniacally-clever force of jealousy and then ask who is
guilty of the crime. Augustine says, that whoever is not jealous is not
in love, and if love and jealousy are correlate, one may be inferred
from the other. What is at work is jealousy, what is to to be shown is
love. That is, the evil in the world is due to jealousy, but this cause
would be more difficult to prove than its correlate, love. And we know
how difficult it is to conceal love,--so difficult that it has become a
popular proverb that when a woman has a paramour, everybody knows it but
her husband. Now, if a crime has been committed through jealousy it
would be simply naïve to ask whether the woman was jealous. Jealousy is
rare to discover and unreliable, while her love-affair is known to
everybody. Once this becomes an established fact, we can determine also
the degree of her jealousy.

Woman gives the expression of her jealousy characteristic direction. Man
attempts to possess his wife solely and without trouble, and hence is
naturally jealous. The deceived woman turns all her hatred on her rival
and she excuses the husband if only she believes that she still
possesses, or has regained his love. It will therefore be a mistake to
suppose that because a woman has again begun to love her husband,
perhaps after a long-enduring jealousy, that no such jealousy preceded
or that she had forgiven her rival. It may be that she has come to an
understanding with her husband and no longer cares about the rival, but
this is only either mere semblance or temporary, for the first suspicion
of danger turns loose the old jealousy with all its consequences. Here
again her husband is safe and all her rage is directed upon her rival.
The typical cases are those of the attacks by abandoned mistresses at
the weddings of their lovers. They always tear the wreath and veil from
the bride’s head, but it never is said that they knock the groom’s
top-hat off.

Another characteristic of feminine love which often causes difficulties
is the passion with which the wife often gives herself to her husband.
Two such different authors as Kuno Fischer and George Sand agree to this
almost verbatim. The first says: “What nature demands of woman is
complete surrender to man,” and the second: “Love is a voluntary slavery
for which woman craves by nature.” Here we find the explanation of all
those phenomena in which the will of the wife seems dead beside that of
the husband. If a woman once depends on a man she follows him
everywhere, and even if he commits the most disgusting crimes she helps
him and is his loyalest comrade. We simply catalogue the situation as
complicity, but we have no statutes for the fact that the woman
naturally could do nothing else. We do not find it easy to discover the
accomplices of a man guilty of a crime, but if there is a woman who
really loves him we may be sure that she is one of them.

For the same reason women often bear interminably long maltreatment at
the hands of their husbands or lovers. We think of extraordinary
motives, but the whole thing is explained if the motive was really
feminine love. It will be more difficult for us to believe in this love
when the man is physically and mentally not an object of love. But the
motives of causes of love of woman for man, though much discussed, have
never been satisfactorily determined. Some authorities make strength and
courage the motives, but there are innumerable objections, for historic
lovers have been weak and cowardly, intellectual rather than foolish,
though Schopenhauer says, that intelligence and genius are distasteful
to women. No fixed reasons can be assigned. We have to accept the fact
that a most disgusting man is often loved by a most lovely woman. We
have to believe that love of man turns women from their romantic ideals.
There has been the mistaken notion that only a common crime compels a
woman to remain loyally with a thoroughly worthless man, and again, it
has been erroneously supposed that a certain woman who refused a most
desirable heirloom left her by a man, must have known of some great
crime committed by him. But we need no other motive for this action than
her infinite love, and the reason of that infinity we find in the nature
of that love. It is, in fact, woman’s life, whereas it is an episode in
the life of man. Of course, we are not here speaking of transitory
inclinations, or flirtations, but of that great and profound love which
all women of all classes know, and this love is overmastering; it
conquers everything, it forgives everything, it endures everything.

There is still another inexplicable thing. Eager as man is to find his
woman virgin, woman cares little about the similar thing in man. Only
the very young, pure, inexperienced girl feels an instinctive revulsion
from the real roué, but other women, according to Rochebrune, love a man
in proportion to the number of other women who love or have loved him.
This is difficult to understand, but it is a fact that a man has an easy
task with women if he has a reputation of being a great hand with them.
Perhaps this ease is only an expression of the conceit and envy of
women, who can not bear the idea that a man is interested in so many
others and not in themselves. As Balzac says, “women prefer most to win
a man who already belongs to another.” The inconceivable ease with which
certain types of men seduce women, and at whose heads women throw
themselves in spite of the fact that these men have no praiseworthy
qualities whatever, can only be so explained. Perhaps it is true, as is
sometimes said, that here is a case of sexuality expressing itself in an
inexplicable manner.

Of course there are friendships between men and women, although such
friendships are very rare. There is no doubt that sexual interests tend
easily to dominate such relations. We suppose them to be rare just
because their existence requires that sexual motives be spontaneously
excluded. There are three types of such friendships. 1. When the age of
the friends is such as to make the suspicion of passion impossible. 2.
When from earliest childhood, for one reason or another, a purely
fraternal relationship has developed. 3. When both are of such nature
that the famous divine spark can not set them afire. Whether there is an
electrical influence between couples, as some scientists say, or not, we
frequently see two people irrationally select each other, as if
compelled by some evil force. Now this selection may result in nothing
more than a friendship. Such friendships are frequently claimed in
trials, and of course, they are never altogether believed in. The
necessary thing in treating these cases is caution, for it will be
impossible to prove these friendships unlikely, and hence unjust to deny
them without further evidence. It will be necessary to discover whether
the sexual interest is or can be excluded. If not, the friendship is
purely a nominal one.

Friendship between women is popularly little valued. Comedies, comic
papers, and criticisms make fun of it, and we have heard all too often
that the news of the first gray hair, or the disloyalty of a husband,
has its starting-point in a woman friend, and that women decorate
themselves and improve themselves in order to worry their friends. One
author wanted to show that friendships between two women were only
conspiracies against a third, and Diderot said that there is a secret
union among women as among priests of one and the same religion--they
hate each other, but they protect each other. The latter fact we see
frequently enough in the examination of women witnesses. Envy, dislike,
jealousy, and egoism play up vividly, and he is a successful judge who
can discover how much of the evidence is born of these motives. But
beyond a certain point, women co-operate. This point is easy to find,
for it is placed where-ever feminine qualities are to be generalized. So
long as we stick, during an examination, to a concrete instance, and so
long as the witness observes no combination of her conduct and opinions
with that of the object of her testimony, she will allow herself to be
guided partly by the truth, partly by her opinions of the woman in
question. But just as soon as we expressly or tacitly suggest common
feminine qualities, or start to speak of some matter in which the
witness herself feels guilty, she turns about and defends where before
she had been attacking. In these cases we must try to find out whether
we have become “general.” If we have, we know why the witness is
defending the accused.

We may say the same things of feminine hate that we have said of
feminine love. Love and hate are only the positive and negative aspects
of the same relation. When a woman hates you she has loved you, does
love you, or will love you,--this is a reliable rule for the many cases
in which feminine hatred gives the criminalist work. Feminine hatred is
much intenser than masculine hatred. St. Gregory says that it is worse
than the devil’s, for the devil acts alone while woman gets the devil to
help her, and Stolle believes that a woman seeking revenge is capable of
anything. We have here to remember that among women of the lower
classes, hate, anger, and revenge are only different stages of the same
emotion. Moreover, nobody finds greater joy in revenge than a woman.
Indeed I might say that revenge and the pursuit of revenge are
specifically feminine. The real, vigorous man is not easily turned
thereto. In woman, it is connected with her greater sensibility which
causes anger, rage, and revenge to go further than in men. Lombroso has
done most to show this, and Mantegazza cites numberless examples of the
superior ease with which woman falls into paroxysms of rage. Hence, when
some crime with revenge as motive is before us, and we have no way of
getting at the criminal, our first suspicion should be directed toward a
woman or an effeminate man. Further, when we have to make an orderly
series of inferences, we will start from this proposition into the past,
present, and future, and shall not have much to wonder at if the
successful vengeance far exceeds its actual or fanciful occasion, and
if, perhaps, a very long time has elapsed before its accomplishment.
Nulla irae super iram mulieris.

Feminine cruelty is directly connected with feminine anger and hatred.
Lombroso has already indicated how fundamental woman’s inclination to
cruelty is. The cases are well known, together with the frequent and
remarkable combination of real kindness of heart with real bestiality.
Perhaps it would be proper to conceive this cruelty as a form of
defence, or the expression of defence, for we often find cruelty and
weakness paired elsewhere, as among children, idiots, etc. It is
particularly noticeable among cretins in the Alps. The great danger of
the cretin’s anger is well known there. Once, one of these unfortunates
was tortured to death by another because he thought that his victim had
received from the charitable monks a larger piece of bread than he.
Another was killed because he had received a gift of two trousers
buttons. These instances, I should think, indicate the real connection
between cruelty and weakness. Cruelty is a means of defence, and hence
is characteristic of the weaker sex. Moreover, many a curious bit of
feminine cruelty is due to feminine traits misunderstood, suppressed,
but in themselves good. Just as we know that frugality and a tendency to
save in housekeeping may often lead to dishonesty, so we perceive that
these qualities cause cruelty to servants, and even the desire to put
out of the way old and troublesome relatives who are eating the bread
that belongs to husband and children.

These facts serve not only to explain the crime, but to reveal the
criminal. If we succeed, other things being equal, in adducing a number
of feminine characteristics with one of which the cruelty of the crime
may be connected and explained, we have a clew to the criminal. The
instances mentioned,--the motherly care of house and family, frugality,
miserliness, hardness to servants, cruelty to aged parents,--seem rare
and not altogether rational, yet they occur frequently and give the
right clew to the criminal. There are still other similar combinations.
Everybody knows feminine love for trials at court, for the daily paper’s
reports of them, and for public executions. While the last were still
common in Austria, newspapers concluded regularly with the statement
that the “tender” sex was the great majority of the crowd that witnessed
them. At public executions women of the lower class; at great trials,
women of the higher classes, make up the auditors and spectators. Here
the movement from eagerness, curiosity, through the desire for vigorous
nervous stimulation, to hard-heartedness and undeniable cruelty, is
clear enough.

There would be nothing for us to do with this fact if we had not to deal
with the final expression of cruelty, i.e., murder; especially the
specifically feminine forms of murder,--child-murder and poisoning.
These, of course, in particular the former, involve abnormal conditions
which are subjects for the physician. At the same time it is the judge
who examines and sentences, and he is required to understand these
conditions and to consider every detail that may help him in drawing his
conclusion.

That poisoning is mainly a feminine crime is a familiar fact of which
modern medico-legal writers have spoken much; even the ancient authors,
not medical, like Livy, Tacitus, etc., have mentioned it. It is
necessary, therefore, carefully to study the feminine character in order
to understand how and why women are given to this form of murder. To do
so we need consider, however, only the ordinary factors of the daily
life; the extraordinary conditions, etc., are generally superfluous.

Every crime that is committed is committed when the reasons for doing it
outweigh the reasons for not doing it. This is true even of passional
crimes, for a _pro_ and _contra_ must have presented themselves in spite
of the lightninglike swiftness of the act. One appeared and then the
other, the _pro_ won and the deed was done. In other crimes this
conflict lasts at least so long as to be definitely observable, and in
the greater crimes it will, as a rule, take more time and more motive.
The principles of good and of evil will really battle with each other,
and when the individual is so depraved as no longer to have good
principles, their place is taken by fear of discovery and punishment,
and by the question whether the advantage to be gained is worth the
effort, etc. The commission of the crime is itself evidence that the
reasons for it were all-powerful. Now suppose that a woman gets the idea
of killing somebody. Here for a time _pro_ and _contra_ will balance
each other, and when the latter are outweighed she will think that she
_must_ commit murder. If she does not think so she will not do so. Now,
every murder, save that by poison, requires courage, the power to do,
and physical strength. As woman does not possess these qualities, she
spontaneously makes use of poison. Hence, there is nothing extraordinary
or significant in this fact, it is due to the familiar traits of woman.
For this reason, when there is any doubt as to the murderer in a case of
poisoning, it is well to think first of a woman or of a weak, effeminate
man.

The weakness of woman will help us in still another direction. It is
easily conceivable that all forms of weakness will seek support and
assistance, whether physical or moral. The latter is inclined in cases
of need to make use, also, of such assistance as may be rendered by
personal inward reflection. Now this reflection may be on the one hand,
dissuasion, on the other hand persuasion, self-persuasion; the first
subduing self-reproach, the latter, fear of discovery. Hence, a woman
will try to persuade not only herself, but others also that she was
justified in her course and will assign as reason, bad treatment. Now
there might have been some bad treatment, but it will have been altered
and twisted so utterly as to lose its original form and to become
imaginatively unbearable. Thus, a series of conclusions from the
reactions of the suspect to her environment may be easily found, and
these are the more convincing if they have occurred within a rather long
period of time, in which they may be chronologically arranged, and from
which a slow and definite intensification, usque ad ultimum, can be
proved. Such an analysis is, of course, troublesome, but if done
systematically, almost always rich in results.

The tricks of persuasion which are to suppress the fears of discovery
are always helps of another sort. As a rule they are general, and point
to the fact that the crime contemplated had occurred before without
danger, that everything was intelligently provided for, etc. Now these
circumstances are less dangerous, but they require consideration when
they count on certain popular views, especially superstitions and
certain customs and assumptions. Suppose, for example, that a young wife
wants to get rid of her old husband whom she had married for the sake
of his money. Now certain proverbs point to the fact that old men who
marry young women die soon after marriage. This popular view may be
entirely justified in the fact that the complete alteration in the mode
of life, the experience of uncustomary things, the excitement, the
extreme tension, then the effort _in venere_, finally, perhaps also the
use of popularly well-known stimulants, etc., may easily cause
weakening, sickening, and as conclusion the death of the old man. But
the public does not draw this kind of inference, it simply assumes,
without asking the reason, that when an old man marries a young woman,
he dies. Therefore a young wife may easily think, “If I make use of
poison nobody will wonder, nobody will see anything suspicious about the
death. It is only an event which is universally supposed to happen. The
old man died because he married me.” Such ideas may easily seduce an
uneducated woman and determine her conduct. Of course, they are not
subject to observation, but they are not beyond control, if the popular
views concerning certain matters are known as the views which determine
standards. Therefore their introduction into the plot of the suspect may
help us in drawing some useful inference.[276]

With regard to child-murder the consideration of psychopathic conditions
need not absolutely be undertaken. Whether they are present must, of
course, be determined, and therefore it is first of all necessary to
learn the character of the suspect’s conduct. The opportunity for this
is given in any text-book on legal medicine, forensic psychopathology,
and criminal psychology. There are a good many older authors.[277] Most
of the cases cited by authorities show that women in the best of
circumstances have behaved innumerable times in such a way that if they
had been poor girls child-murder would immediately have been assumed.
Again, they have shown that the sweetest and most harmless creatures
become real beasts at the time of accouchement, or shortly after it
develop an unbelievable hatred toward child and husband. Many a
child-murder may possibly be explained by the habit of some animals of
consuming their young immediately after giving birth to them. Such cases
bind us in every trial for child-murder to have the mental state of the
mother thoroughly examined by a psychiatrist, and to interpret
everything connected with the matter as psychologist and humanitarian.
At the same time it must not be forgotten that one of the most dangerous
results is due to this attitude. Law-makers have without further
consideration kept in mind the mental condition of the mother and have
made child-murder much less punishable than ordinary murder. It is
inferred, therefore, that it is unnecessary to study the conditions
which cause it. This is dangerous, because it implies the belief that
the case is settled by giving a minimum sentence, where really an
infinity of grades and differences may enter. The situation that the
law-maker has studied is one among many, the majority of which we have
yet to apprehend and to examine.


Section 76. (d) Emotional Disposition and Related Subjects.

Madame de Krüdener writes in a letter to Bernardin de St. Pierre: “Je
voulais être sentie.” These laconic words of this wise pietist give us
an insight into the significance of emotional life of woman. Man wants
to be understood, woman felt. With this emotion she spoils much that man
might do because of his sense of justice. Indeed, a number of qualities
which the woman uses to make herself noted are bound up with her
emotional life, more or less. Compassion, self-sacrifice, religion,
superstition,--all these depend on the highly developed, almost diseased
formation of her emotional life. Feminine charity, feminine activity as
a nurse, feminine petitions for the pardon of criminals, infinite other
samples of women’s kindly dispositions must convince us that these
activities are an integral part of their emotional life, and that women
perform them only, perhaps, in a kind of dark perception of their own
helplessness. On the one side an unconscious egoism impels them to the
defence of those who find themselves in a _similar_ condition; on the
other side, it is a feminine characteristic to apply anything she is to
judge to herself first, and then to make her choice. That she does this,
rests on the eminent overweight of emotion. So Schopenhauer says: “Women
are very sympathetic, but they are behind man in all matters of justice,
probity, and scrupulous conscientiousness. Injustice is the fundamental
feminine defect.”[278] Schopenhauer should have added, “because they are
too sympathetic, because emotion takes up so much place in their minds
that they have not enough left for justice.” According to Proudhon, “The
conscience of woman is as much weaker than man’s as her intelligence is
smaller. Her morality is of a different sort, her ideas of right and
wrong are different, being always on this or that side of justice, and
never requiring any equivalence between rights and duties which are such
a painful necessity to man.” Spencer says,[279] briefly, that the
feminine mind shows a definite lack with regard to the sense of justice.

These assertions show that women are deficient in justice, but do not
show why. The deficiency is to be explained only in the superabundance
of emotional life. This superabundance clarifies a number of facts of
their daily routine. We have, of course, to make a distinction between
the feeling of a gentlewoman, of a peasant woman, and of the innumerable
grades between the two, but this distinction is not essential. Both
noble and proletarian are equally unjust, but the rich emotion restores
a thousand times what may be missing in justice, and perhaps in many
cases hits better upon what is absolutely right than the bare masculine
sense of justice. We are, of course, frequently mistaken by relying on
the testimony of women, but only when we assume that our rigorously
judicial sentence is the only correct one, and when we do not know how
women judge. Hence, we interpret women’s testimonies with difficulty and
rarely with correctness; we forget that almost every feminine statement
contains in itself much more judgment than the testimony of men; we fail
to examine how much real judgment it contains; and finally, we weigh
this judgment in other scales than those used by the woman. We do best,
therefore, when we take the testimony of man and woman together in order
to find the right average. This is not easy, for we are unable to enter
properly into the emotional life of woman, and can not therefore
discount that tendency of hers to drag the objective truth in some
biased direction. It might be theoretically supposed that a noble,
kindly, feminine feeling would tend to reflect everything as better and
gentler, and would tend to excuse and conceal. If that were so we might
have a definite standard of valuation, and might be able to discount the
feminine bias. But that is so in perhaps no more than half the cases
that come before us. In all others woman has allowed herself to be moved
to displeasure, and appears as the punishing avenger. Hence, she fights
with all her strength on the side that seems to her to be oppressed and
innocently persecuted, irrespective of whether it is the side of the
accused or of his enemy. In consequence, we must first of all, when
judging her statements, determine the direction in which her emotion
impels her, and this can not be done with a mere knowledge of human
nature. Nothing will do except a careful study of the specific feminine
witness at the time she gives her evidence. And this requires the
expenditure of much time, for, to plunge directly into the middle of
things without having any means of comparison or relation, is to make
judgment impossible or very unsafe. If you are to do it at all you must
discuss other things first and even permit yourself the dishonesty of
asking about matters which you already know in order to find some
measure of the degree of feminine obliqueness. Of course, one discovers
here only the degree of obliqueness, not its direction--in the case
selected for comparison the woman might have judged too kindly, in the
case in hand she may just as well be too rigorous. But all things have a
definite limit, and hence, much practice and much goodwill will help us
to discover the direction of obliqueness.

When we inquire into the emotional life of the simple, uneducated women,
we find it to be fundamentally the same as that of women of other
classes, but different in expression, and it is the expression we have
to observe. Its form is often raw, therefore difficult to discover. It
may express itself in cursing and swearing, but it is still an
expression of emotion, just as are the mother’s curses or beatings of
her child because it has fallen and hurt itself. But observe that the
prevalence of emotion is so thoroughly a feminine condition that it is
clearly noticeable only where femininity itself is explicit--therefore,
always weaker among masculine women, and in the single individual most
powerful when femininity is most fully developed. It grows in the child,
remains at a constant level when woman becomes completely woman, and
decreases when, in advanced age, the differences in sex begin to
disappear. Very old men and very old women are also in this matter very
close together.


Section 77. (e) Weakness.

“Frailty, thy name is woman,” says Shakespeare, and Corvin explains this
in teasing fashion: “Women pray every day, ‘Lead us not into temptation,
for see, dear God, if you do so I can’t resist it.’” Even Kant[280]
takes feminine weakness as a distinguishing criterion: “In order to
understand the whole of mankind we need only to turn our attention to
the feminine sex, for where the force is weaker the tool is so much the
more artistic.” Experienced criminalists explain the well-known fact
that women are the chief sources of anonymous letters by their weakness.
From the physical inferiority of woman her mental inferiority may be
deduced, and though we learn a hundred times that small, weak men can be
mentally stronger than great and strong ones, it is, of course, natural,
that as a rule the outcome of a powerful body is also a powerful mind.
The difficulty is to discover in _what_ feminine weakness expresses
itself. The frequently joked-about hen-pecking of men has been explained
by Voltaire as the fulfilment of the divine purpose of taming men
through the medium of the specially created instrument--woman. Victor
Hugo calls men only woman’s toys. “Oh, this lofty providence which gives
each one its toy, the doll to the child, the child to the man, the man
to the woman, the woman to the devil.” The popular proverb also seems to
assign them considerable strength, at least to aged women. For we hear
in all kinds of variations the expression, “An old woman will venture
where the devil does not dare to tread.” Nor must we underestimate the
daily experience of feminine capacity to bear pain. Midwives of
experience unanimously assure us that no man would bear what a woman
regularly has to, every time she gives birth to a child; and surgeons
and dentists assure us similarly. Indeed the great surgeon, Billroth, is
said to have asserted that he attempted new methods of operation on
women first because they are less subject to pain, for like savages they
are beings of a lower status and hence better able to resist than men.
In the light of such expressions we have to doubt the assertion that
women are distinguished by weakness, and yet that assertion is correct.
The weakness must, however, not be sought where we expect to find it,
but in the quite different feminine intelligence. Wherever intelligence
is not taken into consideration, woman is likely to show herself
stronger than man. She is better able to stand misfortune, to nurse
patients, to bear pain, to bring up children, to carry out a plan, to
persevere in a plan. It would be wrong to say that feminine weakness is
a weakness of will, for most examples show that women’s wills are
strong. It is in matters of intelligence that they fail. When somebody
has to be persuaded, we find that a normally-organized man may agree
when he is shown a logically-combined series of reasons. But the
feminine intelligence is incapable of logic; indeed, we should make a
mistake in paying honor to the actual feminine in woman if she were
capable of logic. She is rather to be persuaded with apparent reasons,
with transitory and sparkling matters that have only the semblance of
truth. We find her too ready to agree, and blame her will when it is
only her different form of intelligence. She persuades herself in the
same way. An epithet, a sparkling epigram, a pacifying reflection is
enough for her; she does not need a whole construction of reason, and
thus she proceeds to do things that we again call “weak.” Take so
thoroughly a feminine reflection as this: “The heart seems to beat--why
shouldn’t it beat for somebody?” and the woman throws herself on the
breast of some adventurer. The world that hears of this fact weeps over
feminine “weakness,” while it ought really to weep over defective
intelligence and bad logic. That the physiological throb of the heart
need not become significant of love, that the owner of a beating heart
need not be interested in some man, and certainly not in that particular
adventurer, she does not even consider possible. She is satisfied with
this clean-cut, sparkling syllogism, and her understanding is calm. The
judge in the criminal court must always first consider the weakness of
the feminine intelligence, not of the feminine will.

It is supposed to be weakness of will which makes woman gossipy, unable
to keep a secret. But here again it is her understanding that is at
fault. This is shown by the fact, already thoroughly discussed by Kant,
that women are good keepers of their own secrets, but never of the
secrets of others. If this were not a defect of intelligence they would
have been able to estimate the damage they do. Now, every one of us
criminalists knows that the crime committed, and even the plan for it,
has in most cases been betrayed by women. We can learn most about this
matter from detectives, who always go to women for the discovery of
facts, and rarely without success. Of course, the judge must not act
like a detective, but he must know, when something is already a matter
of discussion and its source is sought, where to look. He is to look for
the woman in the case.

Another consideration of importance is the fact that women who have told
secrets have also altered them. This is due to the fact that because
they are secrets the whole is not told them and they have had to infer
much, or they have not properly understood what was told. Now, if we
perceive that only a part of the revealed secret can be correct, the
situation may be inferred with complete safety, but only by remembering
this curious trait of feminine intelligence. We have only to ask what
illogical elements does the matter contain? When these are discovered we
have to ask, what is their logical form? If the process is followed
properly we get at the truth that what happens happens logically, but
what is thought, is thought illogically even by women.

When we summarise all we know about woman we may say briefly: Woman is
neither better nor worse, neither more nor less valuable than man, but
she is different from him and inasmuch as nature has created every
object correctly for its purpose, woman has also been so created. The
reason of her existence is different from that of man’s and hence, her
nature is different.


Section 78. (b) Children.

The special character of the child has to be kept in mind both when it
appears as witness and as accused. To treat it like an adult is always
wrong. It would be wrong, moreover, to seek the differences in its
immaturity and inexperience, in its small knowledge and narrower
outlook. This is only a part of the difference. The fact is, that
because the child is in the process of growth and development of its
organs, because the relations of these to each other are different and
their functions are different, it is actually a different kind of being
from the adult. When we think how different the body and actions of the
child are, how different its nourishment, how differently foreign
influences affect it, and how different its physical qualities are, we
must see that its mental character is also completely different. Hence,
a difference in degree tells us nothing, we must look for a difference
in kind. Observations made by individuals are not enough. We must
undertake especial studies in the very rich literature.[281]


Section 79. (1) _General Consideration._

One does not need to have much knowledge of children to know that as a
rule, children are more honest and straightforward than adults. They are
good observers, more disinterested and hence unbiased in giving
evidence, but because of their weakness, more subject to the influence
of other people. Apart from intentional influences there is the
tremendous influence of selected preconceptions. If a child is an
important witness we can never get the truth from him until we discover
what his ideals are. It is, of course, true that everybody who has
ideals is influenced by them, but it is also true that children who have
adventurous, imaginative tendencies are so steeped in them that
everything they think or do gets color, tone, and significance from
them. What the object of adventure does is good, what it does not do is
bad, what it possesses is beautiful, and what it asserts is correct.
Numerous unexplainable assertions and actions of children are cleared up
by reference to their particular ideals, if they may be called ideals.

As a rule, we may hold that children have a certain sense of justice,
and that they find it decidedly unpleasant to see anybody treated
otherwise than he deserves. But in this connection it must be considered
that the child has its own views as to what a person’s deserts are, and
that these views can rarely be judged by our own. In the same way it is
certain that, lacking things to think or to trouble about, children are
much interested in and remember well what occurs about them. But, again,
we have to bear in mind that the interest itself develops from the
child’s standpoint and that his memory constructs new events in terms of
his earlier experiences. As a rule, we may presuppose in his memory only
what is found already in his occupations. What is new, altogether new,
must first find a function, and that is difficult. If, now, a child
remembers something, he will first try to fit it to some function of
memory already present and this will then absorb the new fact, well or
ill, as the case may be. The frequent oversight of this fact is the
reason for many a false interpretation of what the child said; he is
believed to have perceived falsely and to have made false restatements,
when he has only perceived and restated in his own way.

As children have rarely a proper sense of the value of life, they
observe an undubitable death closely without much fear. This explains
many an unbelievable act of courage or clear observation in a child in
cases where an adult, frightened, can see nothing. It is, hence, unjust
to doubt many a statement of children, because you doubt their
“courage.” “Courage” was not in question at all.

Concerning the difference between boys and girls, Löbisch[282] says
rightly, that girls remember persons better, and boys, things. He adds,
moreover: “The more silent girl, who is given to observe what is before
her, shows herself more teachable than the spiteful and also more
imaginative boy who understands with difficulty because he is intended
to be better grounded and to go further in the business of knowing. The
girl, all in all, is more curious; the boy, more eager to know. What he
fails in, what he is not spurred to by love or talent, he throws
obstinately aside. While the girl loyally and trustfully absorbs her
teachings, the boy remains unsatisfied without some insight into the
_why_ or _how_, without some proof. The boy enters daily more and more
into the world of concepts, while the girl thinks of objects not as
members of a class, but as definite particular things.”


Section 80. (2) _Children as Witnesses._

Once, in an examination of the value of the testimony of children, I
found it to be excellent in certain directions because not so much
influenced by passion and special interest as that of adults, and
because we may assume that children have classified too little rather
than too much; that they frequently do not understand an event but
perceive instinctively that it means disorder, and hence, become
interested in it. Later the child gets a broader horizon and understands
what he has not formerly understood, although, possibly, not altogether
with correctness.

I have further found that the boy just growing out of childhood, in so
far as he has been well brought up, is especially the best observer and
witness there is. He observes everything that occurs with interest,
synthesizes events without prejudice, and reproduces them accurately,
while the girl of the same age is often an unreliable, even dangerous
witness. This is almost always the case when the girl is in some degree
talented, impulsive, dreamy, romantic, and adventurous,--she expresses a
sort of weltschmerz connected with ennui. This comes early, and if a
girl of that age is herself drawn into the circle of the events in
question, we are never safe from extreme exaggeration. The merest
larceny becomes a small robbery; a bare insult, a remarkable attack; a
foolish quip, an interesting seduction; and a stupid, boyish
conversation, an important conspiracy. Such causes of mistakes are
well-known to all judges; at the same time they are again and again
permitted to recur.

The sole means of safety from them is the clearest comprehension
possible of the mental horizon of the child in question. We have very
little general knowledge about it, and hence, are much indebted to the
contemporary attempts of public-school teachers to supply the
information. We all know that we must make distinctions between city and
country children, and must not be surprised at the country child who has
not seen a gas-lamp, a railroad, or something similar. Stanley Hall
tried to discover from six year old children whether they really knew
the things, the names of which they used freely. It seemed, as a result,
that 14% of them had never seen a star; 45% had never been in the
country; 20% did not know that milk came from a cow; 50% that fire-wood
comes from trees; 13% to 15% the difference between green, blue and
yellow; and 4% had never made the acquaintance of a pig.

Karl Lange made experiments (reported in “Über Apperzeption,” Plauen,
1889) on 500 pupils in 33 schools in small towns. The experiment showed
that 82% had never seen sun-rise; 77% a sunset; 36% a corn field; 49% a
river; 82% a pond; 80% a lock; 37% had never been in the woods, 62%
never on the mountains, and 73% did not know how bread was made from
grain. Involuntarily the question arises, what must be the position of
the unfortunate children of large cities, and moreover, what may we
expect to hear from children who do not know things like that, and at
the same time speak of them easily? Adults are not free from this
difficulty either. We have never yet seen a living whale, or a sandstorm
in the Sahara, or an ancient Teuton, yet we speak of them confidently
and profoundly, and never secure ourselves against the fact that we have
never seen them. Now, as we of the ancient Teuton, so children of the
woods; neither have seen them, but one description has as much or as
little value as the other.

Concerning the integration of senses, Binet and Henri[283] have examined
7200 children, whom they had imitate the length of a model line, or pick
out from a collection of lines those of similar length. The latter
experiment was extraordinarily successful.

The senses of children are especially keen and properly developed. It is
anatomically true that very young children do not hear well; but that is
so at an age which can not be of interest to us. Their sense of smell
is, according to Heusinger, very dull, and develops at the time of
puberty, but later observers, in particular those who, like Hack,
Cloquet and others, have studied the sense of smell, say nothing about
this.

Concerning the accuracy of representation in children authorities are
contradictory. Montaigne says that all children lie and are obstinate.
Bourdin corroborates him. Maudsley says that children often have
illusions which seem to them indubitably real images, and Mittermaier
says that they are superficial and have youthful fancies. Experience in
practice does not confirm this judgment. The much experienced Herder
repeatedly prizes children as born physiognomists, and Soden values the
disinterestedness of children very highly. According to Löbisch,
children tell untruths without lying. They say only what they have in
mind, but they do not know and care very little whether their mental
content is objective and exists outside of them, or whether only half
real and the rest fanciful. This is confirmed by legal experience which
shows us, also, that the subjective half of a child’s story may be
easily identified. It is characteristically different from the real
event and a confusion of the two is impossible.

We must also not forget that there are lacunae in the child’s
comprehension of what it perceives. When it observes an event, it may,
e.g., completely understand the first part, find the second part
altogether new and unintelligible, the third part again comprehensible,
etc. If the child is only half-interested, it will try to fill out these
lacunae by reflection and synthesis, and may conceivably make serious
blunders. The blunders and inaccuracies increase the further back the
event goes into the child’s youth. The real capacity for memory goes far
back. Preyer[284] tells of cases in which children told of events that
they had experienced at thirty-two, twenty-four, and even eighteen
months, and told them correctly. Of course, adults do not recall
experiences of such an early age, for they have long since forgotten
them. But very small children can recall such experiences, though in
most cases their recollection is worthless, their circle of ideas being
so small that the commonest experiences are excluded from adequate
description. But they are worth while considering when a mere fact is in
question, or is to be doubted (Were you beaten? Was anybody there? Where
did the man stand?).

Children’s determinations of time are unreliable. Yesterday and to-day
are easily confused by small children, and a considerably advanced
intelligence is necessary to distinguish between yesterday and a week
ago, or even a week and a month. That we need, in such cases, correct
individualization of the witness is self-evident. The conditions of the
child’s bringing-up, the things he learned to know, are what we must
first of all learn. If the question in hand can fit into the notion the
child possesses, he will answer better and more if quite unendowed, than
if a very clever child who is foreign to the notions of the defined
situation. I should take intelligence only to be of next importance in
such cases, and advise giving up separating clever from stupid children
in favor of separating practical and unpractical children. The latter
makes an essential difference. Both the children of talent and stupid
children may be practical or unpractical. If a child is talented and
practical he will become a useful member of society who will be at home
everywhere and will be able to help himself under any circumstances. If
a child is talented and unpractical, it may grow up into a professor, as
is customarily expected of it. If a child is untalented and practical,
it will properly fill a definite place, and if it has luck and “pull”
may even attain high station in life. If it is untalented and
unpractical it becomes one of those poor creatures who never get
anywhere. For the rôle of witness the child’s practicality is the
important thing. The practical child will see, observe, properly
understand, and reproduce a group of things that the unpractical child
has not even observed. Of course, it is well, also, to have the child
talented, but I repeat: the least clever practical child is worth more
as witness than the most clever unpractical child.

What the term “practical” stands for is difficult to say, but everybody
knows it, and everybody has seen, who has cared about children at all,
that there are practical children.


Section 81. (3) _Juvenile Delinquency._

There have never lacked authors who have assigned to children a great
group of defects. Ever since Lombroso it has been the custom in a
certain circle to find the worst crimes already foreshadowed in
children. If there are congenital criminals it must follow that there
are criminals among children. It is shown that the most cruel and most
unhuman men, like Nero, Caracalla, Caligula, Louis XI, Charles IX, Louis
XIII, etc., showed signs of great cruelty, even in earliest childhood.
Perez cites attacks of anger and rage in children; Moreau, early
development of the sense of vengeance, Lafontaine, their lack of pity.
Nasse also calls attention to the cruelty and savagery of large numbers
of children, traits shown in their liking for horror-stories, in the
topsy-turvy conclusion of the stories they tell themselves, in their
cruelty to animals. Broussais[285] says, “There is hardly a lad who
will not intentionally abuse weaker boys. This is his first impulse. His
victim’s cries of pain restrain him for a moment from further
maltreatment, if the love of bullying is not native with him. But at the
first offered opportunity he again follows his instinctive impulse.”

Even the power of training is reduced and is expressed in the proverb,
that children and nations take note only of their last beating. The time
about, and especially just before, the development of puberty seems to
be an especially bad one, and according to Voisin[286] and
Friedreich,[287] modern man sees in this beginning of masculinity the
cause of the most extraordinary and doubtful impulses. Since Esquirol
invented the doctrine of monomanias there has grown up a whole
literature, especially concerning pyromania among girls who are just
becoming marriageable, and Friedreich even asserts that all pubescent
children suffer from pyromania, while Grohmann holds that scrofulous
children are in the habit of stealing.

When this literature is tested the conclusion is inevitable that there
has been overbold generalization. One may easily see how. Of course
there are badly behaved children, and it is no agreement with the
Italian positivists to add, also, that a large number of criminals were
good for nothing even in their earliest youth. But we are here concerned
with the specific endowment of childhood, and it is certainly an
exaggeration to set this lower than that of maturity. If it be asked,
what influence nurture and training have if children are good without
it, we may answer at once, that these have done enough in having
supplied a counterbalance to the depraving influences of life,--the
awakening passions and the environment.

Children who are bad at an early age are easily noticeable. They make
noise and trouble as thousands of well-behaved children do not, and a
poor few of such bad ones are taken to be representative of all. What is
silent and not significant, goes of itself, makes no impression, even
though it is incomparably of greater magnitude. Individual and noisy
cases require so much attention that their character is assigned to the
whole class. Fortune-telling, dreams, forewarnings, and prophecies are
similarly treated. If they do not succeed, they are forgotten, but if in
one case they succeed, they make a great noise. They appear, therefore,
to seduce the mind into incorrectly interpreting them as typical. And
generally, there is a tendency to make sweeping statements about
children. “If you have understood this, you understand that also,”
children are often told, and most of the time unjustly. The child is
treated like a grown man to whom _this_ has occurred as often as _that_,
and who has intelligence enough and experience enough to apply _this_ to
_that_ by way of identification. Consider an exaggerated example. The
child, let us say, knows very well that stealing is dishonorable,
sinful, criminal. But it does not know that counterfeiting, treachery,
and arson are forbidden. These differences, however, may be reduced to a
hair. It knows that stealing is forbidden, but considers it permissible
to “rag” the neighbors’ fruit. It knows that lying is a sin, but it does
not know that certain lies become suddenly punishable, according to law,
and are called frauds. When, therefore, a boy tells his uncle that
father sent him for money because he does not happen to have any at
home, and when the little rascal spends the money for sweets, he may
perhaps believe that the lie is quite ugly, but that he had done
anything objectively punishable, he may be totally unaware. It is just
as difficult for the child to become subjective. The child is more of an
egoist than the adult; on the one hand, because it is protected and
watched in many directions by the adult; on the other, because, from the
nature of things, it does not have to care for anybody, and would go
ship-wreck if it were not itself cared for. The natural consequences are
that it does not discover the limits between what is permissible, and
what is not permissible. As Kraus says,[288] “Unripe youth shows a
distinct quality in distinguishing good and evil. A child of this age,
that is required to judge the action or relations of persons, will not
keep one waiting for the proper solution, but if the action is brought
into relation to its selfhood, to its own personality, there is a sudden
disingenuity, a twisting of the judgment, an incapacity in the child to
set itself at the objective point of view.” Hence, it is wrong to ask a
child: “Didn’t you know that you should not have done this thing?” The
child will answer, “Yes, I knew,” but it does not dare to add, “I knew
that other people ought not do it, but I might.” It is not necessary
that the spoiled, pampered pet should say this; any child has this
prejudiced attitude. And how shall it know the limit between what is
permitted it, and what is not? Adults must work, the child plays; the
mother must cook, the child comes to the laden table; the mother must
wash, the child wears the clean clothes; it gets the titbits; it is
protected against cold; it is forgiven many a deed and many a word not
permitted the adult. Now all of a sudden it is blamed because it has
gone on making use of its recognized privileges. Whoever remembers this
artificial, but nevertheless necessary, egoism in children will have to
think more kindly of many a childish crime. Moreover, we must not
overlook the fact that the child does many things simply as blind
imitation. More accurate observation of this well known psychological
fact will show how extensive childish imitation is. At a certain limit,
of course, liability is here also present, but if a child is imitating
an imitable person, a parent, a teacher, etc., its responsibility is at
an end.

All in all, we may say that nobody has brought any evidence to show that
children are any worse-behaved than adults. Experience teaches that
hypocrisy, calculating evil, intentional selfishness, and purposeful
lying are incomparably rarer among children than among adults, and that
on the whole, they observe well and willingly. We may take children,
with the exception of pubescent girls, to be good, reliable witnesses.


Section 82. (c) Senility.

It would seem that we lawyers have taken insufficient account of the
characteristics of senility. These characteristics are as definitive as
those of childhood or of sex, and to overlook them may lead to serious
consequences. We shall not consider that degree of old age which is
called second childhood. At that stage the question seriously arises
whether we are not dealing with the idiocy of age, or at least with a
weakness of perception and of memory so obvious that they can not be
mistaken.

The important stage is the one which precedes this, and in which a
definite decline in mental power is not yet perceivable. Just as we see
the first stage of early youth come to an end when the distinction
between boy and girl becomes altogether definite, so we may observe that
the important activity of the process of life has run its course when
this distinction begins to degenerate. It is essentially defined by the
approximation to each other of the external appearance of the two
sexes,--their voices, their inner character, and their attitude. What is
typically masculine or feminine disappears. It is at this point that
extreme old age begins. The number of years, the degree of intelligence,
education, and other differences are of small importance, and the
ensuing particularities may be easily deduced by a consideration of the
nature of extreme old age. The task of life is ended, because the
physical powers have no longer any scope. For the same reason resistance
to enemies has become lessened, courage has decreased, care about
physical welfare increased, everything occurs more slowly and with
greater difficulty, and all because of the newly-arrived weakness which,
from now on, becomes the denotative trait of that whole bit of human
nature. Hence, Lombroso[289] is not wrong in saying that the
characteristic diseases of extreme old age are rarer among women than
among men. This is so because the change in women is not so sudden, nor
so powerful, since they are weak to begin with, while man becomes a weak
graybeard suddenly and out of the fullness of his manly strength. The
change is so great, the difference so significant and painful, that the
consequence must be a series of unpleasant properties,--egoism,
excitability, moroseness, cruelty, etc. It is significant that the very
old man assumes all those unpleasant characteristics we note in
eunuchs--they result from the consciousness of having lost power.

It is from this fact that Kraus (loc. cit.) deduces the crimes of
extreme old age. “The excitable weakness of the old man brings him into
great danger of becoming a criminal. The excitability is opposed to
slowness and one-sidedness in thought; he is easily surprised by
irrelevancies; he is torn from his drowse, and behaves like a somnolent
drunkard.... The very old individual is a fanatic about rest--every
disturbance of his rest troubles him. Hence, all his anger, all his
teasing and quarreling, all his obstinacy and stiffness, have a single
device: ‘Let me alone.’”

This somnolent drunkenness is variously valued. Henry Holland, in one of
his “Fragmentary Papers,” said that age approximates a condition of
dreams in which illusion and reality are easily confused. But this can
be true only of the last stages of extreme old age, when life has become
a very weak, vegetative function, but hardly any crimes are committed by
people in this stage.

It would be simpler to say that the old man’s weakness gives the earlier
tendencies of his youth a definite direction which may lead to crime.
All diseases develop in the direction of the newly developing weakness.
But selfishness or greed are not young. Hence we must assume that an
aging man who has turned miser began by being prudent, but that he did
not deny himself and his friends because he knew that he was able to
restore, later, what they consumed. Now he is old and weak, he knows
that he can no longer do this easily, i.e., that his money and property
are all that he has to depend on in his old age, and hence, he is very
much afraid of losing or decreasing them, so that his prudence becomes
miserliness, later mania for possession, and even worse; finally it may
turn him into a criminal.

The situation is the same sexually. Too weak to satisfy natural
instincts in adults, he attacks immature girls, and his fear of people
he can no longer otherwise oppose turns him into a poisoner. Drobisch
finds that by reason of the alteration of characteristics, definite
elements of the self are distinguishable at every stage. The
distinguishing element in extreme old age, in senility, is the loss of
power, and if we keep this in mind we shall be able to explain every
phenomenon characteristic of this period.

Senile individuals require especial treatment as witnesses. An accurate
study of such people and of the not over-rich literature concerning them
will, however, yield a sufficient basis to go on. What is most important
can be found in any text-book on psychology. The individual cases are
considerably helped by the assumption that the mental organization of
senility is essentially simplified and narrowed to a few types. Its
activities are lessened, its influences and aims are compressed, the
present brings little and is little remembered, so that its collective
character is determined by a resultant, composed of those forces that
have influenced the man’s past life. Accurate observation will reveal
only two types of senility.[290] There is the embittered type, and there
is the character expressed in the phrase, “to understand all is to
forgive all.” Senility rarely succeeds in presenting facts objectively.
Everything it tells is bound up with its judgment, and its judgment is
either negative or positive. The judgment’s nature depends less on the
old man’s emotional character than on his experience in life. If he is
one of the embittered, he will probably so describe a possibly harmful,
but not bad event, as to be able to complain of the wickedness of the
world, which brought it about, that at one time such and such an evil
happened to him. The excusing senile will begin with “Good God, it
wasn’t so bad. The people were young and merry, and so one of them--.”
That the same event is presented in a fundamentally different light by
each is obvious. Fortunately, the senile is easily seen through and his
first words show how he looks at things. He makes difficulties mainly by
introducing memories which always color and modify the evidence. The
familiar fact that very old men remember things long past better than
immediate occurrences, is to be explained by the situation that the
ancient brain retains only that which it has frequently experienced. Old
experiences are recalled in memory hundreds and hundreds of times, and
hence, may take deep root there, while the new could be repeated, only a
few times, and hence had not time to find a place before being
forgotten. If the old man tells of some recent event, some similar
remote event is also alive in his mind. The latter has, however, if not
more vivid at least equally vigorous color, so that the old man’s story
is frequently composed of things long past. I do not know how to
eliminate these old memories from this story. There are always
difficulties, particularly as personal experiences of evil generally
dominate these memories. It is not unjust, that proverb which says “If
youth is at all silly, old age remembers it well.”


Section 83. (d) Differences in Conception.

I should like to add to what precedes, that senility presents fact and
judgment together. In a certain sense every age and person does so and,
as I have repeatedly said, it would be foolish to assert that we have
the right to demand only facts from witnesses. Setting aside the
presence of inferences in most sense-perceptions, every exposition
contains, without exception, the judgment of its subject-matter, though
only, perhaps, in a few dry words. It may lie in some choice expression,
in the tone, in the gesture but it is there, open to careful
observation. Consider any simple event, e.g., two drunkards quarreling
in the street. And suppose we instruct any one of many witnesses to tell
us only the facts. He will do so, but with the introductory words, “It
was a very ordinary event,” “altogether a joke,” “completely harmless,”
“quite disgusting,” “very funny,” “a disgusting piece of the history of
morals,” “too sad,” “unworthy of humanity,” “frightfully dangerous,”
“very interesting,” “a real study for hell,” “just a picture of the
future,” etc. Now, is it possible to think that people who have so
variously characterized the same event will give an identical
description of the mere fact? They have seen the event in accordance
with their attitude toward life. One has seen nothing; another this;
another that; and, although the thing might have lasted only a very
short time, it made such an impression that each has in mind a
completely different picture which he now reproduces.[291] As Volkmar
said, “One nation hears in thunder the clangor of trumpets, the
hoof-beats of divine steeds, the quarrels of the dragons of heaven;
another hears the mooing of the cow, the chirp of the cricket, the
complaint of the ancestors; still another hears the saints turn the
vault of heaven, and the Greenlander, even the quarrel of bewitched
women concerning a dried skin.” And Voltaire says, “If you ask the devil
what beauty is, he will tell you that beauty is a pair of horns, four
hoofs, and a tail.” Yet, when we ask a witness what is beautiful, we
think that we are asking for a brute fact, and expect as reliable an
answer as from a mathematician. We might as well ask for cleanliness
from a person who thinks he has set his house in order by having swept
the dirt from one corner to another.

To compare the varieties of intellectual attitude among men generally,
we must start with sense-perception, which, combined with mental
perception, makes a not insignificant difference in each individual.
Astronomers first discovered the existence of this difference, in that
they showed that various observers of contemporaneous events do not
observe at the same time. This fact is called “the personal equation.”
Whether the difference in rate of sense-perception, or the difference of
intellectual apprehension, or of both together, are here responsible, is
not known, but the proved distinction (even to a second) is so much the
more important, since events which succeed each other very rapidly may
cause individual observers to have quite different images. And we know
as little whether the slower or the quicker observer sees more
correctly, as we little know what people perceive more quickly or more
slowly. Now, inasmuch as we are unable to test individual differences
with special instruments, we must satisfy ourselves with the fact that
there are different varieties of conception, and that these may be of
especial importance in doubtful cases, such as brawls, sudden attacks,
cheating at cards, pocket-picking, etc.

The next degree of difference is in the difference of observation.
Schiel says that the observer is not he who sees the thing, but who sees
of what parts it is made. The talent for such vision is rare. One man
overlooks half because he is inattentive or is looking at the wrong
place; another substitutes his own inferences for objects, while another
tends to observe the quality of objects, and neglects their quantity;
and still another divides what is to be united, and unites what is to be
separated. If we keep in mind what profound differences may result in
this way, we must recognize the source of the conflicting assertions by
witnesses. And we shall have to grant that these differences would
become incomparably greater and more important if the witnesses were not
required to talk of the event immediately, or later on, thus
approximating their different conceptions to some average. Hence we
often discover that when the witnesses really have had no chance to
discuss the matter and have heard no account of it from a third person,
or have not seen the consequences of the deed, their discussions of it
showed distinct and essential differences merely through the lack of an
opportunity or a standard of correction. And we then suppose that a part
of what the witnesses have said is untrue, or assume that they were
inattentive, or blind.

Views are of similar importance.[292] Fiesto exclaims, “It is scandalous
to empty a full purse, it is impertinent to misappropriate a million,
but it is unnamably great to steal a crown. The shame decreases with the
increase of the sin.” Exner holds that the ancients conceived Oedipus
not as we do; they found his misfortune horrible; we find it unpleasant.

These are poetical criminal cases presented to us from different points
of view; and we nowadays understand the same action still more
differently, and not only in poetry, but in the daily life. Try, for
example, to get various individuals to judge the same formation of
clouds. You may hear the clouds called flower-stalks with spiritual
blossoms, impoverished students, stormy sea, camel, monkey, battling
giants, swarm of flies, prophet with a flowing beard, dunderhead, etc.
We have coming to light, in this accidental interpretation of fact, the
speaker’s view of life, his intimacies, etc. This emergence is as
observable in the interpretation also of the ordinary events of the
daily life. There, even if the judgments do not vary very much, they are
still different enough to indicate quite distinct points of view. The
memory of the curious judgment of one cloud-formation has helped me many
a time to explain testimonies that seemed to have no possible
connection.

_Attitude or feeling_--this indefinable factor exercises a great
influence on conception and interpretation. It is much more wonderful
than even the march of events, or of fate itself. Everybody knows what
attitude (stimmung) is. Everybody has suffered from it, everybody has
made some use of it, but nobody can altogether define it. According to
Fischer, attitude consists in the compounded feelings of all the inner
conditions and changes of the organism, expressed in consciousness.
This would make attitude a sort of vital feeling, the resultant of the
now favorable, now unfavorable functioning of our organs. The
description is, however, not unexceptionable, inasmuch as single,
apparently insignificant influences upon our senses may create or alter
our attitudes for a long time without revealing its effect on any organ
or its integration with the other mental states. I know how merely good
or bad weather determines attitude, how it may be helped immediately by
a good cigar, and how often we may pass a day, joyous or dejected, only
to discover that the cause is a good or a bad dream of the foregoing
night. Especially instructive in this regard was a little experience of
mine during an official journey. The trouble which brought me out was an
ordinary brawl between young peasants, one of whom was badly cut up and
was to be examined. Half-way over, we had to wait at a wayside inn where
I expected a relieving gendarme. A quarter of an hour after the stop,
when we renewed the journey, I found myself overcome by unspeakable
sadness, and this very customary brawl seemed to me especially
unpleasant. I sympathized with the wounded boy, his parents, his
opponents, all strangers to me, and I bewrayed the rawness of mankind,
its love for liquor, etc. This attitude was so striking that I began to
seek its cause. I found it, first of all, in the dreary region,--then in
the cup of hot coffee that I had drunk in the restaurant, which might
possibly have been poisonous;--finally, it occurred to me that the
hoof-beats of the horses were tuned to a very saddening minor chord. The
coachman in his hurry had forgotten to take bells with him, and in order
to avoid violating police regulations he had borrowed at the inn another
peal, and my sad state dated from the moment I heard it. I banished the
sound and immediately I found myself enjoying the pretty scenery.

I am convinced that if I had been called to testify in my sad state, I
would have told the story otherwise than normally. The influence of
music upon attitude is very well known. The unknown influence of
external conditions also makes a difference on attitude. “If you are
absorbed in thought,” says Fechner, “you notice neither sunshine nor the
green of the meadows, etc., and still you are in a quite different
emotional condition from that which would possess you in a dark room.”

The attitude we call indifference is of particular import. It appears,
especially, when the ego, because of powerful impressions, is concerned
with itself; pain, sadness, important work, reflection, disease, etc.
In this condition we depreciate or undervalue the significance of
everything that occurs about us. Everything is brought into relation to
our personal, immediate condition, and is from the point of view of our
egoism, more or less indifferent. It does not matter whether this
attitude of indifference occurs at the time of perception or at the time
of restatement during the examination. In either case, the fact is
robbed of its hardness, its significance, and its importance; what was
white or black, is described as gray.

There is another and similar attitude which is distinguished by the fact
that we are never quite aware of it but are much subject to it.
According to Lipps[293] and Lotze,[294] there is to be observed in
neurotic attitudes a not rare and complete indifference to feeling, and
in consciousness an essential lack of feeling-tone in perception. Our
existence, our own being, seems to us, then, to be a foreign thing,
having little concern with us--a story we need not earnestly consider.
That in such condition little attention is paid to what is going on
around us seems clear enough. The experiences are shadowy and
superficial; they are indifferent and are represented as such only. This
condition is very dangerous in the law court, because, where a
conscientious witness will tell us that, e.g., at the time of the
observation or the examination he was sick or troubled, and therefore
was incorrect, a person utterly detached in the way described does not
tell the judge of his condition, probably because he does not know
anything about it.

There are certain closely-related mental and physical situations which
lead to quite a different view. Those who are suffering physically,
those who have deeply wounded feelings, and those who have been reduced
by worry, are examined in the same way as normal people, yet they need
to be measured by quite a different standard. Again, we are sometimes
likely to suppose great passions that have long since passed their
period, to be as influential as they were in their prime. We know that
love and hate disappear in the distance, and that love long dead and a
long-deferred hatred tend to express themselves as a feeling of mildness
and forgiveness which is pretty much the same in spite of its diverse
sources. If the examiner knows that a great passion, whether of hate or
of love, exists, he thinks he is fooled when he finds a full, calm and
objective judgment instead of it. It seems impossible to him, and he
either does not believe the probably accurate witness, or colors his
testimony with that knowledge.

Bodily conditions are still more remarkable in effecting differences in
point of view. Here no sense-illusion is presented since no change
occurs in sense-perception; the changes are such that arise after the
perception, during the process of judgment and interpretation. We might
like an idea when lying down that displeases us when we stand up.
Examination shows that this attitude varies with the difference in the
quantity of blood in the brain in these two positions, and this fact may
explain a whole series of phenomena. First of all, it is related to
plan-making and the execution of plans. Everybody knows how, while lying
in bed, a great many plans occur that seem good. The moment you get up,
new considerations arise, and the half-adopted plan is progressively
abandoned. Now this does not mean anything so long as nothing was
undertaken in the first situation which might be binding for the
resolution then made. For example, when two, lying in bed, have made a
definite plan, each is later ashamed before the other to withdraw from
it. So we often hear from criminals that they were sorry about certain
plans, but since they were once resolved upon, they were carried out.
Numbers of such phenomena, many of them quite unbelievable in
appearance, may be retroduced to similar sources.

A like thing occurs when a witness, e.g., reflects about some event
while he is in bed. When he thinks of it again he is convinced, perhaps,
that the matter really occurred in quite another way than he had newly
supposed it to. Now he may convince himself that the time at which he
made the reflections was nearer the event, and hence, those reflections
must have been the more correct ones--in that case he sticks to his
first story, although that might have been incorrect. Helmholtz[295] has
pointed to something similar: “The colors of a landscape appear to be
much more living and definite when they are looked at obliquely, or when
they are looked at with the head upside down, than when they are looked
at with the head in its ordinary position. With the head upside down we
try correctly to judge objects and know that, e.g., green meadows, at a
certain distance, have a rather altered coloration. We become used to
that fact, discount the change and identify the green of distant objects
with the shade of green belonging to near objects. Besides, we see the
landscape from the new position as a flat image, and incidentally we see
clouds in right perspective and the landscape flat, like clouds when we
see them in the ordinary way.” Of course, everybody knows this. And of
course, in a criminal case such considerations will hardly ever play
any rôle. But, on the other hand, it is also a matter of course that the
reason for these differences might likewise be the reason for a great
many others not yet discovered, and yet of great significance to
criminalists.

Such is the situation with regard to comparison. Schiel laid much
emphasis on the fact that two lines of unequal length seem equal when
they diverge, although their difference is recognized immediately if
they are parallel, close together, and start from the same level. He
says that the situation is similar in all comparison. If things may be
juxtaposed they can be compared; if not, the comparison is bound to be
bad. There is no question of illusion here, merely of convenience of
manipulation. Juxtaposition is frequently important, not for the
practical convenience of comparison, but because we must know whether
the witness has discovered the right juxtaposition. Only if he has, can
his comparison have been good. To discover whether he has, requires
careful examination.

Conception and interpretation are considerably dependent on the interest
which is brought to the object examined. There is a story of a child’s
memory of an old man, which was not a memory of the _whole_ man, but
only of a green sleeve and a wrinkled hand presenting a cake of
chocolate. The child was interested only in the chocolate, and hence,
understood it and its nearest environment--the hand and the sleeve. We
may easily observe similar cases. In some great brawl the witness may
have seen only what was happening to his brother. The numismatist may
have observed only a bracelet with a rare coin in a heap of stolen
valuables. In a long anarchistic speech the witness may have heard only
what threatened his own welfare. And so on. The very thing looks
different if, for whatever reason, it is uninteresting or intensely
interesting. A color is quite different when it is in fashion, a flower
different when we know it to be artificial, the sun is brighter at home,
and home-grown fruit tastes better. But there is still another group of
specific influences on our conceptions and interpretations, the examples
of which have been increasing unbrokenly. One of these is the variety in
the significance of words. Words have become symbols of concepts, and
simple words have come to mean involved mathematical and philosophical
ideas. It is conceivable that two men may connote quite different things
by the word “symbol.” And even in thinking and construing, in making use
of perceived facts, different conceptions may arise through presenting
the fact to another with symbols, that to him, signify different things.
The difference may perhaps not be great, but when it is taken in
connection with the associations and suggestions of the word used, small
mistakes multiply and the result is quite different from what it might
have been if another meaning had been the starting-point. The use of
foreign words, in a sense different from that used by us, may lead us
far astray. It must be borne in mind that the meaning of the foreign
word frequently does not coincide with the sense it has in the
dictionary. Hence, it is dangerous in adducing evidence to use foreign
expressions when it is important to adhere strictly to a single meaning.
Taine says, correctly: “Love and amour, girl and jeune fille, song and
chanson, are not identical although they are substituted for one
another.” It is, moreover, pointed out that children, especially, are
glad to substitute and alter ideas for which one word stands, so that
they expand or contract its meaning haphazard. Bow-wow may first mean a
dog, then a horse, then all animals, and a child who was once shown a
fir tree in the forest said it wasn’t a fir tree, for fir trees come
only at Christmas.

This process is not confined to children. At one time or another we hear
a word. As soon as we hear it we connect it with an idea. This
connection will rarely be correct, largely because we have heard the
word for the first time. Later, we get our idea from events in which
this word occurs, of course, in connection with the object we
instantaneously understand the word to mean. In time we learn another
word, and word and meaning have changed, correctly or incorrectly. A
comparison of these changes in individuals would show how easy both
approximations and diversifications in meaning are. It must follow that
any number of misunderstandings can develop, and many an alteration in
the conception of justice and decency, considered through a long period,
may become very significant in indicating the changes in the meaning of
words. Many a time, if we bear thoroughly in mind the mere changes in
the meaning of the word standing for a doubtful fact, we put ourselves
in possession of the history of morals. Even the most important quarrels
would lapse if the quarreling persons could get emotionally at the
intent of their opponent’s words.

In this connection questions of honor offer a broad field of examples.
It is well known that German is rich in words that show personal
dislikes, and also, that the greater portion of these words are harmless
in themselves. But one man understands this, the other that, when he
hears the words, and finally, German is in the curious position of being
the cause of the largest number of attacks on honor and of cases of
slander in the world. Where the Frenchman laughs and becomes witty, the
German grows sullen, insulting, and looks for trouble. The French call
sensitiveness to insignificant and worthless things, the German way of
quarreling (faire querelle d’allemand). Many a slander case in court is
easily settled by showing people the value of the word. Many who
complained that they were called a creature, a person, etc., went away
satisfied as soon as the whole meaning of the words had been explained
to them.

In conclusion, just a word concerning the influence of time on
conception. Not the length of past time, but the value of the time-span
is what is important in determining an event. According to Herbart,
there is a form of temporal repetition, and time is the form of
repetition. If he is right it is inevitable that time, fast-moving or
slow-moving, must influence the conception of events. It is well-known
that monotony in the run of time makes it seem slow, while time full of
events goes swiftly, but appears long in memory, because a large number
of points have to be thought through. Münsterberg shows that we have to
stop at every separate point, and so time seems, in memory, longer. But
this is not universally valid. Aristotle had already pointed out that a
familiar road appears to be shorter than an unfamiliar one, and this is
contradictory to the first proposition. So, a series of days flies away
if we spend them quietly and calmly in vacation in the country. Their
swiftness is surprising. Then when something of importance occurs in our
life and it is directly succeeded by a calm, eventless period, this
seems very long in memory, although it should have seemed long when it
occurred, and short in the past. These and similar phenomena are quite
unexplained, and all that can be said after numerous experiments is,
that we conceive short times as long, and long times as short. Now, we
may add the remarkable fact that most people have no idea of the
duration of very small times, especially of the minute. Ask any
individual to sit absolutely quiet, without counting or doing anything
else, and to indicate the passing of each minute up to five. He will say
that the five minutes have passed at the end of never more than a minute
and a half. So witnesses in estimating time will make mistakes also, and
these mistakes, and other nonsense, are written into the protocols.

There are two means of correction. Either have the witness determine the
time in terms of some familiar form, i.e., a paternoster, etc., or give
him the watch and let him observe the second hand. In the latter case he
will assert that his ten, or his five, or his twenty minutes were, at
most, no more than a half or a whole minute.

The problem of time is still more difficult when the examination has to
be made with regard to the estimation of still longer periods--weeks,
months, or years. There is no means of making any test. The only thing
that experience definitely shows is, that the certainty of such
estimates depends on their being fixed by distinct events. If anybody
says that event A occurred four or five days before event B, we may
believe him if, e.g., he adds, “For when A occurred we began to cut
corn, and when B occurred we harvested it. And between these two events
there were four or five days.” If he can not adduce similar judgments,
we must never depend upon him, for things may have occurred which have
so influenced his conception of time that he judges altogether falsely.

It often happens in such cases that defective estimates, made in the
course of lengthy explanations, suddenly become points of reference, and
then, if wrong, are the cause of mistakes. Suppose that a witness once
said that an event occurred four years ago. Much later an estimation of
the time is undertaken which shows that the hasty statement sets the
event in 1893. And then all the most important conclusions are merely
argued from that. It is best, as is customary in such cases, to test the
uncertainty and incorrectness of these estimates of time on oneself. It
may be assumed that the witness, in the case in question, is likely to
have made a better estimate, but it may equally be assumed that he has
not done so. In short, the conception of periods of time can not be
dealt with too cautiously.


Section 84. (e) Nature and Nurture.

Schopenhauer was the first to classify people according to nature and
nurture. Just where he first used the categories I do not know, but I
know that he is responsible for them. “Nature” is physical and mental
character and disposition, taken most broadly; “nurture” is bringing up,
environment, studies, scholarship, and experience, also in the broadest
sense of those words. Both together present what a man is, what he is
able to do, what he wants to do. A classification, then, according to
nature and nurture is a classification according to essence and
character. The influence of a man’s nature on his face, we know, or try
to know, but what criminal relationships his nurture may develop for us,
we are altogether ignorant of. There are all sorts of intermediaries,
connections and differences between what the goddess of civilization
finds to prize, and what can be justified only by a return to simplicity
and nature.


Section 85. I. _The Influence of Nurture._

Criminologically the influence of nurture on mankind is important if it
can explain the development of morality, honorableness, and love of
truth. The criminalist has to study relations, actions, and assertions,
to value and to compare them when they are differentiable only in terms
of the nurture of those who are responsible for them. The most
instructive works on this problem are those of Tarde,[296] and
Oelzelt-Newin.[297] Among the older writers Leibnitz had already said,
“If you leave education to me I’ll change Europe in a century.”
Descartes, Locke, Helvetius assign to nurture the highest possible value
while Carlyle, e.g., insists that civilization is a cloak in which wild
human nature may eternally burn with hellish fire. For moderns it is a
half-way house. Ribot says that training has least effect at the two
extremes of humanity--little and transitively on the idiot, much on the
average man, not at all on the genius. I might add that the circle of
idiots and geniuses must be made extremely large, for average people are
very few in number, and the increase in intellectual training has made
no statistical difference on the curve of crime. This is one of the
conclusions arrived at by Adolf Wagner[298] which corroborates the
experience of practising lawyers and we who have had, during the growth
of popular education, the opportunity to make observations from the
criminalistic standpoint, know nothing favorable to its influence. If
the general assertion is true that increased national education has
reduced brawling, damages to property, etc., and has increased
swindling, misappropriations, etc., we have made a great mistake. For
the psychological estimation of a criminal, the crime itself is not
definitive; there is always the question as to the damage this
individual has done his own nature with his deed. If, then, a peasant
lad hits his neighbor with the leg of a chair or destroys fences, or
perhaps a whole village, he may still be the most honorable of youths,
and later grow up into a universally respected man. Many of the best and
most useful village mayors have been guilty in their youth of brawls,
damages to property, resistance to authority, and similar things. But
if a man has once swindled or killed anybody, he has lost his honor,
and, as a rule, remains a scoundrel for the rest of his life. If for
criminals of the first kind we substitute the latter type we get a very
bad outlook.

Individuals yield similar experiences. The most important characteristic
of a somewhat cultivated man who not only is able to read and to write,
but makes some use of his knowledge, is a loudly-expressed discontent
with his existence. If he once has acquired the desire to read, the
little time he has is not sufficient to satisfy it, and when he has more
time he is always compelled to lay aside his volume of poetry to feed
the pigs or to clean the stables. He learns, moreover, of a number of
needs which he can not satisfy but which books have instilled in him,
and finally, he seeks illegal means, as we criminalists know, for their
satisfaction.

In many countries the law of such cases considers extenuating
circumstances and defective bringing-up, but it has never yet occurred
to a single criminalist that people might be likely to commit crime
because they could not read or write. Nevertheless, we are frequently in
touch with an old peasant as witness who gives the impression of
absolute integrity, reliability, and wisdom, so much so that it is gain
for anybody to talk to him. But though the black art of reading and
writing has been foreign to him through the whole of his life, nobody
will have any accusation to make against him about defective
bringing-up.

The exhibition of unattainable goods to the mass of mankind is a
question of conscience. We must, of course, assume that deficiency in
education is not in itself a reason for doubting the witness, or for
holding an individual inclined to crime. The mistakes in bringing-up
like spoiling, rigor, neglect, and their consequences, laziness, deceit,
and larceny, have a sufficiently evil outcome. And how far these are at
fault, and how far the nature of the individual himself, can be
determined only in each concrete case by itself. It will not occur to
anybody to wish for a return to savagery and anarchy because of the low
value we set on the training of the mind. There is still the business of
moral training, and its importance can not be overestimated. Considering
the subject generally, we may say that the aim of education is the
capacity of sympathizing with the feeling, understanding, and willing of
other minds. This might be supplemented, perhaps, also with the
limitation that the sympathy must be correct, profound, and implicative,
for external, approximate, or inverted sympathy will obviously not do.
The servant girl knows concerning her master only his manner of
quarreling and his manner of spitting but is absolutely unaffected by,
and strange to his inner life. The darker aspects of culture and
civilization are most obvious in the external contacts of mankind.

When we begin to count an intelligent sympathy, it must follow that the
sympathy is possible only with regard to commonly conceivable matters;
that we must fundamentally exclude the essential inward construction of
the mind and the field of scientific morality. Hence we have left only
religion, which is the working morality of the populace.

According to Goethe, the great fundamental conflict of history is the
conflict of belief with doubt. A discussion of this conflict is
unnecessary here. It is mentioned only by way of indicating that the
sole training on which the criminalist may rely is that of real
religion. A really religious person is a reliable witness, and when he
is behind the bar he permits at least the assumption that he is
innocent. Of course it is difficult to determine whether he is genuinely
religious or not, but if genuine religion can be established we have a
safe starting point. Various authors have discussed the influence of
education, _pro_ and _con_. Statistically, it is shown that in Russia,
only 10% of the population can read and write, and still of 36,868
condemned persons, no fewer than 26,944 were literate. In the seventies
the percentage of criminals in Scotland was divided as follows, 21%
absolutely illiterate, 52.7 half educated; 26.3% well educated.

The religious statistics are altogether worthless. A part of them have
nothing to do with religion, e.g., the criminality of Jews. One part is
worthless because it deals only with the criminality of baptized
Protestants or Catholics, and the final section, which might be of great
interest, i.e., the criminality of believers and unbelievers, is
indeterminable. Statistics say that in the country _A_ in the year _n_
there were punished x% Protestants, y% Catholics, etc. Of what use is
the statement? Both among the x and the y percentages there were many
absolute unbelievers, and it is indifferent whether they were Protestant
or Catholic unbelievers. It would be interesting to know what percentage
of the Catholics and of the Protestants are really faithful, for if we
rightly assume that a true believer rarely commits a crime, we should be
able to say which religion from the view point of the criminalist should
be encouraged. The one which counts the greater percentage of believers,
of course, but we shall never know which one that is. The numbers of
the “Protestant” criminals, and those of the “Catholics,” can not help
us in the least in this matter.


Section 86. (2) _The Views of the Uneducated._

“To discourse is nature, to assimilate discourse as it is given, is
culture.” With this statement, Goethe has shown where the deficiencies
in culture begin, and observation verifies the fact that the uncultured
person is unable to accept what is told him as it is told him. This does
not mean that uncultured people are unable to remember statements as
they are made, but that they are unable to assimilate any perception in
its integrity and to reproduce it in its natural simplicity. This is the
alpha and the omega of every thing observable in the examination of
simple people. Various thinkers in different fields have noted this
fact. Mill, e.g., observes that the inability to distinguish between
perception and inference is most obvious in the attempt of some ignorant
person to describe a natural phenomenon. Douglas Stewart notices that
the village apothecary will rarely describe the simplest case without
immediately making use of a terminology in which every word is a theory.
The simple and true presentation of the phenomenon will reveal at once
whether the mind is able to give an accurate interpretation of nature.
This suggests why we are frequently engaged in some much-involved
process of description of a fact, in itself simple. It has been
presented to us in this complicated fashion because our informants did
not know how to speak simply. So Kant: “The testimony of common people
may frequently be intended honestly, but it is not often reliable
because the witnesses have not the habit of prolonged attention, and so
they mistake what they think themselves for what they hear from others.
Hence, even though they take oaths, they can hardly be believed.” Hume,
again, says somewhere in the Essay, that most men are naturally inclined
to differentiate their discourse, inasmuch as they see their object from
one side only, do not think of the objections, and conceive its
corroborative principles with such liveliness that they pay no attention
to those which look another way. Now, whoever sees an object from one
side only does not see it as it comes to him, and whoever refuses to
think of objections, has already subjectively colored his objects and no
longer sees them as they are.

In this regard it is interesting to note the tendency of uneducated
people to define things. They are not interested in the immediate
perception, but in its abstract form. The best example of this is the
famous barrack-room definition of honor: Honor is that thing belonging
to the man who has it. The same fault is committed by anybody who fails
to apprehend the _whole_ as it comes, but perceives only what is most
obvious and nearest. Mittermaier has pointed out that the light-minded,
accidental witness sees only the nearest characteristics. Again, he
says, “It is a well-known fact that uneducated people attend only to the
question that was asked them last.”[299] This fact is important. If a
witness is unskilfully asked in one breath whether he murdered A, robbed
B, and stole a pear from C, he will probably answer with calmness, “No,
I have not stolen a pear,” but he pays no attention to the other two
portions of the question. This characteristic is frequently made use of
by the defense. The lawyers ask some important witness for the
prosecution: “Can you say that you have seen how the accused entered the
room, looked around, approached the closet, and then drew the watch
toward himself?” The uneducated witness then says dryly, “No, I can not
say that,” although he has seen everything except the concealment of the
watch. He denies the whole thing solely because he has been able to
attend to the last portion of the question only. It is very easy to look
out for these characteristics, by simply not permitting a number of
questions in one, by having questions put in the simplest and clearest
possible form. Simple questions are thankfully received, and get better
answers than long, or tricky ones.

For the same reason that prevents uneducated people from ever seeing a
thing as it comes to them, their love of justice depends on their
eagerness to avoid becoming themselves subjects of injustice. Hence,
weak people can never be honest, and most uneducated people understand
by duty that which _others_ are to do. Duty is presented as required of
all men, but it is more comfortable to require it of others, so that it
is understood as only so required. It may be due to the fact that
education develops quiet imperturbability, and that this is conducive to
correcter vision and more adequate objectivity in both events and
obligations.

There is another series of processes which are characteristic of the
point of view of the uneducated. There is, e.g., a peculiar recurring
mental process with regard to the careful use of life preservers, fire
extinguishers, and other means of escape, which are to be used _hastily_
in case of need. They are found always carefully chained up, or hidden
in closets by the ignorant. This is possible only if the idea of
protecting oneself against sudden need does not make itself effective as
such, but is forced out of the mind by the desire to protect oneself
against theft.

Why must the uneducated carefully feel everything that is shown them, or
that they otherwise find to be new? Children even smell such things,
while educated people are satisfied with looking at them. The request in
public places, “Do not touch,” has very good reason. I believe that the
level of culture of an individual may be determined without much
mistake, by his inclination to touch or not to touch some new object
presented him. The reason for this desire can hardly be established but
it is certainly the wish of the uneducated to study the object more
fundamentally and hence, to bring into play other senses than that of
sight. It may be that the educated man sees more because he is better
trained in careful observation, so that the uneducated man is really
compelled to do more than merely to look. On the other hand, it may be
that the uneducated man here again fails to perceive the object as it
is, and when it appears to him as object A, or is indicated as that
object, he is inclined to disbelieve, and must convince himself by
careful feeling that it is really an A.[300] It may be, again, that
“trains of association” can help to explain the matter.

That an understanding of the character of an object is dependent on
training and educated observation has been verified many times,
incidentally, also by the fact that the uneducated find it difficult to
get on with representations. Now this can not be accounted for by only
their defective practice. The old, but instructive story of the
peasant-woman who asked her son what he was reading, the black or the
white, repeats itself whenever uneducated people are shown images,
photographs, etc. For a long time I had not noticed that they see the
background as the thing to be attended to. When, for example, you show
an uneducated man a bust photograph, it may happen that he perceives the
upper surroundings of shoulder and head as the lower contours of the
background which is to indicate some fact, and if these contours happen
to be, e.g., those of a dog, the man sees “a white dog.” This is more
frequent than we think, and hence, we must pay little attention to
failures to recognize people in photographs.[301] One more story by way
of example--that of a photographer who snapped a dozen parading young
dragoons, and had gotten the addresses, but not the street numbers of
their parents. He sent for that reason to the twelve parents, for
inspection, a photograph each with the notice that if some mistake had
occurred he would rectify it. But not a parent complained of the
photographer’s failure to have sent them the pictures of their own
children. Each had received a soldier, and appeared to be quite
satisfied with the correctness of his image. Hence it follows again,
that denials of photographic identity by the uneducated are altogether
without value.

In another direction images have a peculiar significance for children
and ignorant people, because they show ineradicable ideas, particularly
with regard to size. Nobody recalls any book so vividly as his first
picture book and its contents. We remember it even though we are
convinced that the people who made our picture book were quite mistaken.
Now, as it frequently happens that the sizes are incorrectly reproduced,
as when, e.g., a horse and a reindeer occur in the same picture, and the
latter seems bigger than the former, the reindeer appears in imagination
always bigger. It does not matter if we learn later how big a reindeer
is, or how many times we have seen one, we still find the animal
“altogether too small, it must be bigger than a horse.” Educated adults
do not make this mistake, but the uneducated do, and many false
statements depend on ideas derived from pictures. If their derivation is
known we may discover the source of the mistake, but if the mistake
occurred unconsciously, then we have to combine the circumstances and
study further to find the reason.

Finally, the general influence of the failure of ignorant people to see
things as they are, upon their feeling-tone is shown in two
characteristic stories. Bulwer tells of a servant whose master beat him
and who was instigated to seek protection in court. He refused
indignantly inasmuch as his master was too noble a person to be subject
to law. And Gutberlet tells the story of the director of police,
Serafini, in Ravenna, who had heard that a notorious murderer had
threatened to shoot him. Serafini had the assassin brought to him, gave
him a loaded pistol and invited him to shoot. The murderer grew pale and
Serafini boxed his ears and kicked him out.


Section 87. (3) _One-Sided Education._

Just a few words about the considerable danger in the testimony
presented by persons of one-sided education. Altogether uneducated
people warn us in their own way, but people who have a certain amount of
training, in at least one direction, impress us to such a degree that we
assume them to be otherwise also educated and thus get involved in
mistakes.

It is hard to say correctly what constitutes an educated man. We demand,
of course, a certain amount of knowledge, but we do not know the
magnitude of that amount of knowledge, and still less its subject
matter. It is remarkable that our time, which has devoted itself more
than all others to natural science, does not include knowledge of such
science in its concept of the educated man. Some ignorance of history,
or of the classics, or even of some modern novels, failure to visit the
theaters and the picture exhibitions, neglect of French and English,
etc., classifies a man at once as lacking essential “culture.” But if he
knows these things, and at the same time exhibits in the most naïve way
an incredible ignorance of zoölogy, botany, physics, chemistry,
astronomy, etc., he still remains “an educated man.” The contradiction
is inexplicable, but it exists, and because of it, nobody can definitely
say what is meant by a one-sided education. The extent of one-sidedness
is, however, illustrated by many examples. We mention only two.
Linnaeus’ own drawings with remarks by Afzelius show that in spite of
his extraordinary knowledge of botany and his wonderful memory, he did
not know a foreign language. He was in Holland for three years, and
failed to understand even the Dutch language, so very similar to his
own. It is told of Sir Humphrey Davy, that during the visit to the
Louvre, in Paris, he admired the extraordinary carving of the frames of
the pictures, and the splendid material of which the most famous of the
Greek sculptures were made.

Now, how are we to meet people of this kind when they are on the witness
stand? They offer no difficulty when they tell us that they know nothing
about the subject in question. Suppose we have to interrogate a
philologist on a subject which requires only that amount of knowledge of
natural science which may be presupposed in any generally educated
individual. If he declares honestly that he has forgotten everything he
had learned about the matter in college, he is easily dealt with in the
same way as “uneducated people.” If, however, he is not honest enough
immediately to confess his ignorance, nothing else will do except to
make him see his position by means of questions, and even then to
proceed carefully. It would be conscienceless to try to spare this man
while another is shown up.

The same attitude must be taken toward autodidacts and dilettantes who
always measure the value of their knowledge by the amount of effort they
had to use in getting it, and hence, always overestimate their
acquirements. It is to be observed that they assert no more than their
information permits them to, and their personality is easily
discoverable by the manner in which they present their knowledge. The
self-taught man is in the end only the parvenu of knowledge, and just as
the parvenu, as such, rarely conceals his character, so the autodidact
rarely conceals his character.

There is an additional quality of which we must beware--that is the
tendency of experts to take pride in some different, incidental, and
less important little thing than their own subject. Frederick the Great
with his miserable flute-playing is an example. Such people may easily
cause mistakes. The knowledge of their attainment in one field causes us
involuntarily to respect their assertions. Now, if their assertions deal
with their hobbies many a silly thing is taken at its face value, and
that value is counterfeit.


Section 88. (4) _Inclination._

Whether a scientific characterization of inclination is possible,
whether the limits of this concept can be determined, and whether it is
the result of nature, culture, or both together, are questions which can
receive no certain answer. We shall not here speak of individual forms
of inclination, i.e., to drink, to gamble, to steal, etc., for these are
comparatively the most difficult of our modern problems. We shall
consider them generally and briefly. Trees and men, says the old
proverb, fall as they are inclined. Now, if we examine the inclination
of the countless fallen ones we meet in our calling we shall have fewer
difficulties in qualifying and judging their crimes. As a rule, it is
difficult to separate inclination, on the one hand, from opportunity,
need, desire, on the other. The capacity for evil is a seduction to its
performance, as Alfieri says somewhere, and this idea clarifies the
status of inclination. The ability may often be the opportune cause of
the development of an evil tendency, and frequent success may lead to
the assumption of the presence of an inclination.

Maudsley points out that feelings that have once been present leave
their unconscious residua which modify the total character and even
reconstruct the moral sense as a resultant of particular experiences.
That an inclination or something similar thereto might develop in this
way is certain, for we may even inherit an inclination,--but only under
certain conditions. This fact is substantiated by the characteristics of
vagabonds. It may, perhaps, be said that the enforcement of the laws of
vagabondage belongs to the most interesting of the psychological
researches of the criminal judge. Even the difference between the real
bona fide tramp, and the poor devil who, in spite of all his effort can
get no work, requires the consideration of a good deal of psychological
fact. There is no need of description in such cases; the difference must
be determined by the study of thousands of details. Just as interesting
are the results of procedure, especially certain statistical results.
The course of long practice will show that among real tramps there is
hardly ever an individual whose calling requires very hard or difficult
work. Peasants, smiths, well-diggers, mountaineers, are rarely tramps.
The largest numbers have trades which demand no real hard work and whose
business is not uniform. Bakers, millers, waiters are hence more
numerous. The first have comparatively even distribution of work and
rest; the latter sometimes have much, sometimes little to do, without
any possible evenness of distribution. Now, we should make a mistake if
we inferred that because the former had hard work, and an equivalent
distribution of work and rest, they do not become tramps, while the
latter, lacking these, do become tramps. In truth, the former have
naturally a need and inclination for hard work and uniform living, have,
therefore, no inclination to tramping, and have for that reason chosen
their difficult calling. The latter, on the other hand, felt an
inclination for lighter, more irregular work, i.e., were already
possessed of an inclination for vagabondage, and had, hence, chosen the
business of baking, grinding, or waiting. The real tramp, therefore, is
not a criminal. Vagabondage is no doubt the kindergarten of criminals,
because there are many criminals among tramps, but the true vagabond is
one only because of his inclination for tramping. He is a degenerate.

Possibly a similar account of other types may be rendered. If it is
attained by means of a statistic developed on fundamental psychological
principles, it would give us ground for a number of important
assumptions. It would help us to make parallel inferences, inasmuch as
it would permit us to determine the fundamental inclination of the
person by considering his calling, his way of approaching his work, his
environment, his choice of a wife, his preferred pleasures, etc. And
then we should be able to connect this inclination with the deed in
question. It is difficult to fix upon the relation between inclination
and character, and the agreement will be only general when a man’s
character is called all those things to which he is naturally, or by
education, inclined. But it is certain that a good or bad character
exists only then when its maxims of desire and action express themselves
in fact. The emphasis must be on the fact; what is factual may be
discovered, and these discoveries may be of use.


Section 89. (5) _Other Differences._

The ancient classification of individuals according to temperaments is
of little use. There were four of them, called humors, and a series of
characteristics was assigned to each, but not one of them had all of its
characteristics at once. Hence temperaments determined according to
these four categories do not really exist, and the categorical
distinction can have no practical value. If, however, we make use of the
significant general meaning of temperament, the apparatus of
circumstance which is connected with this distinction becomes
superfluous. If you call every active person choleric, every truculent
one sanguine, every thoughtful one phlegmatic, and every sad one
melancholy, you simply add a technical expression to a few of the
thousands of adjectives that describe these things. These four forms are
not the only ones there are. Apart from countless medial and
transitional forms, there are still large numbers that do not fit in any
one of these categories. Moreover, temperament alters with age, health,
experience, and other accidents, so that the differentiation is not even
justified by the constancy of the phenomenon. Nevertheless, it is to
some degree significant because any form of it indicates a certain
authority, and because each one of these four categories serves to
connect a series of phenomena and assumes this connection to be
indubitable, although there is absolutely no necessity for it. When
Machiavelli says that the world belongs to the phlegmatic, he certainly
did not have in mind that complex of phenomena which are habitually
understood as the characteristics of the phlegmatic humor. He wanted
simply to say that extremes of conduct lead to as little in the daily
life as in politics; that everything must be reflected upon and
repeatedly tested before its realization is attempted; that only then
can progress, even if slow, be made. If he had said, the world belongs
to the cautious or reflective person, we should not have found his
meaning to be different.

When we seek clearly to understand the nature and culture of an
individual, an investigation into his temperament does not help us in
the least. Let us consider then, some other characteristic on which is
based the judgment of individuals. The proverb says that laughter
betrays a man. If in the theater, you know the subject of laughter, the
manner of laughter, and the point at which laughter first occurred, you
know where the most educated and the least educated people are.
Schopenhauer says that the intelligent man finds everything funny, the
logical man nothing; and according to Erdmann (in Über die Dummheit),
the distressing or laughable characteristics of an object, shows not its
nature, but the nature of the observer. It would seem that the
criminalist might save himself much work by observing the laughter of
his subjects. The embarrassed, foolish snickering of the badly observing
witness; the painful smile of the innocent prisoner, or the convicted
penitent; the cruel laughter of the witness glad of the damage he has
done; the evil laughter of the condemning accomplice; the happy, weak
laughter of the innocent who has adduced evidence of his innocence, and
the countless other forms of laughter, all these vary so much with the
character of the laugher, and are so significant, that hardly anything
compares with them in value. When you remember, moreover, that
concealment during laughter is not easy, at least at the moment when the
laughter ceases, you see how very important laughter may be in
determining a case.

Of equal importance with laughter are certain changes which may occur in
people during a very short time. If we observe in the course of the
daily life, that people, without any apparent reason, so change that we
can hardly recognize them, the change becomes ten times more intense
under the influence of guilt or even of imprisonment. Somebody said that
isolation has revealed the greatest men, the greatest fools, and the
greatest criminals. What, then, might be the influence of compulsory
isolation, i.e., of imprisonment! We fortunately do not live in a time
which permits imprisonment for months and years in even the simplest
cases, but under certain circumstances even a few days’ imprisonment may
completely alter a person. Embitterment or wildness may exhibit itself,
just as sorrow and softness, during the stay under arrest. And hence,
the criminalist who does not frequently see and deal with his subjects
does not perform his duty. I do not mean, of course, that he should see
them for the purpose of getting a confession out of an attack of
morbidity; I mean only, that this is the one way of getting a just and
correct notion of the case. Every criminalist of experience will grant
that he sees the event, particularly the motives of the criminal,
otherwise after the first examination than after the later ones, and
that his later notions are mainly the more correct ones. If we set aside
the unfortunate cases in which the individual held for examination is
instructed by his prison-mates and becomes still more spoiled, I might
permit myself the assertion that imprisonment tends to show the
individual more correctly as he is; that the strange surroundings, the
change from his former position, the opportunity to think over his
situation may, if there are no opposing influences, help the criminalist
a great deal, and this fact is confirmed in the superior results of
later to earlier examinations.

In addition, the bodily condition and the health of the prisoner change
almost always. The new mode of life, the different food and
surroundings, the lack of movement, the moral effect, work directly on
the body, and we must confess, unfortunately, on health. There are,
however, cases in which health has been improved by imprisonment,
especially the health of people who have led a wild, irregular, drunken
life, or such who have had to worry and care too much. But these are
exceptions, and as a rule the prisoner’s physique suffers a great deal,
but fortunately for a short time only. The influence of such effects on
the mind is familiar. The bodily misfortune gives a wide opening for
complete change in moral nature; health sustains the atheist in
darkness. This fact, as mentioned by Bain, may serve to explain the
origin of many a confession which has saved an innocent person at the
last moment.

Nor must we forget that time--and for the prisoner, imprisonment is time
endowed with power--effects many an adjustment of extremes. We know that
utter evil is as rare as perfect virtue. We have nothing to do with the
latter, but we almost as infrequently meet the former. The longer we
deal with “bad men,” the more inclined are we to see the very summit of
devilment as the result of need and friendlessness, weakness,
foolishness, flightiness, and just simple, real, human poorness of
spirit. Now, what we find so redistributed in the course of years, we
often find crushed together and fallen apart in a short time. Today the
prisoner seems to us the most dreadful criminal; in a few days, we have
calmed down, have learned to know the case from another side, the
criminal has shown his real nature more clearly, and our whole notion of
him has changed.

I frequently think of the simple story of Charles XII’s sudden entry
into Dresden. The city fathers immediately called an extraordinary
session for the next day in order to discuss, as the Swedish king
supposed, what they should have done the day before. Every examined
prisoner does the same thing. When he leaves the court he is already
thinking of what he should have said differently, and he repeats his
reflections until the next examination. Hence, his frequently almost
inexplicable variety of statements, and hence, also, the need of
frequent examination.

Finally, there is the fact Mittermaier has pointed to--the importance of
the criminalist’s own culture and character. “If a girl testifies for
her lover and against her brother, the question in judgment arises,
which voice is the more powerful? The judge will not easily be able to
divorce this standard of judgment from himself and his own view of
life.” This is a frequent occurrence. You consider a difficult
psychological case in all its aspects, and suddenly, without knowing how
or why, you have found its solution: “It must have been so and not
otherwise; he has acted so and so for this reason, etc.” A close
examination of such a definite inference will convince you that it is
due to the pathetic fallacy, i.e., you have so inferred because you
would have done so, thought and desired so, under similar circumstances.
The commission of the pathetic fallacy is the judge’s greatest danger.


Section 90. (6) _Intelligence and Stupidity._

The three enemies of the criminalist are evil nature, untruth, and
stupidity or foolishness. The last is not the least difficult. Nobody is
safe from its attacks; it appears as the characteristic of mankind in
general, in their prejudices, their preconceptions, their selfishness,
and their high-riding nature. The criminalist has to fight it in
witnesses, in jurymen, and frequently in the obstinacy,
dunder-headedness, and amusing self-conceit of his superiors. It hinders
him in the heads of his colleagues and of the defendant, and it is his
enemy not least frequently in his own head. The greatest foolishness is
to believe that you are not yourself guilty of foolishness. The
cleverest people do the most idiotic things. He makes the most progress
who keeps in mind the great series of his own stupidities, and tries to
learn from them. One can only console oneself with the belief that
nobody else is better off, and that every stupidity is a basis for
knowledge. The world is such that every foolishness gets somebody to
commit it.

Foolishness is an isolated property. It is not related to intelligence
as cold to warmth. Cold is the absence of heat, but foolishness is not
the absence of intelligence. Both are properties that look in the same
direction. Hence, it is never possible to speak of intelligence or
stupidity by itself. Whoever deals with one deals with the other, but it
would be a mistake to conceive them as a developing series at one end of
which is intelligence, and at the other, stupidity. The transition is
not only frequent, but there are many remarkable cases in which one
passes into the other, gets mixed up with it, and covers it. Hence, a
thing may often be at one and the same time intelligent and stupid,
intelligent in one direction and stupid in another; and it is not
incorrect, therefore, to speak of clever stupidities, and of clever
deeds that are heartily foolish.

The importance of stupidity is due not only to the fact that it may lead
to important consequences, but also to the difficulty of discovering it
in certain cases. It is before all things correct, that foolish people
often seem to be very wise, and that as a rule, much intercourse alone
is able to reveal the complete profundity of a man’s foolishness. But in
our work we can have little intercourse with the people whom we are to
know, and there are, indeed, persons whom we take to be foolish at the
first encounter, and who really are so when we know them better. And
even when we have learned the kind and degree of a man’s foolishness, we
have not learned his way of expressing it, and that discovery requires
much wisdom. Moreover, an incredible amount of effort, persistence, and
slyness is often made use of for the purpose of committing an immense
act of foolishness. Every one of us knows of a number of criminal cases
that remained unexplained for a long time simply because some one
related event could be explained by a stupidity so great as to be
unbelievable. Yet the knowledge that such stupidity actually exists
could explain many a similar matter, simply and easily. This is
especially true with regard to the much discussed “one great stupidity,”
which the criminal commits in almost every crime. Assume that such a
stupidity is impossible, and the explanation of the case is also
impossible. We must never forget that it is exactly the wise who refuse
to think of the possibility of foolishness. Just as everything is clean
to the cleanly, and everything is philosophic to the philosopher,
everything is wise to the wise. Hence, he finds it unintelligible that a
thing may be explained from the point of view of pure unreason. His duty
therefore, is, to learn as much and as accurately as possible about the
nature of foolishness.

There are, perhaps, few books on earth that contain so many clever
things as Erdmann’s little text “Concerning Foolishness” (Über die
Dummheit). Erdmann starts with small experiences. For example, he once
came early to the Hamburg Railway Station and found in the waiting-room
one family with many children, from whose conversation he learned that
they were going to visit a grandfather in Kyritz. The station filled up,
to the increasing fear of the smallest member of the family, a boy. When
the station grew quite full he suddenly broke out: “Look here, what do
all these people want of grandfather in Kyritz.” The child supposed that
because he himself was travelling to Kyritz all other people in the same
place could have had no different intention. This narrowness of the
point of view, the generalization of one’s own petty standpoint into a
rule of conduct for mankind is, according to Erdmann, the essence of
foolishness. How far one may go in this process without appearing
foolish may be seen from another example. When, in the sixties, a
stranger in Paris spoke admiringly of the old trees on a certain avenue,
it was the habit of the Parisians to answer, “Then you also do not agree
with Haussmann?” because everybody knew about the attempt by the
Parisian prefect, Baron Haussmann, to beautify Paris by killing trees.
If, however, the trees in the churchyard of the little village are
praised, and the native peasant replies, “So you know also that our
Smith wants to have the trees chopped down,” the remark is foolish,
because the peasant had no right to assume that the world knows of the
intentions of the village mayor.

Now, if you decrease the number of view-points, and narrow the horizon,
you reach a point where the circumference of ideas is identical with
their center, and this point is the kernel of stupidity, the idiot.
Stupidity is the state of mind in which a man judges everything by
himself. This again may be best illustrated by a figure of speech. If
you go about a room and observe its contents you soon notice how the
objects change place and appearance with the change in your point of
view. If you look _only_ through the key-hole, you do not, however,
recognize that fact; everything seems equal. The idiot is he whose
egoistic eye is the only key-hole through which he looks into the
decorated parlor we call the world. Hence, the defective individual,
l’homme borné, who has real narrowness of mind, possesses only a small
number of ideas and points of view, and hence, his outlook is restricted
and narrow. The narrower his outlook, the more foolish the man.

Foolishness and egoism are privileges of the child; we are all born
foolish and raw. Only light sharpens our wits, but as the process is
very slow, there is not one of us who has not some blunt edges. To
distinguish objects is to be clever; to confound them, to be foolish.
What one first notices in defective minds is the unconditional
universality of their remarks. The generalizations of stupid people are
then unjustly called exaggerations. Where they say “always,” the clever
will say, “two or three times.” The foolish man interrupts his fellow
because he presses to the front as the only justified speaker. What is
most characteristic of him is his attempt to set his ego in the
foreground, “_I_ do this always,” “This is one of my traits,” “_I_ do
this thing in quite another way.” Indeed, every high grade of
foolishness exhibits a certain amount of force which the fool in
question uses to bring his personality forward. If he speaks about
reaching the North Pole, he says, “Of course, I have never been at the
North Pole, but I have been at Annotook,” and when the subject of
conversation is some great invention, he assures us that he has not
invented anything, but that he is able to make brooms, and incidentally,
he finds fault with the invention, and the more foolish he is, the more
fault he finds.

These characteristics must, of course, be kept apart, and foolishness
must not be confused with related qualities, although its extent or
boundaries must not be fixed too absolutely. Kraus, e.g., distinguishes
between the idiot, the fool, the weak-minded, the idea-less, etc., and
assigns to each distinguishing character-marks. But as the notions for
which these expressions stand vary very much, this classification is
hardly justified. A fool in one country is different from a fool in
another, an idiot in the South from an idiot in the North, and even when
various individuals have to be classified at the same place and at the
same time, each appears to be somewhat unique. If, for example, we take
Kraus’s definitions of the idiot as one who is least concerned with
causal relations, who understands them least, and who can not even grasp
the concept of causation, we may say the same thing about the
weak-minded, the untalented, etc. Kant says, rightly, that inasmuch as
fools are commonly puffed-up and deserve to be degraded, the word
foolishness must be applied to a “swell-headed” simpleton, and not to a
good and honest simpleton. But Kant is not here distinguishing between
foolishness and simplicity, but between pretentiousness and kindly
honesty, thus indicating the former as the necessary attribute of
foolishness. Another mode of distinction is to observe that
forgetfulness is a quality of the simpleton who is defective in
attention, but not of the fool who has only a narrow outlook. Whether or
not this is true, is hard to say. There is still another differentiation
in which foolishness and simplicity are distinguished by the lack of
extent, or the intensity of attention.

It is just as difficult to determine what we mean by naïveté, and how to
distinguish that from foolishness. That the concepts nowhere coincide is
indubitable. The contact appears only where one is uncertain whether a
thing is foolish or naïve. The real fool is never naïve, for foolishness
has a certain laziness of thought which is never a characteristic of
naïveté. The great difficulty of getting at the difference is most
evident in the cases of real and artificial naïveté. Many people make
use of the latter with great success. To do so requires the appearance
of sufficient foolishness to make the real simpleton believe that he is
the cleverer of the pair. If the simpleton believes, the mummer has won
the game, but he has not simulated real foolishness; he has simulated
naïveté. Kant defines naïveté as conduct which pays no attention to the
possible judgment of other people. This is not the modern notion of
naïveté, for nowadays we call naïveté an uncritical attitude toward
one’s environment, and its importance in our profession is, perhaps, due
to the fact that--pardon me--many of us practise it. Naturalness,
openness of heart, lovable simplicity, openness of mind, and whatever
else the efflorescence of naïveté may be called, are fascinating
qualities in children and girls, but they do not become the criminal
judge. It is naïve honestly to accept the most obvious denials of
defendant and witness; it is naïve not to know how the examinees
correspond with each other; it is naïve to permit a criminal to talk
thieves’ patter with another in your own hearing; it is still more naïve
to speak cordially with a criminal in this patter; it is naïve not to
know the simplest expressions of this patter; and it is most naïve to
believe that the criminal can discover his duty by means of the
statutes, their exposition, and explanation; it is naïve to attempt to
impose on a criminal by a bald exhibition of slyness; and it is most
naïve of all not to recognize the naïveté of the criminal. A criminalist
who studies himself will recognize how frequently he was naïve through
ignorance of the importance of apparently insignificant circumstances.
“The greatest wisdom,” says La Rochefoucauld, “consists in knowing the
values of things.” But it would be a mistake to attempt always to bring
out directly that alone which appears to be hidden behind the naïve
moment. The will does not think, but it must turn the attention of the
mind to knowledge. It can not will any particular result of knowledge.
It can only will that the mind shall investigate without prejudice.

The proper use of this good will will consist in trying to find out the
quantity of intelligence and stupidity which may be taken for granted in
the interlocutor. I have once shown that it is a great mistake to
suppose the criminal more foolish than oneself, but that one is not
compelled to suppose him to be more intelligent than oneself. Until one
can gain more definite knowledge of his nature, it is best to believe
him to be just as intelligent as oneself. This will involve a mistake,
but rarely a damaging one. Otherwise, one may hit on the correct
solution by accident in some cases, and make great mistakes in all
others.

Intelligence in the sense of wisdom is the important quality in our
interlocutor. The witness helps us with it, and the defendant deceives
and eludes us by its means. According to Kant, a man is wise when he has
the power of practical judgment. According to Dörner, certain
individuals have especial intuitive talents, others have capacity for
empirical investigations, and still others for speculative synthesis. In
the former, their capacity serves to render the object clearly, to
observe it sharply, to analyze it into its elements. In the latter,
there is the capacity for the synthesis, for the discovery of
far-reaching relationships. Again, we hear that the wise head invents,
the acute mind discovers, the deep mind seeks out. The first combines,
the second analyzes, the third founds. Wit blends, sharpness clarifies,
deepness illuminates. Wit persuades, sharpness instructs, deepness
convinces.

In individual cases, a man is completely and suddenly understood,
perhaps, in terms of the following proverb: “There are two kinds of
silence, the silence of the fool and the silence of the wise man--both
are clever.” Kant says, somewhere, that the witty person is free and
pert, the judicious person reflective, and unwilling to draw
conclusions. In a certain direction we may be helped, also, by
particular evidences. So, when, e.g., Hering[302] says, “One-sidedness
is the mother of virtuosity. The work of the spider is wonderful, but
the spider can do nothing else. Man makes a bow and arrow when he can
get no prey in his net, the spider goes hungry.” This distinguishes
mechanical cleverness from conscious wisdom completely. Of the same
illuminating, character are such salse dicta as: “The fool never does
what he says, the wise man never says what he does.” “You can fool one
man, but you can not fool all men.” “Stupidity is natural, wisdom is a
product of art.” “To depend on accident is foolishness, to use accident
is wisdom.” “There are stupidities which can be committed only by the
wise.” “Wisdom is as different from foolishness, as man from monkey.”
“Fools speak what wise men think.” “Understanding is deficient, but
stupidity never is.” etc. These and countless other help us considerably
in individual cases, but give us no general characterization of the
function of wisdom. We may, therefore, get some sort of pragmatic
insight into the wisdom or unwisdom, of an action in the assertion: “To
be wise is to be able to sacrifice an immediate petty advantage to a
later and greater advantage.” This proposition seems not to have
sufficient scope, but on closer examination seems to fit all cases. The
wise man lives according to law, and sacrifices the petty advantage of
immediate sensual pleasure for the greater advantage of sustained
health. He is prudent and sacrifices the immediate petty delights to the
advantage of a carefree age. He is cautious in his speculation, and
sacrifices momentary doubtful, and hence, petty successes, to the
greater later success of certain earning. He is silent, and sacrifices
the petty advantage of appearing for the moment well-informed about all
possible matters, to the greater advantage of not getting into trouble
on account of this. He commits no punishable deeds, and sacrifices
advantages that might be gained for the moment to the later greater
advantage of not being punished. So the analysis might be continued, and
in each case we should find that there was no wisdom which could not be
explained in this way.

The use of our explanatory proposition is possible in all cases which
require determining the real or apparent participation of some
individual in a crime. If the degree of wisdom a man may be credited
with can be determined by means of this analysis, it is not difficult
afterwards to test by its use the probability of his having a share in
the crime in question.

Finally, cases are again and again observed in which very foolish
people--idiots and lunatics--either because of anxiety, terror, wounds
in the head, or shortly before death, become intelligent for a brief
period. It is conceivable that the improvement of mental activity in
these cases arises when the defect has depended on the pathological
dominance of an inhibitory center, the abnormally intensified activity
of which has as its result an inhibition of other important centers
(acute, curable dementia, paranoia). A light, transitory, actual
increase of mental activity, might, possibly, be explained by the
familiar fact that cerebral anemia, in its early stages, is exciting
rather than dulling. Theoretically this might be connected, perhaps,
with the molecular cell-changes which are involved in the disintegration
of the brain. The difference between the effects of these two causes
will hardly be great, but testimony dependent on this altered character
of mental activity will have little reliability. Hallucinations, false
memories, melancholic accusations of self, particularly, may also be
explained in terms of such excitement. We criminalists have frequently
to deal with people in above-named conditions, and when we receive
intelligent answers from them we must never set them aside, but must
carefully make note of them and estimate them in the light of expert
advice.

To this class belongs the interesting phenomenon that we very frequently
meet fools who never do anything foolish. It is not true that these are
simply misjudged and only appear to be foolish. They are really foolish
but they are helped by certain conditions in every instance of their
conduct. To begin with, they are not so foolish as to deceive
themselves; they are, therefore, in possession of a certain notion of
their own weakness, and do not attempt things which are too much for
them. Then, they must have a certain degree of luck in their
undertakings. The proverb says that conceit is the force behind the
fool, and if these fools apply their conceit to appropriate situations,
they succeed. Then again, they sometimes fail to see dangers, and are
therefore free from swindles which are dangerous, even to the cleverest
persons. “The fool stumbles across the abyss into which the wise man
regularly tumbles,” says the proverb again. And if routine may properly
be called the surrogate of talent, we must suppose that custom and
practice may carry the biggest fool so far as to help him in many cases
to success.

According to Esser, the fool thinks in terms of the following
proposition: “Things that are alike in a few points are identical, and
things that are unlike in a few points are altogether diverse.” If this
is true, the fool can fail only when he is drawing inferences of this
kind; if, however, none of the important events in his life involve such
inferences, he has no opportunity to exhibit his essential foolishness.
The same thing is true of his interests. No fool has a real eagerness
for knowledge. He has, instead, curiosity, and this can never be
distinguished with certainty from knowledge. Now, if the fool is lucky,
he seems to be moving forward, shows himself possessed of interests, and
nobody proves that this possession is only idiotic curiosity. The fool
must protect himself against one thing--action. Foolishness in action is
rawness--true rawness is always foolish and can not be mistaken.

Here, again, we draw the extraordinary conclusion that we criminalists,
as in all other cases, must not take man to be what he seems most of the
time, but what he shows himself as, in exceptional cases. The worst man
may have done something absolutely good, the greatest liar may today
tell the truth, and the simpleton may today act wisely. We are not
concerned with man as such; what is important for us is his immediate
self-expression. The rest of his nature is a matter of judgment.


Topic 2. ISOLATED INFLUENCES.

Section 91. (a) Habit.

Habit may be of considerable importance in criminal law. We have, first
of all, to know how far we ourselves are influenced in our thinking and
acting by habit; then it is important, in judging the testimony of
witnesses, to know whether and how far the witness behaved according to
his habits. For by means of this knowledge we may be able to see the
likelihood of many a thing that might have otherwise seemed improbable.
Finally, we may be able properly to estimate many an excuse offered by a
defendant through considering his habits, especially when we are dealing
with events that are supposed to have occurred under stupefaction,
absolute intoxication, distraction, etc.[303] Hume, indeed, has assigned
to habit the maximum of significance; his whole system depends upon the
use of habit as a principle of explanation. He shows that the essence of
all our inferences with regard to facts relates to the principle of
causation, and the foundation of all our beliefs in causation is
experience, while the foundation of inference from experience is habit.
As a matter of fact, it is strange how often an obscure event becomes
suddenly clear by an inquiry into the possibility of habit as its cause.
Even everything we call fashion, custom, presumption, is at bottom
nothing more than habit, or explicable by habit. All new fashions in
clothes, in usages, etc., are disliked until one becomes habituated to
them, and custom and morality must attach themselves to the iron law of
habit. What would my grandmother have said of a woman whom she might
have seen happily bicycling through the streets! How every German
citizen crosses himself when he sees French sea-bathing! And if we had
no idea of a ball among the four hundred what should we say if we heard
that in the evening men meet half-naked women, embrace them vigorously,
pull them round, and bob and stamp through the hall with disgusting
noise until they must stop, pouring perspiration, gasping for breath?
But because we are accustomed to it, we are satisfied with it. To see
what influence habit has on our views of this subject, just close your
ears tightly at some ball and watch the dancers. As soon as you stop
hearing the music you think you are in a lunatic asylum. Indeed, you do
not need to select such a really foolish case. Helmholtz suggests
looking at a man walking in the distance, through the large end of a
telescope. What extraordinary humping and rocking of the body the
passer-by exhibits! There are any number of such examples, and if we
inquire concerning the permissibility of certain events we simply carry
the question of habit into the field of conduct. Hunting harmless
animals, vivisection, the execution of back-breaking tricks, ballets,
and numerous other things, will seem to us shocking, inconceivable,
disgusting, if we are not habituated to them. What here requires thought
is the fact that we criminalists often judge situations we do not know.
When the peasant, the unskilled laborer, or the craftsman, does
anything, we know only superficially the deed’s nature and real status.
We have, as a rule, no knowledge of the perpetrator’s habits, and when
we regard some one of his actions as most reprehensible,--quarrel or
insult or maltreatment of his wife or children--he responds to us with a
most astounded expression. He is not habituated to anything else, and we
do not teach him a better way by punishing him.

Questions of this sort, however, deal with the generality of human
nature, and do not directly concern us. But directly we are required to
make a correct judgment of testimony concerning habit, they will help us
to more just interpretations and will reduce the number of crass
contradictions. This is so because many an assertion will seem probable
when the witness shows that the thing described was habitual. No
definite boundary can be drawn between skill and habit, and we may,
perhaps, say rightly, that skill is possible only where habit exists,
and habit is present where a certain amount of skill has been attained.
Skill, generally, is the capacity of speedy habituation. But a
distinction must be drawn. Habit makes actions easy. Habituation makes
them necessary. This is most obvious in cases of bodily skill,--riding,
swimming, skating, cycling,--everything in which habit and skill can not
be separated, and with regard to which we can not see why we and other
untrained people can not immediately do the same thing. And when we can
do it, we do it without thinking, as if half asleep. Such action is not
skilled, but habitual, i.e., a part of it is determined by the body
itself without the especial guidance of the mind.

We find the hunter’s power to see so many animals, tracks, etc.,
inconceivable. When, e.g., we have once properly mastered the principle
of a quite complicated crystal, we cannot understand why we had not done
so before. We feel in the same way with regard to an unclear drawing, a
new road, some bodily activity, etc. Anybody who has not acquired the
habit might have to take all day to learn the business of dressing and
undressing himself. And how difficult it is just to walk, a thing we do
unconsciously, is confirmed by the mechanic who wants to construct a
walking figure.

That all people are equally subject to habit, is not asserted. The thing
is a matter of disposition, in the sense of the recurrence of past ideas
or tendencies. We must assume that an inclination evinced by idea A
makes possible ideas a´, a´´, a´´´. Habits may develop according to
these dispositions, but the knowledge of the conditions of this
development we do not yet possess. Nevertheless, we tend to assume that
the famous historian X and the famous Countess Y will not get the habit
of drinking or opium-smoking--but in this case our assumption is deduced
from their circumstances, and not from their personality. Hence, it is
difficult to say with certainty that a person is incapable of acquiring
this or that habit. So that it is of importance, when the question
arises, to discover the existence of implied habits whenever these are
asserted in the face of apparently contradictory conditions. There is a
certain presumption for the correctness of the implication, when, e.g.,
the practised physician asserts that he counted the pulse for a minute
without a watch, or when the merchant accurately estimates the weight of
goods within a few grams, etc. But it will be just as well to test the
assertion, since, without this test, the possibility of error is still
great.

Somebody asserts, e.g., that he had been distracted and had paid no
attention to what two persons close to him had said. Suddenly he began
to take notice and found himself able to recapitulate all their remarks.
Or again, a musician, who is almost altogether deaf, says that he is so
accustomed to music that in spite of his deafness he is able to hear the
smallest discord in the orchestra. Yet again, we hear of insignificant,
hardly controllable habits that become accidentally significant in a
criminal case. Thus the crime of arson was observed by the firebrand’s
neighbor, who could have seen the action through the window, only if he
had leaned far out of it. When he was asked what he wanted to see in
the cold winter night, he replied, that he had the habit daily of
spitting out of the window just before going to bed. Another, who was
surprised in his sleep by an entering thief, had heavily wounded the
latter with a great brush, “because he happened to have had it in his
hand.” The happening was due to his habit of being unable to fall asleep
without a brush in his hand. If such habits are demonstrable facts they
serve to explain otherwise unexplainable events.

They are, however, the more difficult to establish, because they occur
mainly in isolated people--old bachelors and old maids--so that their
confirmation by others is rare. On the other hand, every one of us knows
habits of his own or of his friends which would not be believed when
cited, and which would be very difficult to prove when the need arose.
The influence of habit on indifferent matters can be shown by numerous
examples. There is Kant’s citation, that if anybody happened to send his
doctor nine ducats the latter would have to believe that the messenger
had stolen the tenth. If you give a bride most beautiful linen, but only
eleven pieces, she will weep. Give her thirteen pieces, and she will
certainly throw one of them away. If you keep these deep-rooted habits
in mind, you may possibly say that they must have had a definite,
determinative, and alternative influence on body and mind. For example,
from time immemorial mankind has taken medications at definite
intervals, e.g., every hour, every two hours, etc.; hence, a powder
ordered every seventy-seven minutes will cause us complete surprise. But
by what authority does the body require exactly these quantities of time
or weight? Or again, our lectures, private or public, so and so much
time? Of course it would be inconvenient if professors lectured only 52
minutes, yet how much difficulty must not the mind have met in becoming
habituated to exactly 60 minutes of instruction! This habituation has
been going on for a long time, and now children, like nations, regard
the new in the light of the old, so that the old, especially when it is
fixed by language, becomes the mind’s instrument for the control of the
new. Indeed, we often stick linguistically to old things, although they
have been long superannuated.

There is the characteristic state of mind which might be called the
refraction of an idea by the presence of another idea. An example is the
habit of saying, “Unprepared, as I have--” before beginning a speech.
The speaker means to say that he has not prepared himself, but, as he
really has prepared himself, both expressions come out together. This
habitual concurrence of the real thought is of importance, and offers,
frequently, the opportunity of correcting what is said by what is
thought. This process is similar to that in which a gesture contradicts
a statement. We often hear: “I had to take it because it was right
there.” This assertion indicates theft through need, and at the same
time, theft through opportunity. Or again, we hear: “We had not agreed,
before”--this assertion denies agreement and can indicate merely,
because of the added “before,” that the agreement was not of already
_long_ standing. Still again, we hear, “When we fell to the floor, I
defended myself, and struck down at him.” Here what is asserted is
self-defense, and what is admitted is that the enemy was underneath the
speaker. Such refractions of thought occur frequently and are very
important, particularly in witnesses who exaggerate or do not tell the
whole truth. They are, however, rarely noticed because they require
accurate observation of each word and that requires time, and our time
has no time.


Section 92. (b) Heredity.[304]

However important the question of heredity may be to lawyers
psychologically, its application to legal needs is impossible. It would
require, on the one hand, the study of all the literature concerning it,
together with the particular teachings of Darwin and his disciples, and
of Lombroso and his. The criminal-psychological study of it has not yet
been established. The unfounded, adventurous, and arbitrary assertions
of the Lombrosists have been contradicted, especially through the
efforts of German investigators. But others, like Debierre in Lille,
Sernoff in Moscow, Taine, Drill, Marchand have also had occasion to
controvert the Italian positivists. At the same time, the problem of
heredity is not dead, and will not die. This is being shown particularly
in the retort of Marchand concerning the examinations he made with M. E.
Koslow, in the asylum for juvenile offenders founded by the St.
Petersburg Anthropological Society. Between Buckle, who absolutely
denies heredity, and the latest of the modern doctrines, there are a
number of intermediate views, one of which may possibly be true. There
is an enormous literature which every criminalist should study.[305]

Nevertheless, this literature can tell us nothing about the legitimacy
of the premise of heredity. Every educated man still believes Darwin’s
doctrines, and the new theories that seek to emancipate themselves from
it do so only by pushing them out of the big front door, and insinuating
them through the little back door. But according to Bois-Reymond
Darwinism is only the principle of the hereditary maintenance of the
child’s variation from its parents. Everybody knows of real inherited
characters, and many examples of it are cited. According to Ribot,
suicide is hereditary; according to Despine, kleptomania; according to
Lucas, vigorous sexuality; according to Darwin, hand-writing, etc. Our
personal acquaintances show the inheritance of features, figure, habits,
intellectual properties, particularly cleverness, such as, sense of
space and time, capacity for orientation, interests, diseases, etc. Even
ideas have their ancestors like men, and we learn from the study of
animals how instincts, capacities, even acquired ones, are progressively
inherited. And yet we refuse to believe in the congenital criminal! But
the contradiction is only apparent.

A study of the works of Darwin, Weismann, DeVries, etc., shows us
indubitably that no authority asserts the inheritance of great
alterations appearing for the first time in an individual. And as to the
inheritance of acquired characteristics, some authorities assert this to
be impossible.

Until Darwin the old law of species demanded that definite traits of a
species should not change through however long a period. The Darwinian
principle indicates the inheritance of minute variations, intensified by
sexual selection, and, in the course of time, developed into great
variations. Now nobody will deny that the real criminal is different
from the majority of other people. That this difference is great and
essential, is inferred from the circumstance that a habit, a single
characteristic, an unhappy inclination, etc., does not constitute a
criminal. If a man is a thief it will not be asserted that he is
otherwise like decent people, varying only in the accidental inclination
to theft. We know that, besides the inclination to theft, we may assign
him a dislike for honest work, lack of moral power, indifference to the
laws of honor when caught, the lack of real religion,--in short, the
inclination to theft must be combined with a large number of very
characteristic qualities in order to make a thief of a man. There must,
in a word, be a complete and profound change in his whole nature. Such
great changes in the individual are never directly inherited; only
particular properties can be inherited, but these do not constitute a
criminal. Hence, the son of a criminal need not in his turn be a
criminal.

This does not imply that in the course of generations characters might
not compound themselves until a criminal type is developed, but this is
as rare as the development of new species among the animals. Races are
frequently selected; species develop rarely.


Section 93. (c) Prepossession.

Prepossession, prejudice, and anticipatory opinion are, perhaps, the
most dangerous foes of the criminalist. It is believed that the danger
from them is not great, since, in most cases, prepossession controls
only one individual, and a criminal case is dealt with by several, but
this proves nothing. When the elegant teacher of horseback riding has
performed his subtlest tricks, he gracefully removes his hat and bows to
the public, and only at that moment does the public observe that it has
been seeing something remarkable and applauds heartily, not because it
has understood the difficulty of the performance, but because the rider
has bowed. This happens to us however good our will. One man has a case
in hand; he develops it, and if, at the proper time, he says “Voilà,”
the others say, “Oh, yes,” and “Amen.” He may have been led by a
prepossession, but its presence is now no longer to be perceived. Thus,
though our assumptions may be most excellently meant, we still must
grant that a conviction on false grounds, even when unconsciously
arrived at, so suffuses a mind that the event in itself can no longer be
honestly observed. To have no prejudices indicates a healthy, vigorous
mind in no sense. That is indicated by the power to set aside prejudices
as soon as their invalidity is demonstrated. Now this demonstration is
difficult, for when a thing is recognized as a prejudice, it is one no
longer. I have elsewhere,[306] under the heading “anticipatory opinion,”
indicated the danger to which the examining justice is subject thereby,
and have sought to show how even a false idea of location may lead to a
prepossession in favor of a certain view; how vigorous the influence of
the first witness is, inasmuch as we easily permit ourselves to be taken
in by the earliest information, and later on lack time to convince
ourselves that the matter may not be as our earliest advice paints it.
Hence, false information necessarily conceals a danger, and it always is
a matter of effort to see that the crime is a fictitious one, or that
something which has been called accident may conceal a crime. The
average man knows this well, and after a brawl, after contradictory
testimony, etc., both parties hurry to be beforehand in laying the
information. Whoever lays the information first has the advantage. His
story effects a prepossession in favor of his view, and it requires
effort to accustom oneself to the opposite view. And later it is
difficult to reverse the rôles of witness and defendant.

But we have to deal with prepossession in others besides ourself, in
witnesses, accused, experts, jury, colleagues, subordinates, etc. The
more we know, the newer new things seem. Where, however, the
apperceptive mass is hard and compact, the inner reconstruction ceases,
and therewith the capacity for new experiences, and hence, we get those
judges who can learn nothing and forget nothing. Indefiniteness in the
apperceptive masses results in the even movement of apperception. Minds
with confused ideational complexes hit little upon the particular
characteristic of presented fact, and find everywhere only what they
have in mind.

The one-sidedness of apperception frequently contains an error in
conception. In most cases, the effective influence is egoism, which
inclines men to presuppose their own experiences, views, and principles
in others, and to build according to them a system of prepossessions and
prejudices to apply to the new case. Especially dangerous are the
_similar_ experiences, for these tend to lead to the firm conviction
that the present case can in no sense be different from former ones. If
anybody has been at work on such earlier, similar cases, he tends to
behave now as then. His behavior at that time sets the standard for the
present, and whatever differs from it he calls false, even though the
similarity between the two cases is only external and apparent.

It is characteristic of egoism that it causes people to permit
themselves to be bribed by being met half-way. The inclination and favor
of most men is won by nothing so easily and completely as by real or
apparent devotion and interest. If this is done at all cleverly, few can
resist it, and the prepossession in their favor is complete. How many
are free of prejudice against ugly, deformed, red-haired, stuttering,
individuals, and who has no prejudice in favor of handsome, lovable
people? Even the most just must make an effort so to meet his neighbor
as to be without prejudice for or against him, because of his natural
endowment.

Behavior and little pleasantnesses are almost as important. Suppose that
a criminalist has worked hard all morning. It is long past the time at
which he had, for one reason or another, hoped to get home, and just as
he is putting his hat on his head, along comes a man who wants to lay
information concerning some ancient apparent perjury. The man had let it
go for years, here he is with it again at just this inconvenient moment.
He has come a long distance--he can not be sent away. His case,
moreover, seems improbable and the man expresses himself with
difficulty. Finally, when the protocol is made, it appears that he has
not been properly understood, and moreover, that he has added many
irrelevant things--in short, he strains one’s patience to the limit.
Now, I should like to know the criminalist who would not acquire a
vigorous prejudice against this complainant? It would be so natural that
nobody would blame one for such a prejudice. At the same time it is
proper to require that it shall be only transitive, and that later, when
the feeling has calmed, everything shall be handled with scrupulous
conscientiousness so as to repair whatever in the first instance might
have been harmed.

It is neither necessary nor possible to discuss all the particular forms
of prepossession. There is the unconditional necessity of merely making
a thoroughly careful search for their presence if any indication
whatever, even the remotest, shows its likelihood. Of the extremest
limit of possible prejudice, names may serve as examples. It sounds
funny to say that a man may be prejudiced for or against an individual
by the sound of his name, but it is true. Who will deny that he has been
inclined to favor people because they bore a beloved name, and who has
not heard remarks like, “The very name of that fellow makes me sick.” I
remember clearly two cases. In one, Patriz Sevenpounder and Emmerenzia
Hinterkofler were accused of swindling, and my first notion was that
such honorable names could not possibly belong to people guilty of
swindling. The opposite case was one in which a deposition concerning
some attack upon him was signed by Arthur Filgré. I thought at first
that the whole complaint was as windy as the complainant’s name. Again,
I know that one man did not get the job of private secretary he was
looking for because his name, as written, was Kilian Krautl. “How can a
man be decent, who has such a foolish name?” said his would-be employer.
Then again, a certain Augustinian monk, who was a favorite in a large
city, owed his popularity partly to his rhythmical cognomen Pater Peter
Pumm.

Our poets know right well the importance for us short-sighted
earth-worms of so indifferent a thing as a name, and the best among them
are very cautious about the selection and composition of names. Net the
smallest part of their effects lies in the successful tone of the names
they use. And it was not unjust to say that Bismark could not possibly
have attained his position if he had been called Maier.


Section 94. (d) Imitation and the Crowd.

The character of the instinct of imitation and its influence on the
crowd has long been studied in animals, children, and even men, and has
been recognized as a fundamental trait of intellect and the prime
condition of all education. Later on its influence on crowds was
observed, and Napoleon said, “Les crimes collectifs n’engagent
personnes.” Weber spoke of moral contagion, and it has long been known
that suicide is contagious. Baer, in his book on “Die Gefängnisse,” has
assigned the prison-suicides “imitative tendency.” There is the
remarkable fact that suicides often hang themselves on trees which have
already been used for that purpose. And in jails it is frequently
observed that after a long interval a series of suicides suddenly
appear.

The repetition of crimes, once one has been committed in a particular
way, is also frequent; among them, the crime of child-murder. If a girl
has stifled her child, ten others do so; if a girl has sat down upon it,
or has choked it by pressing it close to her breast, etc., there are
others to do likewise. Tarde believes that crime is altogether to be
explained by the laws of imitation. It is still unknown where imitation
and the principles of statistics come into contact, and it is with
regard to this contact we find our greatest difficulties. When several
persons commit murder in the same way we call it imitation, but when
definite forms of disease or wounds have for years not been noticed in
hospitals and then suddenly appear in numbers, we call it duplication.
Hospital physicians are familiar with this phenomenon and count on the
appearance of a second case of any disease if only a first occurs.
Frequently such diseases come from the same region and involve the same
extraordinary abnormalities, so that nothing can be said about
imitation. Now, how can imitation and duplication be distinguished in
individual cases? Where are their limits? Where do they touch, where
cover each other? Where do the groups form?

There is as yet no solution for the crimino-political interpretation of
the problems of imitation, and for its power to excuse conduct as being
conduct’s major basis. But the problems have considerable symptomatic
and diagnostic value. At the very least, we shall be able to find the
sole possibility of the explanation of the nature or manner of a crime
in the origin of the stimulus to some particular imitation. Among
youthful persons, women especially, there will be some anticipatory
image which serves as a plan, and this will explain at least the
otherwise inexplicable and superfluous concomitants like unnecessary
cruelty and destruction. The knowledge of this anticipatory image may
give even a clew to the criminal, for it may indicate the nature of the
person who could act it out and realize it. Also in our field there
exists “duplication of cases.”

The condition of action in great crowds offers remarkable
characteristics. The most instructive are the great misfortunes in which
almost every unhappy individual conducts himself, not only irrationally
but, objectively taken, criminally towards his fellows, inasmuch as he
sacrifices them to his own safety without being in real need. To this
class belong the crossing of bridges by retreating troops in which the
cavalry stupidly ride down their own comrades in order to get through.
Again, there are the well-known accidents, e.g., at the betrothal of
Louis XVI., in which 1200 people were killed in the crush, the fires at
the betrothal of Napoleon, in the Viennese Ringtheater in 1881, and the
fire on the picnic-boat “General Slocum,” in 1904. In each of these
cases horrible scenes occurred, because of the senseless conduct of
terrified people. It is said simply and rightly, by the Styrian poet,
“One individual is a man, a few are people, many are cattle.” In his
book on imitation, Tarde says, “In crowds, the calmest people do the
silliest things,” and in 1892, at the congress for criminal
anthropology, “The crowd is never frontal and rarely occipital; it is
mainly spinal. It always contains something childish, puerile, quite
feminine.” He, Garnier, and Dekterew, showed at the same congress how
frequently the mob is excited to all possible excesses by lunatics and
drunkards. Lombroso, Laschi, etc., tell of many cruelties which
rebelling crowds committed without rhyme or reason.[307] The “soul of
the crowd,” just recently invented, is hardly different from
Schopenhauer’s Macroanthropos, and it is our important task to determine
how much the anthropos and how much the macroanthropos is to be blamed
for any crime.


Section 95. (e) Passion and Affection.

Passion and affection occasion in our own minds and in those of
witnesses considerable confusion of observations, influence, or even
effect the guilt of the defendant and serve to explain many things at
the moment of examination. The essence of passion or affection, its
definition and influence, its physical and physiological explanation, is
discussed in any psychology. The use of this discussion for the lawyer’s
purposes has been little spoken of, and possibly can not have more said
about it. Things that are done with passion show themselves as such, and
require no particular examination in that respect. What we have to do is
to discover what might have happened without passion, and especially to
protect ourselves from being in person overcome by passion or affection.
It is indubitable that the most “temperamental” of the criminalists are
the best, for phlegm and melancholy do not carry one through an
examination. The lively and the passionate judges are the most
effective, but they also have the defects of their virtues. No one will
deny that it is difficult to maintain a calm demeanor with an impudent
denying criminal, or in the face of some very cruel, unhuman, or
terrible crime. But it is essential to surmount this difficulty.
Everyone of us must recall shameful memories of having, perhaps justly,
given way to passion. Of course the very temperamental Count Gideon
Raday freed his county in a short time from numberless robberies by
immediately hanging the mayor of the town in which the robberies
occurred, but nowadays so much temperament is not permissible. It is
well to recall the painful position of an excellent presiding justice at
a murder trial, who attacked the defendant passionately, and had to
submit to the latter’s really justified reprimand.

The only means of avoiding such difficulties is not to begin
quarrelling. Just as soon as a single word is uttered which is in any
way improper in polite society, everything is lost. The word is the
rolling snow-ball, and how much momentum it may gather depends upon the
nature and the training of the judge. Lonely insults are not frequent,
and a single improper word breaks down the boundaries. The criminal
knows this and often makes use of his knowledge. A man who has “cussed
out” the other fellow is no longer dangerous, he becomes calm and kind,
and feels instinctively the need of repairing the damage he has
committed by “going too far.” He then exhibits an exaggerated geniality
and care upon which many criminals count, and hence intentionally
provoke the examiner until he does things and says things he is sorry
for.

The emotions of witnesses, especially of those who have been harmed by
the crime and of those who have seen something terrible and disgusting,
and who still tend to get excited over it, constitute a great many
difficulties. Against the unconditional reliability of such persons’
testimony experienced judges take measures of defence. The participant
of this class is never calm; passion, anxiety, anger, personal interest,
etc., either anticipate or exaggerate trouble. Of course, we are not
speaking of cases in which a wound is considerably exaggerated, or even
invented for the sake of money, but of those in which people under
emotional stress often say unthinkable things about their enemy, just to
get him punished. This, however, is comparatively rare where the damage
has been very great. A man who has lost his eye, the father of a raped
daughter, the victim impoverished by arson, often behaves very calmly
toward the criminal. He makes no especial accusation, does not
exaggerate, and does not insult. A person, however, whose orchard has
suffered damage, may behave much worse.

It frequently happens that the sufferer and the defendant really hate
each other. Not necessarily because one had broken the other’s head, or
robbed him; frequently the ostensible reason for coming to trial is the
result of a long and far-reaching hatred. That this emotion can go to
any length is well known and it is therefore necessary, though not
always easy, to seek it out. Hatred is possible among peers, or people
who are peers in one connection or another. As a rule, the king will not
be able to hate his musketeer, but he will when they are both
passionately in love with the same girl, for they are peers in love.
Similarly, the high-bred lady will hardly hate her maid, but if she
observes the maid’s magnificent hair and believes that it is better than
her own, she will hate the maid, for there is no difference in rank with
regard to the love of hair.

Real hate has only three sources: pain, jealousy, or love. Either the
object of hatred has caused his enemy a great irremediable pain or
jealousy, or hatred is, was, or will become love. Some authorities
believe that there is another source of hatred which becomes apparent
when we have done harm to somebody. That this might show itself as
hatred or passion similar to hatred is possible, but in most cases it
will probably be a feeling of deep shame and regret, which has certain
particular characteristics in common with hatred. If it is really
hatred, it is hatred through pain. Hatred is difficult to hide, and even
criminalists of small experience will overlook it only in exceptional
cases. The discovery of envy, which is less forgiving than hatred, less
explosive, much profounder and much more extensive, is incomparably more
difficult. Real hatred, like exquisite passion, requires temperament,
and under circumstances may evoke sympathy, but friendless envy, any
scamp is capable of. Possibly no other passion endangers and destroys so
many lives, chokes off so much service, makes impossible so many
significant things, and finally, judges so falsely an endless number of
persons. When you remember, moreover, its exaggerated extent, and the
poor-spirited, easy trick of hiding it, its dangerous nature can not be
overestimated. We lawyers are even more imperilled by it because we do
not easily allow people to be praised before us; we require witnesses,
etc., to speak incriminatingly most of the time, and we cannot easily
see whether they are envious.

However freely one man may speak against another, we may assume that he
is telling the truth, or at worst, that he has a false notion of the
matter, or was badly instructed, but we rarely think that his envy
dictates it all. This idea occurs to us when he is to praise the other
man. Then he exhibits a cautious, tentative, narrowing attitude, so that
even a person of little experience infers envy. And here the
much-discussed fact manifests itself, that real envy requires a certain
equality. By way of example the petty shop-keeper is cited as envying
his more fortunate competitor, but not the great merchant whose ships go
round the world. The feeling of the private toward his general, the
peasant toward his landlord, is not really envy, it is desire to be like
him. It is anger that the other is better off, but inasmuch as the
emotion lacks that effective capacity which we require for envy, we can
not call it envy. It becomes envy when something by way of intrigue or
evil communication, etc., has been undertaken against the envied person.
Thus the mere _feeling_ is confessed at once. People say, “How I envy
him this trip, his magnificent health, his gorgeous automobile, etc.”
They do not say: “I have enviously spoken evil of him, or done this or
that against him.” Yet it is in the latter form that the actual passion
of envy expresses itself.

The capacity of the envious for false representation makes them
particularly dangerous in the court-room. If we want to discover
anything about an individual we naturally inquire of his colleagues, his
relatives, etc. But it is just among these that envy rules. If you
inquire of people without influence you learn nothing from them, since
they do not understand the matter; if you ask professional people they
speak enviously or selfishly, and that constitutes our dilemma. Our
attention may be called to envy by the speaker’s hesitation, his
reserved manner of answering. This is the same in all classes, and is
valuable because it may warn us against very bad misunderstandings.

As a rule, nothing can be said about passion as a source of crime. We
may assume that passion passes through three periods. The first is
characterized by the general or partial recurrence of older images; in
the second, the new idea employs its dominating place negatively or
positively with respect to the older one,--the passion culminates; and
in the third, the forcibly-disturbed emotional equilibrium is restored.
Most emotions are accompanied by well-known physical phenomena. Some
have been thoroughly studied, e.g., the juristically important emotion
of fear. In fear, breathing is irregular, inspiration is frequently
broken, a series of short breaths is followed by one or more deep ones,
inspiration is short, expiration is prolonged, one or the other is
sobbing. All these phenomena are only a single consequence of the
increase of respiratory changes. The irregularity of the latter causes
coughing, then a disturbance of speech, which is induced by the
irregular action of the muscles of the jaw, and in part by the
acceleration of the breathing. In the stages of echoing fear, yawning
occurs, and the distention of the pupils may be noticed as the emotion
develops. This is what we often see when a denying defendant finds
himself confounded by evidence, etc.

The most remarkable and in no way explicable fact is, that these
phenomena do not occur in innocent people. One might think that the fear
of being innocently convicted would cause an expression of dread, anger,
etc., but it does not cause an expression of real terror. I have no
other than empirical evidence of the fact, so that many more
observations are required before any fresh inferences are deduced
therefrom anent a man’s guilt or innocence. We must never forget that
under such circumstances passions and emotions often change into their
opposites according to rule. Parsimony becomes extravagance, and
conversely; love becomes hate. Many a man becomes altogether too
foolhardy because of despairing fear. So it may happen that terror may
become petrifying coldness, and then not one of the typical marks of
terror appears. But it betrays itself just as certainly by its icy
indifference as by its own proper traits. Just as passions transmute
into their opposites, so they carry a significant company of subordinate
characteristics. Thus, dread or fear is accompanied by disorderly
impertinence, sensuality by cruelty. The latter connection is of great
importance to us, for it frequently eliminates difficulties in the
explanation of crime. That cruelty and lasciviousness have the same
root has long been known. The very ecstasy of adventurous and passionate
love is frequently connected with a certain cruel tendency. Women are,
as a rule, more ferocious than men.[308] It is asserted that a woman in
love is constantly desiring her man. If this be true, the foregoing
statement is sufficiently explained. In one sense the connection between
sexual passion and cruelty is bound up with that unsatiability which is
characteristic of several passions. It is best to be observed in
passions for property, especially such as involve the sense-perception
of money. It is quite correct to speak of the overwhelming, devilish
power of gold, of the sensual desire to roll in gold, of the
irresistible ring of coins, etc. And it is also correctly held that
money has the same definite influence on man as blood on preying
animals. We all know innumerable examples of quite decent people who
were led to serious crimes by the mere sight of a large sum of money.
Knowledge of this tendency may, on occasion, lead to clues, and even to
the personality of the criminal.


Section 96. (f) Honor.

Kant says that a man’s honor consists in what people think about him, a
woman’s in what people say about her. Another authority believes that
honor and a sense of honor are an extension of the sense of self in and
through others. The essence of my honor is my belief that I exist for
others, that my conduct will be judged and valued not only by myself but
by others. Falstaff calls honor the painted picture at a funeral. Our
authors are both right and wrong, for honor is simply the position a man
takes with regard to the world, so that even gamins may be said to have
honor. Unwillingness to see this may cause us criminalists considerable
trouble. One of the worst men I ever met in my profession, a person
guilty of the nastiest crimes, so nasty that he had driven his honorable
parents to suicide, had at the expiration of his last sentence of many
years in prison, said literally, “I offer no legal objection against the
sentence. I beg, however, for three days’ suspension so that I may write
a series of farewell letters which I could not write as a prisoner.”
Even in the heart of this man there was still the light of what other
people call honor. We often find similar things which may be used to our
advantage in examination. Not, of course, for the purpose of getting
confession, accusation of accomplices, etc. This might, indeed, serve
the interests of the case, but it is easy to identify a pliable attitude
with an honorable inclination, and the former must certainly not be
exploited, even with the best intention. Moreover, among persons of low
degree, an inclination toward decency will hardly last long and will
briefly give way to those inclinations which are habitual to bad men.
Then they are sorry for what they had permitted to occur in their better
moment and curse those who had made use of that moment.

It is often funny to see the points at which the criminal seeks his
“honor.” What is proper for a thief, may be held improper for a robber.
The burglar hates to be identified with the pick-pocket. Many a one
finds his honor in this wise deeply attacked, particularly when it is
shown him that he is betraying an accomplice, or that he has swindled
his comrades in the division of booty, etc. I remember one thief who was
inconsolable because the papers mentioned that he had foolishly
overlooked a large sum of money in a burglary. This would indicate that
criminals have professional ambitions and seek professional fame.


Section 97. (g) Superstition.

For a discussion of Superstition see my Handbuch für
Untersuchungsrichter, etc. (English translation by J. Adam, New York,
1907), and H. Gross’s Archiv I, 306; III, 88; IV, 340; V, 290, 207; IX,
253; IV, 168; VI, 312; VII, 162; XII, 334.


Topic 3. MISTAKES.

(a) Mistakes of the Senses.


Section 98. (1) General Considerations.

As sensation is the basis of knowledge, the sensory process must be the
basis of the correctness of legal procedure. The information we get from
our senses and on which we construct our conclusion, may be said, all in
all, to be reliable, so that we are not justified in approaching things
we assume to depend on sense-perception with exaggerated caution.
Nevertheless, this perception is not always completely correct, and the
knowledge of its mistakes must help us and even cause us to wonder that
we make no greater ones.

Psychological examination of sense-perception has been going on since
Heraclitus. Most of the mistakes discovered have been used for various
purposes, from sport to science. They are surprising and attract and
sustain public attention; they have, hence, become familiar, but their
influence upon other phenomena and their consequences in the daily life
have rarely been studied. For two reasons. First, because such illusions
seem to be small and their far-reaching effects are rarely thought of,
as when, e.g., a line drawn on paper seems longer or more inclined than
it really is. Secondly, it is supposed that the influence of sensory
illusions can not easily make a difference in practical life. If the
illusion is observed it is thereby rendered harmless and can have no
effect. If it is not observed and later on leads to serious
consequences, their cause can not possibly be sought out, because it can
not be recognized as such, and because there have been so many
intermediate steps that a correct retroduction is impossible.

This demonstrates the rarity of a practical consideration of
sense-perception, but does not justify that rarity. Of course, there are
great difficulties in applying results of limited experiments to
extensive conditions. They arise from the assumption that the conditions
will be similar to those which the scientist studies, and that a
situation which exhibits certain phenomena under narrow experimental
conditions will show them, also, in the large. But this is not the case,
and it is for this reason that the results of modern psychology have
remained practically unproductive. This, of course, is not a reproach to
the discipline of experimental psychology, or an assault upon the value
of its researches. Its narrow limitations were necessary if anything
definite was to be discovered. But once this has been discovered the
conditions may be extended and something practical may be attained to,
particularly in the matter of illusion of sense. And this possibility
disposes of the second reason for not paying attention to these
illusions.

Witnesses do not of course know that they have suffered from illusions
of sense; we rarely hear them complain of it, anyway. And it is for this
very reason that the criminalist must seek it out. The requirement
involves great difficulties for we get very little help from the immense
literature on the subject. There are two roads to its fulfilment. In the
first place, we must understand the phenomenon as it occurs in our work,
and by tracing it back determine whether and which illusion of the sense
may have caused an abnormal or otherwise unclear fact. The other road is
the theoretical one, which must be called, in this respect, the
preparatory road. It requires our mastery of all that is known of
sense-illusion and particularly of such examples of its hidden nature as
exist. Much of the material of this kind is, however, irrelevant to our
purpose, particularly all that deals with disease and lies in the field
of medicine. Of course, where the nature of the disease is uncertain or
its very presence is unknown, it is as well for us to consider the case
as for the physician. But above all, it is our duty to consult the
physician.

Apart from what belongs to the physician there is the material which
concerns other professions than ours. That must be set aside, though
increasing knowledge may require us to make use even of that. It is
indubitable that we make many observations in which we get the absolute
impression that matters of sensory illusion which do not seem to concern
us lie behind some witnesses’ observations, etc., although we can not
accurately indicate what they are. The only thing to do when this occurs
is either to demonstrate the possibility of their presence or to wait
for some later opportunity to test the witness for them.

Classification will ease our task a great deal. The apparently most
important divisions are those of “normal” and “abnormal.” But as the
boundary between them is indefinite, it would be well to consider that
there is a third class which can not fall under either heading. This is
a class where especially a group of somatic conditions either favor or
cause illusory sense-perceptions, e.g., a rather over-loaded stomach, a
rush of blood to the head, a wakeful night, physical or mental
over-exertion. These conditions are not abnormal or diseased, but as
they are not habitual, they are not normal either. If the overloaded
stomach has turned into a mild indigestion, the increase of blood into
congestion, etc., then we are very near disease, but the boundary
between that and the other condition can not be determined.

Another question is the limit at which illusions of sense begin, how,
indeed, they can be distinguished from correct perceptions. The
possibility of doing so depends upon the typical construction of the
sense-organs in man. By oneself it would be impossible to determine
which sensation is intrinsically correct and which is an illusion. There
are a great many illusions of sense which all men suffer from under
similar conditions, so that the judgment of the majority can not be
normative. Nor can the control of one sense by another serve to
distinguish illusory from correct perception. In many cases it is quite
possible to test the sense of sight by touch, or the sense of hearing by
sight, but that is not always so. The simplest thing is to say that a
sense-impression is correct and implies reality when it remains
identical under various circumstances, in various conditions, when
connected with other senses, and observed by different men, with
different instruments. It is illusory when it is not so constant. But
here again the limit of the application of the term “illusion” is
difficult to indicate. That distant things seem to be smaller than they
are; that railway tracks and two sides of a street seem to run together
are intrinsically real illusions of sense, but they are not so
called--they are called the laws of perspective, so that it would seem
that we must add to the notion of sense-perception that of rarity, or
extraordinary appearance.

I have found still another distinction which I consider important. It
consists in the difference between real illusions and those false
conceptions in which the mistake originates as false inference. In the
former the sense organ has been really registering wrongly, as when, for
example, the pupil of the eye is pressed laterally and everything is
seen double. But when I see a landscape through a piece of red glass,
and believe the landscape to be really red, the mistake is one of
inference only, since I have not included the effect of the glass in my
concluding conception. So again, when in a rain I believe mountains to
be nearer than they really are, or when I believe the stick in the water
to be really bent, my sensations are perfectly correct, but my
inferences are wrong. In the last instance, even a photograph will show
the stick in water as bent.

This difference in the nature of illusion is particularly evident in
those phenomena of expectation that people tend to miscall “illusions of
sense.” If, in church, anybody hears a dull, weak tone, he will believe
that the organ is beginning to sound, because it is appropriate to
assume that. In the presence of a train of steam cars which shows every
sign of being ready to start you may easily get the illusion that it is
already going. Now, how is the sense to have been mistaken in such
cases? The ear has really heard a noise, the eye has really seen a
train, and both have registered correctly, but it is not their function
to qualify the impression they register, and if the imagination then
effects a false inference, that can not be called an illusion of
sensation.

The incorrectness of such classification becomes still more obvious when
some numerical, arithmetical demonstration can be given of the presence
of faulty inference. For example, if I see through the window a man very
far away clearing a lot with an ax, I naturally see the ax fall before I
hear the noise of the blow. Now, it may happen that the distance may be
just great enough to make me hear the sound of the second blow at the
moment in which I see the delivery of the third blow. Thus I perceive at
the same moment, in spite of the great distance, both the phenomena of
light and of sound, just as if I were directly on the spot. Perhaps I
will wonder at first about these physical anomalies, and then, if I have
made my simple mistake in inference, I shall tell somebody about the
remarkable “sensory illusion” I had today, although no one had ever
supposed me capable of being deceived in this way. Schopenhauer calls
attention to the familiar fact that on waking after a short nap all
localizations are apparently perverted, and the mind does not know what
is in front, what behind, what to the right, and what to the left. To
call also this sensory illusion, would again be wrong, since the mind is
not fully awake, and sufficiently orientated to know clearly its
condition. The matter is different when we do not properly estimate an
uncustomary sense-impression. A light touch in an unaccustomed part of
the body is felt as a heavy weight. After the loss of a tooth we feel an
enormous cave in the mouth, and what a nonsensical idea we have of what
is happening when the dentist is drilling a hole in a tooth! In all
these cases the senses have received a new impression which they have
not yet succeeded in judging properly, and hence, make a false
announcement of the object. It is to this fact that all fundamentally
incorrect judgments of new impressions must be attributed,--for example,
when we pass from darkness into bright light and find it very sharp;
when we find a cellar warm in winter that we believe to be ice-cold in
summer; when we suppose ourselves to be high up in the air the first
time we are on horseback, etc. Now, the actual presence of sensory
illusions is especially important to us because we must make certain
tests to determine whether testimony depends on them or not, and it is
of great moment to know whether the illusions depend on the individual’s
mind or on his senses. We may trust a man’s intellect and not his
senses, and conversely, from the very beginning.

It would be superfluous to talk of the importance of sensory illusion in
the determination of a sentence. The correctness of the judgment depends
on the correctness of the transmitted observations, and to understand
the nature of sense-illusion and its frequency is to know its
significance for punishment. There are many mistakes of judges based
entirely on ignorance of this matter. Once a man who claimed, in spite
of absolute darkness, to have recognized an opponent who punched him in
the eye, was altogether believed, simply because it was assumed that the
punch was so vigorous that the wounded man saw sparks by the light of
which he could recognize the other. And yet already Aristotle knew that
such sparks are only subjective. But that such things were believed is a
notable warning.[309]


Section 99. (2) _Optical Illusions._

It will be best to begin the study of optical illusions with the
consideration of those conditions which cause extraordinary, lunatic
images. They are important because the illusion is recognizable with
respect to the possibility of varied interpretations by any observer,
and because anybody may experiment for himself with a bit of paper on
the nature of false optical apprehension. If we should demonstrate no
more than that the simplest conditions often involve coarse mistakes,
much will have been accomplished for the law, since the “irrefutable
evidence” of our senses would then show itself to need corroboration.
Nothing is proved with “I have seen it myself,” for a mistake in one
point shows the equal possibility of mistakes in all other points.

Generally, it may be said that the position of lines is not without
influence on the estimation of their size.[310] Perpendicular dimensions
are taken to be somewhat greater than they are. Of two crossed lines,
the vertical one seems longer, although it is really equal to the
horizontal one. An oblong, lying on its somewhat longer side, is taken
to be a square; if we set it on the shorter side it seems to be still
more oblong than it really is. If we divide a square into equal angles
we take the nearer horizontal ones to be larger, so that we often take
an angle of thirty degrees to be forty-five. Habit has much influence
here. It will hardly be believed, and certainly is not consciously
known, that in the letter S the upper curve has a definitely smaller
radius than the lower one; but the inverted S shows this at once. To
such types other false estimations belong: inclinations, roofs, etc.,
appear so steep in the distance that it is said to be impossible to move
on them without especial help. But whoever does move on them finds the
inclination not at all so great. Hence, it is necessary, whenever the
ascension of some inclined plane is declared impossible, to inquire
whether the author of the declaration was himself there, or whether he
had judged the thing at a distance.

Slight crooks are underestimated. Exner[311] rightly calls attention to
the fact that in going round the rotunda of the Viennese Prater, he
always reached the exit much sooner than he expected. This is due to the
presence of slight deviations and on them are based the numerous false
estimates of distance and the curious fact that people, on being lost at
night in the woods, go round in a significantly small circle. It is
frequently observed that persons, who for one reason or another, i.e.,
robbery, maltreatment, a burglarious assault, etc., had fled into the
woods to escape, found themselves at daybreak, in spite of their flight,
very near the place of the crime, so that their honesty in fleeing seems
hardly believable. Nevertheless it may be perfectly trustworthy, even
though in the daytime the fugitive might be altogether at home in the
woods. He has simply underestimated the deviations he has made, and
hence believes that he has moved at most in a very flat arc. Supposing
himself to be going forward and leaving the wood, he has really been
making a sharp arc, and always in the same direction, so that his path
has really been circular.

Some corroboration for this illusion is supplied by the fact that the
left eye sees objects on the left too small, while the right eye
underestimates the right side of objects. This underestimation varies
from 0.3 to 0.7%. These are magnitudes which may naturally be of
importance, and which in the dark most affect deviations that are
closely regarded on the inner side of the eye--i.e., deviations to the
left of the left eye or the right of the right eye.

Such confusions become most troublesome when other estimations are added
to them. So long as the informant knows that he has only been
estimating, the danger is not too great. But as a rule the informant
does not regard his conception as an estimate, but as certain knowledge.
He does not say, “I estimate,” he says, “It is so.” Aubert tells how the
astronomer Förster had a number of educated men, physicians, etc.,
estimate the diameter of the moon. The estimation varied from 1´´ to 8´´
and more. The proper diameter is 1.5´´ at a distance of 12´´.

It is well known that an unfurnished room seems much smaller than a
furnished one, and a lawn covered with snow, smaller than a
thickly-grown one. We are regularly surprised when we find an enormous
new structure on an apparently small lot, or when a lot is parcelled out
into smaller building lots. When they are planked off we marvel at the
number of planks which can be laid on the surface. The illusions are
still greater when we look upward. We are less accustomed to estimation
of verticals than of horizontals. An object on the gutter of a roof
seems much smaller than at a similar distance on the ground. This can be
easily observed if any figure which has been on the roof of a house for
years is once brought down. Even if it is horizontally twice as far as
the height of the house, the figure still seems larger than before. That
this illusion is due to defective practice is shown by the fact that
children make mistakes which adults find inconceivable. Helmholtz tells
how, as child, he asked his mother to get him the little dolls from the
gallery of a very high tower. I remember myself that at five years I
proposed to my comrades to hold my ankles so that I could reach for a
ball from the second story of a house down to the court-yard. I had
estimated the height as one-twelfth of its actual magnitude. Certain
standards of under and overestimations are given us when there is near
the object to be judged an object the size of which we know. The reason
for the fact that trees and buildings get such ideal sizes on so-called
heroic landscape is the artistically reduced scale. I know that few
pictures have made such a devilish impression on me as an enormous
landscape, something in the style of Claude Lorraine, covering half a
wall. In its foreground there is to be seen a clerk riding a horse in a
glen. Rider and horse are a few inches high, and because of this the
already enormous landscape becomes frightfully big. I saw the picture as
a student, and even now I can describe all its details. Without the
diminutive clerk it would have had no particular effect.

In this connection we must not forget that the relations of magnitude of
things about us are, because of perspective, so uncertain that we no
longer pay any attention to them. “I find it difficult,” says
Lipps,[312] “to believe that the oven which stands in the corner of the
room does not look larger than my hand when I hold it a foot away from
my eyes, or that the moon is not larger than the head of a pin, which I
look at a little more closely.... We must not forget how we are in the
custom of comparing. I compare hand and oven, and I think of the hand in
terms of the oven.” That is because we know how large the hand and the
oven are, but very often we compare things the sizes of which we do not
know, or which we can not so easily get at, and then there are many
extraordinary illusions.

In connection with the cited incident of the estimation of the moon’s
diameter, there is the illusion of Thomas Reid who saw that the moon
seemed as large as a plate when looked at with the unhampered eye, but
as large as a dollar when looked at through a tube. This mistake
establishes the important fact that the size of the orifice influences
considerably the estimation of the size of objects seen through it.
Observations through key-holes are not rarely of importance in criminal
cases. The underestimations of sizes are astonishing.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Aërial perspective has a great influence on the determination of these
phenomena, particularly such as occur in the open and at great
distances. The influence is to be recognized through the various
appearances of distant objects, the various colors of distant mountains,
the size of the moon on the horizon, and the difficulties which aërial
perspective offers painters. Many a picture owes its success or failure
to the use of aërial perspective. If its influence is significant in the
small space of a painting, the illusions in nature can easily become of
enormous significance, particularly when extremes are brought together
in the observations of objects in unknown regions. The condition of the
air, sometimes foggy and not pellucid, at another time particularly
clear, makes an enormous difference, and statements whether about
distance, size, colors, etc., are completely unreliable. A witness who
has several times observed an unknown region in murky weather and has
made his important observation under very clear skies, is not to be
trusted.

An explanation of many sensory illusions may be found in the so-called
illusory lines. They have been much studied, but Zöllner[313] has been
the first to show their character. Thus, really quite parallel lines are
made to appear unparallel by the juxtaposition of inclined or crossing
lines. In figures 1 and 2 both the horizontal lines are actually
parallel, as may be determined in various ways.

The same lines looked at directly or backwards seem, in Fig. 1, convex,
in Fig. 2 concave.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

Still more significant is the illusion in Fig. 3, in which the convexity
is very clear. The length, etc., of the lines makes no difference in the
illusion.

On the other hand, in Fig. 4 the diagonals must be definitely thicker
than the parallel horizontal lines, if those are to appear not parallel.
That the inclination is what destroys the appearance of parallels is
shown by the simple case given in Fig. 5, where the distance from A to B
is as great as from B to C, and yet where the first seems definitely
smaller than the second.

Still more deceptive is Fig. 6, where the first line with the angle
inclined inwards seems incomparably smaller than the second with the
angle inclined outwards.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

All who have described this remarkable subject have attempted to explain
it. The possession of such an explanation might put us in a position to
account for a large number of practical difficulties. But certain as the
facts are, we are still far from their _why_ and _how_. We may believe
that the phenomenon shown in Figs. 1 and 2 appears when the boundaries
of a field come straight up to a street with parallel sides, with the
result that at the point of meeting the street seems to be bent in.
Probably we have observed this frequently without being aware of it, and
have laid no particular stress on it, first of all, because it was
really unimportant, and secondly, because we thought that the street was
really not straight at that point.

In a like manner we may have seen the effect of angles as shown in Figs.
5 and 6 on streets where houses or house-fronts were built cornerwise.
Then the line between the corners seemed longer or shorter, and as we
had no reason for seeking an accurate judgment we paid no attention to
its status. We simply should have made a false estimate of length if we
had been required to judge it. It is also likely that we may have
supposed an actual or suppository line on the side of the gables of a
house enclosed by angles of the gables, to be short,--but until now the
knowledge of this supposition has had no practical value. Nevertheless,
the significance of these illusions should not be underestimated. They
mean most of all the fact that we really can be much deceived, even to
the degree of swearing to the size of a simple thing and yet being quite
innocently mistaken. This possibility shows, moreover, that the
certainty of our judgment according to sensible standards is inadequate
and we have no way of determining how great this inadequacy is. We have
already indicated that we know only the examples cited by Zöllner,
Delboeuf and others. It is probable that they were hit upon by accident
and that similar ones can not be discovered empirically or
intentionally. Hence, it may be assumed that such illusions occur in
great number and even in large dimensions. For example, it is known that
Thompson discovered his familiar “optical circle illusion” (six circles
arranged in a circle, another in the middle. Each possesses bent radii
which turn individually if the whole drawing is itself turned in a
circle) by the accident of having seen the geometrical ornament drawn by
a pupil. Whoever deals with such optical illusions may see very
remarkable ones in almost every sample of ladies’ clothes, particularly
percale, and also in types of carpets and furniture. And these are too
complicated to be described. In the course of time another collection of
such illusions will be discovered and an explanation of them will be
forthcoming, and then it may be possible to determine how our knowledge
of their existence can be turned to practical use.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Practical application is easier in the so-called inversion of the visual
object. Fig. 7 shows the simplest case of it--the possibility of seeing
the middle vertical line as either deeper or higher than the others. In
the first instance you have before you a gutter, in the second a room.
Similar relations are to be observed in the case of a cube in which the
corner _a_ may be seen as either convex or concave according as you
think it behind or before the background of the angles from which _a_
proceeds. It is still clearer when, in a rhomboid, the line _XY_ is
drawn. Then _x_ or _y_ may be seen alternately as nearer or further and
the figure can thereby be brought into a different position. (Fig. 9.)
Done once it may be repeated voluntarily.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

There are many practical examples of these illusions. Sinsteden saw one
evening the silhouette of a windmill against a luminous background. The
arms seemed now to go to the right, now to the left--clearly because he
did not make out the body of the mill and might equally assume that he
saw it from the front or from the rear, the wheels going toward the
right in the first, and toward the left in the other case. An analogous
case is cited by Bernstein. If (Fig. 10) the cross made of the thin
lines stand for the bars of a weather vane and the heavy lines represent
the weather vane itself, it may be impossible under the conditions of
illumination for an eye looking from N to distinguish whether the
weather vane points NE or SW; there is no way of determining the
starting point of motion. All that can certainly be said is that the
weather vane lies between NE and SW and that its angle is at the
crossing of the two lines, but the direction in which its heads point
can not be determined at even a slight distance. Both forms of this
illusion may occur in a criminal trial. If once a definite idea of some
form of order has been gained, it is not abandoned or doubted, and is
even sworn to. If asked, for example, whether the mill-wheel moved right
or left, the observer will consider hardly one time in a hundred whether
there might not have been an optical illusion. He will simply assure us
that the thing was as he thinks he saw it, and whether he saw it
correctly is purely a matter of luck.

To all these illusions may be added those which are connected with
movement or are exposed by movement. During the movement of certain
bodies we can distinguish their form only under definite conditions. As
their movement increases they seem shorter in the direction of movement
and as it decreases they seem broader than normally. An express train
with many cars seems shorter when moving directly near us, and rows of
marching men seem longer. The illusion is most powerful when we look
through a stationary small opening. The same thing occurs when we move
quickly past bodies, for this makes them seem very short as we go by.

Of such cases sense-illusion does not constitute an adequate
explanation; it must be supplemented by a consideration of certain
inferences which are, in most instances, comparatively complex.[314] We
know, e.g. that objects which appear to us unexpectedly at night,
particularly on dark, cloudy nights, seem inordinately magnified. The
process is here an exceedingly complex one. Suppose I see, some cloudy
night, unexpectedly close to me a horse whose environment, because of
the fog, appears indistinct. Now I know from experience that objects
which appear from indistinct environments are as a rule considerably
distant. I know, further, that considerably distant objects seem much
smaller, and hence I must assume that the horse, which in spite of its
imaginary distance appears to retain its natural size, is really larger
than it is. The train of thought is as follows: “I see the horse
indistinctly. It seems to be far away. It is, in spite of its distance,
of great size. How enormous it must be when it is close to me!” Of
course these inferences are neither slow nor conscious. They occur in
reflection with lightning-like swiftness and make no difference to the
certainty of the instantaneous judgment. Hence it is frequently very
difficult to discover the process and the mistake it contains.

If, however, the observer finds an inexplicable hiatus in an event he
happens to notice, he finds it strange because unintelligible. In this
way is created that notion of strangeness which often plays so great a
rôle in the examination of witnesses. Hence when under otherwise
uncomfortable conditions, I see a horse run without hearing the beat of
his hoofs, when I see trees sway without feeling any storm; when I meet
a man who, in spite of the moonlight, has no shadow, I feel them to be
very strange because something is lacking in their logical development
as events. Now, from the moment a thing becomes strange to an individual
his perceptions are no longer reliable, it is doubtful whether he knows
what he has really experienced before his world became strange to him.
Add to this that few people are unwilling to confess that they felt ill
at ease, that perhaps they do not even know it,[315] and you get the
complicated substitution of sensory illusions and uncanny sensation, the
one causing the other, the other magnifying the one, and so on until the
whole affair is turned into something quite unrecognizable. So we find
ourselves in the presence of one of the inexplicable situations of the
reality of which we are assured by the most trustworthy individuals.

To magnify this phenomenon, we need only think of a few slightly
abnormal cases. It has already been indicated that there are many such
which are not diseased, and further, that many diseased cases occur
which are not known as such, at least, as being so much so as to make
the judge call in the doctor. This is the more likely because there are
frequently, if I may say so, localized diseases which do not exhibit any
extraordinary symptoms, at least to laymen, and hence offer no reason
for calling in experts. If we set aside all real diseases which are
connected with optical illusions as not concerning us, there are still
left instances enough. For example, any medical text-book will tell you
that morphine fiends and victims of the cocaine habit have very strong
tendencies to optical illusions and are often tortured by them. If the
disease is sufficiently advanced, such subjects will be recognized by
the physician at a single glance. But the layman can not make this
immediate diagnosis. He will get the impression that he is dealing with
a very nervous invalid, but not with one who is subject to optical
illusions. So, we rarely hear from a witness that he knows such people,
and certainly not that he is one himself. A very notable oculist, Himly,
was the first to have made the observation that in the diseased
excitability of the retina every color is a tone higher. Luminous black
looks blue, blue looks violet, violet looks red, red looks yellow.
Torpor of the retina inverts the substitution.

Dietz[316] tells of color-illusions following upon insignificant
indigestion; Foderè of hysterics who see everything reversed, and
Hoppe[317] says, “If the order of the rods and cones of the retina is
somewhat disturbed by an inflammatory touch, the equilibrium of vision
is altered and changes in size, in form, or appearance occur.”
Naturally the criminalist can not perceive slight indigestion, weak
hysteria, or an inflamed area in the retina when he is examining
witnesses, yet false observations like those described may have a
definite influence upon the decision in a case.

If such abnormal occasions are lacking the reasons for optical illusions
are of another nature. As a rule optical illusions occur when there is
an interruption in the communication between the retina, the sense of
movement, and the sense of touch, or when we are prevented from reducing
the changes of the retinal image to the movement of our body or of our
eyes. This reduction goes on so unconsciously that we see the idea of
the object and its condition as a unit. Again, it is indubitable that
the movement of the body seems quicker when we observe it with a fixed
glance than when we follow it with our eyes. The difference may be so
significant that it is often worth while, when much depends on
determining the speed of some act in a criminal case, to ask how the
thing was looked at.

Fechner has made a far-reaching examination of the old familiar fact
that things on the ground appear to run when we ride by them
rapidly.[318] This fact may be compared with the other, that when you
look directly into swift-moving water from a low bridge, the latter
seems all of a sudden to be swimming rapidly up stream, though the water
does not appear to stand still. Here some unknown factor is at work and
may exercise considerable influence on many other phenomena without our
being able to observe the results. To this class may be added the
extraordinary phenomenon that from the train objects easily seem too
near and hence appear smaller than they are. It may be, however, that
the converse is true and objects appear smaller, or at least shorter,
and that inasmuch as we are in the habit of attributing the diminution
of size in objects to their distance, we tax the latter as false. So
much is certain--that whenever we ourselves move quickly we make false
judgments of size, distance, and even color. The last may be due to the
fact that during a quick passage, colors may so compose themselves, that
green and red become white, and blue and yellow, green, etc. I believe
that all these illusions are increasing in connection with the spread of
bicycling, inasmuch as many observations are made from the fleeting
wheel and its motion tends to increase the illusions considerably.
Concerning the differences in movement Stricker[319] says: “If I lie on
my back and see a bird fly in the uniformly blue heaven, I recognize the
movement although I have no object with which to compare it. This can
not be explained by the variety of points on the retina which are
affected, for when the bird pauses and I turn my eye, I know that it is
not moving.” The last argument is not correct. If the bird is sitting on
a branch I know, in spite of all my occipital movement, that it is
quiet, but only because I perceive and observe the bird’s immobility.
If, however, I lie on my back like Stricker and see above me a bird of
the class that, so to speak, swim motionless in the air for minutes at a
time, and if then I turn my head, I can not tell when the bird begins to
move. Here then we have no exception to the general rule and can always
say that we are speaking of movement optically perceived when the rays
issuing from any body progressively touch various points on the retina.
And since this occurs when we are in motion as well as when the object
is in motion it happens that we can not locate the movement, we cannot
say whether it be in us or in the object.

Of course, the possibility that fanciful images may appear during
movement is familiar. If I sit quietly in the forest and at some
distance see a stone or a piece of wood or a little heap of dried
leaves, etc., it may be that, because of some illusion, I take it to be
a rolled up hedgehog, and it may happen that I am so convinced of the
nature of the object while I am looking at it that I see how the
hedgehog stretches itself, sticks out its paws and makes other
movements. I remember one winter when, because of some delay, a
commission on which I was serving had failed to reach a village not far
from the capital. We had gone to investigate a murder case and had found
the body frozen stiff. The oven in the room was heated and the
grave-digger placed the stiff body near the oven in order to thaw it
out. We at this time were examining the place. After a while I was
instructed by the examining justice to see about the condition of the
corpse, and much to my disgust, I found it sitting near the oven, bent
over. It had thawed out and collapsed. During the subsequent obduction I
saw most clearly how the corpse made all kinds of movements, and even
after the section, during the dictation, of the protocol, my imagination
still seemed to see the corpse moving a hand or a foot.

The imagination may also cause changes in color. Once, I saw on my desk,
which stood next to a window, a great round drop of water on the left
side of which the panes of the window were reflected. (Fig. 11). The
whole business was about a meter from my eye. I saw it repeatedly while
working and it finally occurred to me to inquire how such a great drop
of water could get there. I had sat at my desk for hours without moving.
I must have observed it if it had dropped there. Refraining
intentionally from going closer, I started, without avail, to consider
how it could have come. Some time after I examined the drop of water and
found it to be an ink-blot, long ago completely dried, and bearing on
its left side a few grains of white cigar ash. I had taken these to be
the image of the window, and hence, had immediately attached to it the
idea of the shining, raised drop of water. I had altogether overlooked
the deep black color of the drop. On the witness stand I would have
sworn that I had seen a drop of water, even if I had known the evidence
on the matter to be important.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

In many cases it is possible to control the imagination, but only when
it is known that the images can not be as they are seen. Everybody is
aware how a half-covered object at a distance, or objects accidentally
grouped in one way or another, are taken for God knows what. Thus once,
looking from my desk to my smoking table, I saw an enormous pair of
tailor’s scissors half-covered by a letter. It remained identical under
a number of repeated glances. Only when I thought vigorously that such a
thing could not possibly be in my room did it disappear. A few scales of
ashes, the lower round of the match safe, the metal trimmings of two
cigar boxes half-covered by a letter and reflected by the uncertain
light breaking through the branches of a tree, were all that the
tailor’s scissors was composed of. If there had been such a thing in the
house, or if I had believed something like it to exist in the house, I
should have sought no further and should have taken my oath that I had
seen the thing. It is significant that from the moment I understood the
phenomenon I could not restore the image of the scissors. How often may
similar things be of importance in criminal trials!

The so-called captivation of our visual capacity plays a not unimportant
part in distinguishing correct from illusory seeing. In order to see
correctly we must look straight and fully at the object. Looking askance
gives only an approximate image, and permits the imagination free play.
Anybody lost in a brown study who pictures some point in the room across
the way with his eyes can easily mistake a fly, which he sees confusedly
askance, for a great big bird. Again, the type of a book seems
definitely smaller if the eyes are fixed on the point of a lead pencil
with a certain distance before or above the book. And yet again, if you
stand so that at an angle of about 90 degrees from the fixation point,
you look at a white door in a dark wall, observing its extent in
indirect vision, you will find it much higher than in direct vision.

These examples indicate how indirect vision may be corrected by later
correct vision, but such correction occurs rarely. We see something
indirectly; we find it uninteresting, and do not look at it directly.
When it becomes of importance later on, perhaps enters into a criminal
case, we think that we have seen the thing as it is, and often swear
that “a fly is a big bird.”

There are a number of accidents which tend to complete illusion. Suppose
that the vision of a fly, which has been seen indirectly and taken for a
big bird happens to be synchronous with the shriek of some bird of prey.
I combine the two and am convinced that I have seen that bird of prey.
This may increase, so much so that we may have series of
sense-illusions. I cite the example of the decorative theatrical artist,
who can make the most beautiful images with a few, but very
characteristic blots. He does it by emphasising what seems to us
characteristic, e.g., of a rose arbor, in such a way that at the
distance and under the conditions of illumination of the theatre we
imagine we really see a pretty rose arbor. If the scene painter could
give definite rules he would help us lawyers a great deal. But he has
none, he proceeds according to experience, and is unable to correct
whatever mistakes he has committed. If the rose arbor fails to make the
right impression, he does not try to improve it--he makes a new one.
This may lead to the conclusion that not all people require the same
characteristics in order to identify a thing as such, so that if we
could set the rose arbor on the stage by itself, only a part of the
public would recognize it as properly drawn, the other part would
probably not recognize it at all. But if, of an evening, there is a
large number of decorations on the stage, the collective public will
find the arbor to be very pretty. That will be because the human senses,
under certain circumstances, are susceptible to sympathetic induction.
In the case of the rose arbor we may assume that the artist has
typically represented the necessary characteristics of the arbor for one
part of the audience, for another part those of a castle, for another
part those of a forest, and for a fourth those of a background. But once
an individual finds a single object to be correct, his senses are
already sympathetically inductive, i.e., captivated for the correctness
of the whole collection, so that the correctness passes from one object
to the total number. Now, this psychic process is most clear in those
optical illusions which recently have been much on public exhibition
(the Battle of Gravelotte, the Journey of the Austrian Crown Prince in
Egypt, etc.). The chief trick of these representations is the presenting
of real objects, like stones, wheels, etc., in the foreground in such a
way that they fuse unnoticeably with the painted picture. The sense of
the spectator rests on the plastic objects, is convinced of their
materiality and transfers the idea of this plasticity to the merely
pictured. Thus the whole image appears as tri-dimensional.

The decorations of great parks at the beginning of the last century
indicate that illumination and excited imagination are not alone in
causing such illusions. Weber tells ecstatically of an alley in
Schwetzing at the end of which there was a highly illuminated concave
wall, painted with a landscape of mountains and water-falls. Everybody
took the deception for a reality because the eye was captivated and
properly inducted. The artist’s procedure must have been psychologically
correct and must have counted upon the weakness of our observation and
intellection. Exner points to the simple circumstance that we do not
want to see that things under certain conditions must terminate. If we
draw a straight line and cover an end with a piece of paper, every one
wonders that the line is not longer when the paper is removed.

I know of no case in criminal procedure where illusions of this kind
might be of importance, but it is conceivable that such illusions enter
in numberless instances. This is especially susceptible of observation
when we first see some region or object hastily and then observe it more
accurately. We are astonished how fundamentally false our first
conception was. Part of this falseness may be adduced to faults of
memory, but these play little or no part if the time is short and if we
are able to recall that the false conception appeared just as soon as we
observed the situation in question. The essential reason for false
conception is to be found only in the fact that our first hasty view was
incorrectly inducted, and hence, led to illusions like those of the
theatre. Thus, it is possible to take a board fence covered at points
with green moss, for a moss-covered rock, and then to be led by this to
see a steep cliff. Certain shadows may so magnify the size of the small
window of an inn that we may take it to be as large as that of a sitting
room. And if we have seen just one window we think all are of the same
form and are convinced that the inn is a mansion. Or again, we see,
half-covered, through the woods, a distant pool, and in memory we then
see the possibly, but not necessarily, present river. Or perhaps we see
a church spire, and possibly near it the roof of a house rises above the
trees; then we are inducted into having seen a village, although there
really are visible only the church and the house.

These illusions again, I must repeat, are of no importance if they are
at all doubted, for then the truth is ascertained. When, however, they
are not doubted and are sworn to, they cause the greatest confusion in
trials. A bar-room quarrel, a swung cane, and a red handkerchief on the
head, are enough to make people testify to having seen a great brawl
with bloody heads. A gnawing rat, a window accidentally left open
through the night, and some misplaced, not instantaneously discovered
object, are the ingredients of a burglary. A man who sees a rather quick
train, hears a shrill blowing of the whistle, and sees a great cloud,
may think himself the witness of a wreck. All these phenomena, moreover,
reveal us things as we have been in the habit of seeing them. I repeat,
here also, that the photographic apparatus, in so far as it does not
possess a refracting lens, shows things much more truly than our eye,
which is always corrected by our memory. If I permit a man sitting on a
chair to be photographed, front view, with his legs crossed and
stretched far out, the result is a ludicrous picture because the boots
seem immensely larger than the head of the subject. But the photograph
is not at fault, for if the subject is kept in the same position and
then the apparent size of head and boot are measured, we get accurately
the same relation as on the photograph. We know by experience how big a
head is. And hence, we ordinarily see all relations of size in proper
proportion. But on the photograph we can not apply this “natural”
standard because it is not given in nature, and we blame the camera.

If, in a criminal case, we are dealing with a description of size, and
it is given as it is known from experience, not as it really appears,
then if experience has deceived us, our testimony is also wrong,
although we pretend to have testified on the basis of direct
sense-perception.

The matter of after-images, probably because of their short duration, is
of no criminalistic importance. I did once believe that they might be of
considerable influence on the perception of witnesses, but I have not
succeeded in discovering a single example in which this influence is
perceptible.

On the other hand, the phenomenon of irradiation, the appearance of dark
bodies as covered with rays of light by adjacent luminosities, is of
importance. This phenomenon is well-known, as are Helmholtz’s and
Plateau’s explanations of it. But it is not sufficiently applied. One
needs only to set a white square upon the blackest possible ground and
at the same time a similar black square of equal size on a white ground,
and then to place them under a high light, to perceive how much larger
the white square appears to be. That such phenomena often occur in
nature need not be expounded. Whenever we are dealing with questions of
size it is indubitably necessary to consider the color of the object and
its environment with respect to its background and to the resulting
irradiation.


Section 100. (3) _Auditory Illusions._

From the point of view of the criminalist, auditory illusions are hardly
less significant than visual illusions, the more so, as incorrect
hearing is much more frequent than incorrect seeing. This is due to the
greater similarity of tones to each other, and this similarity is due to
the fact that sound has only one dimension, while vision involves not
only three but also color. Of course, between the booming of cannons and
the rustling of wings there are more differences than one, but the most
various phenomena of tones may be said to vary only in degree. For
purposes of comparison moreover, we can make use only of a class of
auditory images on the same plane, e.g., human voices, etc. Real
acoustic illusions are closely connected with auditory misapprehension
and a distinction between these two can not be rigorously drawn. A
misapprehension may, as a rule, be indicated by almost any external
condition, like the relations of pitch, echo, repetition, false
coincidence of waves of sound, etc. Under such circumstances there may
arise real illusions.

The study of auditory illusions is rendered especially difficult by the
rarity of their repetition, which makes it impossible reliably to
exclude accidents and mistakes in observation. Only two phenomena are
susceptible of accurate and sufficient study. For three summers a man
used to ride through the long street in which I live. The man used to
sell ice and would announce himself by crying out, “Frozen,” with the
accent on the Fro. This word was distinctly audible, but if the man came
to a definite place in the street, there were also audible the words
“Oh, my.” If he rode on further the expression became confused and
gradually turned into the correct, “Frozen.” I observed this daily, got
a number of others to do so, without telling them of the illusion, but
each heard the same thing in spite of the distinct difference between
“frozen,” and “oh, my.”

I made a similar observation at a bicycle school. As is known, beginners
are able frequently to ride by themselves but need help in mounting and
dismounting their machines. To do so they call a teacher by crying out:
“Herr Maier.” At a certain place this sound would seem distinctly to be
“mamma.” I was at first much surprised to hear people of advanced age
cry cheerfully, “mamma.” Later I discovered what the word really was and
acquaintances whose attention I called to the matter confirmed my
observation. Such things are not indifferent, they show that really very
different sounds may be mistaken for one another, that the test of
misunderstandings may often lead to false results, since only during the
test of an illusion are both auditor and speaker accurately in the same
position as before. Finally, these things show that the whole business
of correcting some false auditions is very difficult. Yet this work of
correction may be assumed to be much more easy with respect to hearing
than with respect to seeing. If, e.g., it is asserted that the revolver
has been seen somewhere, and if it has been known that the sight was
impossible, it becomes just as impossible, almost, to determine what the
object seen really was. In the rarest cases only will it be something
altogether similar, e.g., a pistol; most of the time it will be an
object which could not be inferred from no matter what combinations. In
hearing, on the contrary, if once it is determined that there has been a
false audition, the work of placing it, though difficult, need not be
unprofitable. This work is often compulsory upon the criminalist who
receives protocols which have not been read aloud, and in which mistakes
of hearing and dictation have been made. Such mistakes are considerably
disturbing, and if the case is important their source and status must be
inferred. This may almost always be done. Of course, strange, badly
heard proper names can not be corrected, but other things can.

As regards the general treatment of auditory illusions, it is necessary,
first of all, to consider their many and significant differences. In the
first place, there are the varieties of good hearing. That normal and
abnormal hearers vary in degree of power is well known. There are also
several special conditions, causing, e.g., the so called hyper-auditive
who hear more acutely than normal people. Of course, such assertions as
those which cite people who can hear the noise of sulphur rubbed on the
poles of quartz crystals and so on, are incorrect, but it is certain
that a little attention will reveal a surprising number of people whose
hearing is far acuter than that of normal individuals. Apart from
children, the class is made up of musicians, of young girls, and of very
nervous, excitable, and sickly persons. The musicians in fact have
become so because of their ears; the young girls hear well largely
because of their delicate organization and the very fine construction of
their ears; and the nervous people because of their sensibility to the
pain involved in loud noises. Many differences of perception among
witnesses are to be explained by differences of audition, and the
reality of apparent impossibilities in hearing must not be denied but
must be tested under proper conditions. One of these conditions is
location. The difference between hearing things in the noisy day and in
the quiet night, in the roar of the city, or in the quiet of the
mountains, is familiar. The influence of resonance and pitch, echo and
absorption of tones, i.e., the location of the sound, is of great
importance. Finally, it must not be forgotten that people’s ability to
hear varies with the weather. Colds reduce the power, and not a few
people are influenced by temperature, atmospheric pressure, etc. These
considerations show the degree in which auditory illusions can be of
importance even in tests of their nature and existence. They show above
all that the same object of comparison under the same circumstances must
be used in every test. Otherwise much confusion inevitably results.

The presence of auditory illusions in diseases, fever, hysteria,
nervousness, alcoholism and its associates, mental disturbances,
hyperæmia, diseases of the ear, etc., is well known, but concerns us
only as pointing to the necessity of calling in the physician
immediately. They have their definite characteristics and rarely leave
the layman in doubt of his duty in that direction. The great difficulty
comes in dealing with diseases or apparent diseases while it is still
impossible to know of their existence, or where the pain is of such
character that the layman does not know of its presence and thus has no
ground for consulting the doctor. For example, it is well known that a
large amount of ear wax in the aural passage may cause all sorts of
ringing and sighing in the ear, and may even produce real
hallucinations. Yet a person having an abnormal amount of ear wax may be
otherwise absolutely sound. How is the need of a physician to be guessed
in such a case? Again, the perforation of the drum, especially when it
follows a catarrh, may cause a definite auditory illusion with regard to
the sound of voices, or the illusion may be effected by the irritation
of the skin in the ear passage, or by anemia, or by a strong carotid
pulse and a distention of the bloodvessels, as happens in alcoholism.
Many people become abnormally sensitive to sound at the beginning of
fevers. Women at the time of their climacterium hear all kinds of
voices. Inasmuch as this soon stops, the abnormality and incorrectness
of their audition is hard to establish. Childbirth, too, makes a
difference. Old, otherwise conscientious midwives claim to have heard
unborn children breathe and cry.

Examples of this sort of thing are innumerable and they teach that
whenever any questionable assertion is made about a thing heard the
doctor must be called in to determine whether the witness heard it under
abnormal, though not diseased conditions. Again, merely accidental or
habitual general excitability tends to intensify all sounds, and whether
the witness under consideration was in such condition can be determined
only by the expert physician.

The illusions of hearing which completely normal people are subject to
are the most difficult of all. Their number and frequency is variously
estimated. The physician has nothing to do with them. The physicist, the
acoustician and physiologist do not care about the criminalist’s needs
in this matter, and we ourselves rarely have time and opportunity to
deal with it. As a result our information is very small, and no one can
say how much is still undiscovered. One of my friends has called my
attention to the fact that when the beats of the clock are counted
during sleepiness, one too many is regularly counted. I tested this
observation and my experience confirmed it. If, now, we consider how
frequently the determination of time makes the whole difference in a
criminal case and how easily it is possible to mistake a whole hour, we
can get some notion of the importance of this illusion. Its explanation
is difficult and it may be merely a single instance of a whole series of
unknown auditory illusions resting on the same basis. Another and
similar phenomenon is the “double beat of the hammer.” If you have an
assistant strike the table with a hammer while you hold both ears with
your fingers and then open them half a second or a second after the
blow, you hear the blow again. And if you open and shut your ears
quickly you can hear the blow several times. This is explained through
the fact that a number of reflections of the sound occur in the room,
and that these are perceivable only by the unfatigued ear. The
explanation is unsatisfactory because the experiment is sometimes
successful in the open. Taken in itself, this matter seems very
theoretical and without practical value. But this kind of action may
occur automatically. It is well known that swallowing closes the
Eustachian tubes for a moment, especially if done when lying down. Now,
if this occurs during a blow, a shot, etc., the sound must be heard
twice. Again, it may easily happen that because of the noise a man wakes
up half asleep and, frightened, swallows the collected saliva; then this
accident, which in itself seems unimportant, may lead to very
significant testimony. Such occurrences are not infrequent.

The intensity of a sound already heard may be of considerable influence.
Certain experimenters have indicated the remarkable character of
slightly intensive effects of sound. If you hold a watch so far from the
ear as to hear it clearly but weakly, the sound decreases until finally
it is not heard at all, and after awhile it is again heard, etc. This
may lead to hearing distinct sounds made up of many tones, and need not
evince any great illusion with regard to the ticking of a watch. But the
thing may occur also in connection with more powerful and more distant
sounds, e.g., the murmur of a brook, the rush of a train, the pounding
in a distant factory. Noises far removed are influenced by reflections
of sound, waves of air, etc., and it is possible that all kinds of
things may be heard in a completely monotonous noise. This can be easily
learned by listening to the soft murmur of a distant brook at night.
Given the disposition and supposing the existence of the brook unknown,
it is easy to hear in its monotonous murmur, human voices, sighs,
shrieks, etc.

Another remarkable observation shows that in the dark very distinct
things are heard during the playing of delicate instruments, such as
mouth-organs. The humming approaches and withdraws, then it comes on
various sides, and finally one has the feeling that the whole room is
full of humming and winging insects. And this may go on indefinitely.
There is a large collection of reasons for this reduplication of
monotonous sounds. Everybody knows the accord of the æolian harp which
consists of identical notes, and the melodies which seem to lie in the
pounding of the train on the rails. This can become especially clear
when one is half asleep. If ever thinking begins to be ousted by
slumber, the rhythmic pound begins to dominate consciousness. Then the
rhythm gets its appropriate melody which becomes progressively more
intense, and if one grows suddenly wide awake one wonders why the
clearly-heard music is missing. Similarly, it is often asserted that a
row of travelling wild swans make pleasant chords, although each swan is
able to utter only one cry. Difference in distance and alterations in
the air cause the chords.

The difficulties in distinguishing the intensity or weakness of a sound
are of importance. Fechner learned from the violinist Wasilewski that he
observed that a male choir of four hundred voices did not sound
essentially louder than one of two hundred. At the same time one clock
is not heard at a great distance, a hundred clocks are heard. One locust
can not be heard eating; when 1000 eat they are heard; hence each one
must make a definite noise.[320] Early authorities have already
indicated how difficult it is to distinguish the number of bells ringing
together. Even musicians will often take two or three to be five or six.

Certain dispositions make some difference in this respect. The operating
physician hears the low groaning of the patient after the operation
without having heard his loud cries during the operation. During the
operation the physician must not hear anything that is likely to disturb
his work, but the low groan has simply borne in upon him. The sleeping
mother often is deaf to considerable noise, but wakes up immediately
when her child draws a deeper breath than usual. Millers and factory
hands, travellers, etc., do not hear the pounding of their various
habitual environmental noises, but they perceive the slightest call, and
everybody observes the considerable murmur of the world, the sum of all
distant noises, only in the silence of the night that misses it.

Illusions of direction of sound are very common. It is said that even
animals are subject to them; and everybody knows how few human beings
can distinguish the source and direction of street music, a rolling
wagon, or a ringing bell. Even when long practice enables one to
determine direction with correctness, an accidental event, perhaps the
weather, especial sounds, a different grouping of individuals on the
street, may result in serious mistakes. I tried to learn to judge from
my office-desk whether the ring of the horse-car came from above or
below. I succeeded so well that I could not understand how it was
difficult not to learn the difference, and yet I failed many a time
altogether in judgment. The reason for it I do not know.

All these enumerated circumstances must show how very uncertain all
acoustic perceptions are, and how little they may be trusted if they are
not carefully tested under similar conditions, and if--what is most
important--they are not isolated. We are here led back to the old
principle that every observation is not proof but means of proof, and
that it may be trusted only when it is confirmed by many parallel
actions which are really consistent. That even after that mistakes are
possible, is true, but “after that” is when we have done all that lies
within human power.


Section 101. (4) _Illusions of Touch._

The high standing of the sense of touch which make it in certain
directions even the organ of control of the sense of sight, is well
known, and Condillac’s historic attempt to derive all the senses from
this one is still plausible. If what is seen is to be seen accurately
there is automatic resort to the confirmatory aid of the sense of touch,
which apprehends what the eye has missed. Hence we find many people
touching things, whose vision is not altogether reliable--i.e., people
of considerable age, children unpracticed in seeing, an uneducated
people who have never learned to see quickly and comprehensively.
Moreover, certain things can be determined only by touching, i.e., the
fineness of papers, cloth, etc., the sharpness or pointedness of
instruments, or the rawness of objects. Even when we pat a dog kindly we
do so partly because we want to see whether his skin is as smooth and
fine as the eye sees it; moreover, we want to test the visual impression
by that of touch.

But important and reliable as the sense of touch is, it is nevertheless
not to be trusted when it is the sole instrument of perception. We must
never depend on the testimony of a witness based entirely on perceptions
by touch, and the statements of a wounded person concerning the time,
manner, etc., of his wound are unreliable unless he has also seen what
he has felt. We know that most knife and bullet wounds, i.e., the most
dangerous ones, are felt, in the first instance, as not very powerful
blows. Blows on the extremities are not felt as such, but rather as
pain, and blows on the head are regularly estimated in terms of pain,
and falsely with regard to their strength. If they were powerful enough
to cause unconsciousness they are said to have been very massive, but if
they have not had that effect, they will be described by the most honest
of witnesses as much more powerful than they actually were. Concerning
the location of a wound in the back, in the side, even in the upper arm,
the wounded person can give only general indications, and if he
correctly indicates the seat of the wound, he has learned it later but
did not know it when it occurred. According to Helmholtz, practically
all abdominal sensations are attributed to the anterior abdominal wall.
Now such matters become of importance when an individual has suffered
several wounds in a brawl or an assault and wants to say certainly that
he got wound A when X appeared, wound B when Y struck at him, etc. These
assertions are almost all false because the victim is likely to identify
the pain of the moment of receiving the wound with its later
painfulness. If, for example, an individual has received a rather long
but shallow knife wound and a deep stab in the back, the first will
cause him very considerable burning sensation, the latter only the
feeling of a heavy blow. Later on, at the examination, the cut has
healed and is no longer painful; the dangerous stab which may have
reached the lung, causes pain and great difficulty in breathing, so that
the wounded man assigns the incidence of the stab to the painful
sensation of the cut, and conversely.

Various perceptions of victims on receiving a wound are remarkable, and
I have persuaded a police surgeon of considerable learning and
originality to collect and interpret his great mass of material. It is
best done by means of tabulation, accurate description of wounds
according to their place, size, form, and significance, the statement of
the victim concerning his feeling at the moment of receiving the wound,
the consequences of healing, and at the end explanatory observations
concerning the reasons for true or incorrect sensations of the victim.
As this work is to have only psychological value it is indifferent
whether the victim is veracious or not. What we want to know is what
people say about their perception. The true and the false will
distinguish themselves automatically, the material being so rich, and
the object will be to compare true subjective feelings with true
subjective deeds. Perhaps it may even be possible to draw
generalizations and to abstract certain rules.

There are many examples of the fact that uncontrolled touch leads to
false perceptions. Modern psychophysics has pointed to a large group of
false perceptions due to illusions of pressure, stabs, or other contact
with the skin. The best known, and criminalistically most important
experiments, are those with open compasses. Pressed on the less
sensitive parts of the body, the back, the thigh, etc., they are always
felt as one, although they are quite far apart. The experiments of
Flournoy, again, show how difficult it is to judge weights which are not
helped by the eye’s appreciation of their form and appearance. Ten
objects of various forms were judged by fifty people for their weight;
only one discovered that they all had the same weight.

Similarly, mere touch can not give us proper control over the organs of
the body. Sully says that in bed we may voluntarily imagine that a leg
has a position quite different from that it really has. Let me cite some
similar examples from my “Manual for Investigating Judges.” If we take a
pea between the thumb and the index finger, we feel the pea simply,
although its tactile image comes to us through two fingers, i.e.,
double. If now we cross the third finger over the fourth and hold the
pea between the ends of these two fingers, we feel it to be double
because the fingers are not in their customary positions and hence give
double results. From one point of view this double feeling is correct,
but when we touch the pea naturally, experience helps us to feel only
one pea. Another example consists in crossing the hands and turning them
inward and upward, so that the left fingers turn to the left and the
right fingers to the right. Here the localization of the fingers is
totally lost, and if a second person points to one of the fingers
without touching it, asking you to lift it, you regularly lift the
analogous finger of the other hand. This shows that the tactile sense is
not in a very high stage of development, since it needs, when unhelped
by long experience, the assistance of the sense of sight. Perceptions
through touch alone, therefore, are of small importance; inferences are
made on the basis of few and more coarse characteristic impressions.

This is shown by a youthful game we used to play. It consisted of
stretching certain harmless things under the table--a soft piece of
dough, a peeled, damp potato stuck on a bit of wood, a wet glove filled
with sand, the spirally cut rind of a beet, etc. Whoever got one of
these objects without seeing it thought he was holding some disgusting
thing and threw it away. His sense of touch could present only the
dampness, the coldness, and the motion, i.e., the coarsest traits of
reptilian life, and the imagination built these up into a reptile and
caused the consequent action. Foolish as this game seems, it is
criminalistically instructive. It indicates what unbelievable illusions
the sense of touch is capable of causing. To this inadequacy of the
tactile imagination may be added a sort of transferability of certain
touch sensations. For example, if ants are busy near my seat I
immediately feel that ants are running about under my clothes, and if I
see a wound or hear it described, I often feel pain in the analogous
place on my own body. That this may lead to considerable illusion in
excitable witnesses is obvious.

Finally, this dependence of the sense of touch may be supplemented by
the fact that it is counted only relatively, and its value varies with
the individual. We find the cellar warm in winter and cold in summer,
because we only feel the difference with the outer air, and when we put
one hand in hot, and the other in cold water, and then put both in tepid
water one finds the tepid water cold, the other warm. The record of
tactile sensations is frequent in our protocols and requires constant
consideration of the sense’s unreliability.

Diseased conditions are of course to be referred to the physician. I
need only mention that slight poisonings by means of chloroform,
morphine, atropine, daturine, decrease, and that strychnine increases
the sensitivity of the touch organ.


Section 102. (5) _Illusions of the Sense of Taste._

Illusions of taste are of importance for us only in cases of poisoning
in which we want the assistance of the victim, or desire to taste the
poison in question in order to determine its nature. That taste and odor
are particularly difficult to get any unanimity about is an old story,
and it follows that it is still more difficult clearly to understand
possible illusions of these senses. That disease can cause mistaken
gustatory impressions is well known. But precedent poisoning may also
create illusions. Thus, observation shows that poisoning by
rose-santonin (that well-known worm remedy to which children are so
abnormally sensitive) causes a long-enduring, bitter taste;
sub-cutaneous morphine poisoning causes illusory bitter and sour tastes.
Intermittent fevers tend to cause, when there is no attack and the
patient feels comparatively well, a large number of metallic,
particularly coppery tastes. If this is true it may lead to unjustified
suspicions of poisoning, inasmuch as the phenomena of intermittent fever
are so various that they can not all be identified.

Imagination makes considerable difference here. Taine tells somewhere of
a novelist, who so graphically described the poisoning of his heroine
that he felt the taste of arsenic and got indigestion. This may be
possible, for perhaps everybody has already learned the great influence
of the false idea of the nature of a food. If some salt meat is taken to
be a sweet pastry, the taste becomes disgusting because the imaginary
and the actual tastes seem to be mixed. The eye has especial influence,
and the story cited and denied a hundred times, that in the dark, red
wine and white wine, chicken and goose, can not be distinguished, that
the going out of a cigar is not noted, etc., is true. With your eyes
closed it may be possible to eat an onion instead of an apple.

Prior tastes may cause significant gustatory illusions. Hence, when
assertions are made about tastes, it is always necessary to inquire at
the outset what had been eaten or drunk before. Experienced housewives
take this fact into consideration in setting their tables and arranging
their wines. The values of the wines are considerably raised by complete
illusions of taste. All in all, it must not be forgotten that the
reliability of the sense of taste can not be estimated too low. The
illusions are greatest especially when a thing has been tasted with a
preconceived notion of its taste.


Section 103. (6) _The Illusions of the Olfactory Sense._

Olfactory illusions are very rare in healthy people and are hence of
small importance. They are frequent among the mentally diseased, are
connected in most cases with sexual conditions and then are so vivid
that the judge can hardly doubt the need of calling in the physician.
Certain poisons tend to debauch the olfactory sense. Strychnine, e.g.,
tends to make it finer, morphine duller. People with weak lungs try, in
most cases, to set their difficulty of breathing outside themselves and
believe that they are inhaling poisoned air, coal-gas, etc. If one
considers in this connection the suspiciousness which many people
suffering from lung trouble often exhibit, we may explain many
groundless accusations of attempted murder by stifling with poisonous or
unbreathable gas. If this typical illusion is unknown to the judge he
may find no reason for calling in the physician and then--injustice.

The largest number of olfactory illusions are due to imagination.
Carpenter’s frequently cited case of the officials who smelled a corpse
while a coffin was being dug up, until finally the coffin was found to
be empty, has many fellows. I once was making an examination of a case
of arson, and on approaching the village noted a characteristic odor
which is spread by burned animals or men. When we learned that the
consumed farm lay still an hour’s ride from the village, the odor
immediately disappeared. Again, on returning home, I thought I heard the
voice of a visitor and immediately smelled her characteristic perfume,
but she had not been there that day.

Such illusions are to be explained by the fact that many odors are in
the air, that they are not very powerfully differentiated and may hence
be turned by means of the imagination into that one which is likely to
be most obvious.

The stories told of hyper-sensitives who think they are able to smell
the pole of a magnet or the chemicals melted into a glass, belong to
this class. That they do so in good faith may be assumed, but to smell
through melted glass is impossible. Hence it must be believed that such
people have really smelled something somewhere and have given this odor
this or that particular location. Something like this occurs when an
odor, otherwise found pleasant, suddenly becomes disgusting and
unbearable when its source is unknown. However gladly a man may eat
sardines in oil he is likely to turn aside when his eyes are closed and
an open can of sardines is held under his nose. Many delicate forms of
cheese emit disgusting odors so long as it is not known that cheese is
the source. The odor that issues from the hands after crabs have been
eaten is unbearable; if, however, one bears in mind that the odor is the
odor of crabs, it becomes not at all so unpleasant.

Association has much influence. For a long time I disliked to go to a
market where flowers, bouquets, wreaths, etc., were kept because I
smelled dead human bodies. Finally, I discovered that the odor was due
to the fact that I knew most of these flowers to be such as are laid on
coffins--are smelled during interment. Again, many people find perfumes
good or bad as they like or dislike the person who makes use of them,
and the judgment concerning the pleasantness or unpleasantness of an
odor is mainly dependent upon the pleasantness or unpleasantness of
associative memories. When my son, who is naturally a vegetarian and who
could never be moved to eat meat, became a doctor, I thought that he
could never be brought to endure the odor of the dissecting room. It did
not disturb him in the least, however, and he explained it by saying: “I
do not eat what smells like that, and I can not conceive how you can eat
anything from the butcher shops where the odor is exactly like that of
the dissecting room.” What odor is called good or bad, ecstatic or
disgusting, is purely a subjective matter and never to be the basis of a
universal judgment. Statements by witnesses concerning perceptions of
odor are valueless unless otherwise confirmed.


Section 104. (b) Hallucinations and Illusions.

The limits between illusions of sense and hallucinations and illusions
proper can in no sense be definitely determined inasmuch as any
phenomena of the one may be applied to the other, and vice versa.[321]
Most safely it may be held that the cause of illusions of sense lies in
the nature of sense-organs, while the hallucinations and illusions are
due to the activity of the brain. The latter are much more likely to
fall within the scope of the physician than sense-illusions, but at the
same time many of them have to be determined upon by the lawyer,
inasmuch as they really occur to normal people or to such whose disease
is just beginning so that the physician can not yet reach it.
Nevertheless, whenever the lawyer finds himself face to face with a
supposed illusion or hallucination he must absolutely call in the
physician. For, as rarely as an ordinary illusion of sense is explicable
by the rules of logic or psychology, or even by means of other knowledge
or experience at the command of any educated man, so, frequently, do
processes occur in cases of hallucination and illusion which require, at
the very least, the physiological knowledge of the physician. Our
activity must hence be limited to the perception of the presence of
hallucination or illusion; the rest is matter for the psychiatrist.
Small as our concern is, it is important and difficult, for on the one
hand we must not appeal to the physician about every stupid fancy or
every lie a prisoner utters, and on the other hand we assume a heavy
responsibility if we interpret a real hallucination or illusion as a
true and real observation. To acquire knowledge of the nature of these
things, therefore, can not be rigorously enough recommended.

Hallucination and illusion have been distinguished by the fact that
hallucination implies no external object whatever, while in illusion
objects are mistaken and misinterpreted. When one thing is taken for
another, e.g., an oven for a man, the rustle of the wind for a human
song, we have illusion. When no objective existence is perceived, e.g.,
when a man is seen to enter, a voice is heard, a touch is felt, although
nothing whatever has happened, we have hallucination. Illusion is
partial, hallucination complete, supplementation of an external object.
There is not a correct and definite difference between illusion and
hallucination inasmuch as what is present may be so remotely connected
with what is perceived that it is no more than a stimulus, and thus
illusion may be turned into real hallucination. One authority calls
illusion the conception of an actually present external event which is
perceived by the peripheral organs in the form of an idea that does not
coincide with the event. The mistake does not lie in the defective
activity of the senses so much as in the fact that an apperceptive idea
is substituted for the perceptive view. In hallucination every external
event is absent, and hence, what is seen is due to a stimulation of the
periphery. Some authorities believe hallucination to be caused by cramp
of the sensory nerve. Others find illusions to be an externally
stimulated sense-perception not corresponding to the stimulus, and still
others believe it to be essentially normal. Most human beings are from
time to time subject to illusions; indeed, nobody is always sober and
intelligent in all his perceptions and convictions. The luminous center
of our intelligent perceptions is wrapped in a cloudy half-shadow of
illusion.

Sully[322] aims to distinguish the essential nature of illusion from
that characterized by ordinary language. Illusion, according to him, is
often used to denote mistakes which do not imply untrue perceptions. We
say a man has an illusion who thinks too much of himself, or when he
tells stories otherwise than as they happen because of a weakness of
memory. Illusion is every form of mistake which substitutes any direct
self-evident or intuitive knowledge, whether as sense-perception or as
any other form.

Nowadays the cause of hallucination and illusion is sought in the
over-excitement of the cerebro-spinal system. As this stimulation may be
very various in its intensity and significance, from the momentary rush
of blood to complete lunacy, so hallucinations and illusions may be
insignificant or signs of very serious mental disturbances. When we seek
the form of these phenomena, we find that all those psychical events
belong to it which have not been _purposely_ performed or lied about.
When Brutus sees Cæsar’s ghost; Macbeth, Banquo’s ghost; Nicholas, his
son; these are distinctly hallucinations or illusions of the same kind
as those “really and truly” seen by our nurses. The stories of such
people have no significance for the criminalist, but if a person has
seen an entering thief, an escaping murderer, a bloody corpse, or some
similar object of criminal law, and these are hallucinations like
classical ghosts, then are we likely to be much deceived. Hoppe[323]
enumerates hallucinations of apparently sound (?) people. 1. A priest
tired by mental exertion, saw, while he was writing, a boy’s head look
over his shoulder. If he turned toward it it disappeared, if he resumed
writing it reappeared. 2. “A thoroughly intelligent” man always was
seeing a skeleton. 3. Pascal, after a heavy blow, saw a fiery abyss into
which he was afraid he would fall. 4. A man who had seen an enormous
fire, for a long time afterward saw flames continually. 5. Numerous
cases in which criminals, especially murderers, always had their victims
before their eyes. 6. Justus Möser saw well-known flowers and
geometrical figures very distinctly. 7. Bonnet knows a “healthy” man who
saw people, birds, etc., with open eyes. 8. A man got a wound in his
left ear and for weeks afterward saw a cat. 9. A woman eighty-eight
years old often saw everything covered with flowers,--otherwise she was
quite “well.”

A part of these stories seems considerably fictitious, a part applies to
indubitable pathological cases, and certain of them are confirmed
elsewhere. That murderers, particularly women-murderers of children,
often see their victims is well known to us criminalists. And for this
reason the habit of confining prisoners in a dark cell for twenty-four
hours on the anniversary of a crime must be pointed to as refined and
thoroughly mediæval cruelty. I have repeatedly heard from people so
tortured of the terror of their visions on such days of martyrdom. Cases
are told of in which prisoners who were constipated had all kinds of
visual and auditory hallucinations and appeared, e.g., to hear in the
rustling of their straw, all sorts of words. That isolation predisposes
people to such things is as well known as the fact that constipation
causes a rush of blood to the head, and hence, nervous excitement. The
well-known stories of robbers which are often told us by prisoners are
not always the fruit of malicious invention. Probably a not
insignificant portion are the result of hallucination.

Hoppe tells of a great group of hallucinations in conditions of waking
and half-waking, and asserts that everybody has them and can note them
if he gives his attention thereto. This may be an exaggeration, but it
is true that a healthy person in any way excited or afraid may hear all
kinds of things in the crackling of a fire, etc., and may see all kinds
of things, in smoke, in clouds, etc. The movement of portraits and
statues is particularly characteristic, especially in dim light, and
under unstable emotional conditions. I own a relief by Ghiberti called
the “Rise of the Flesh,” in which seven lemurs dance around a corpse and
sing. If, at night, I put out the lamp in my study and the moon falls on
the work, the seven lemurs dance as lively as may be during the time it
takes my eyes to adapt themselves from the lamplight to the moonlight.
Something similar I see on an old carved dresser. The carving is so
delicate that in dim light it shows tiny heads and flames after the
fashion of the Catholic church pictures of “poor souls,” in purgatory.
Under certain conditions of illumination the flames flicker, the heads
move, and out of the fire the arms raise themselves to the clouds
floating above. Now this requires no unusual excitement, simply the
weary sensing of evening, when the eyes turn from prolonged uniform
reading or writing to something else.[324] It has happened to me from my
earliest childhood. High bodily temperature may easily cause
hallucinations. Thus, marching soldiers are led to shoot at nonexisting
animals and apparently-approaching enemies. Uniform and fatiguing mental
activity is also a source of hallucination. Fechner says that one day
having performed a long experiment with the help of a stop-watch, he
heard its beats through the whole evening after. So again when he was
studying long series of figures he used to see them at night in the dark
so distinctly that he could read them off.

Then there are illusions of touch which may be criminalistically
important. A movement of air may be taken for an approaching man. A
tight collar or cravat may excite the image of being stifled! Old people
frequently have a sandy taste while eating,--when this is told the
thought occurs that it may be due to coarsely powdered arsenic, yet it
may be merely illusion.

The slightest abnormality makes hallucinations and illusions very easy.
Persons who are in great danger have all kinds of hallucinations,
particularly of people. In the court of law, when witnesses who have
been assaulted testify to having seen people, hallucination may often be
the basis of their evidence. Hunger again, or loss of blood, gives rise
to the most various hallucinations. Menstruation and hæmorrhoids may be
the occasions of definite periodic visions, and great pain may be
accompanied by hallucinations which begin with the pain, become more
distinct as it increases, and disappear when it ceases.

It might seem that in this matter, also, the results are destructive and
that the statements of witnesses are untrue and unreliable. I do not
assert that our valuation of these statements shall be checked from all
possible directions, but I do say that much of what we have considered
as true depends only on illusions in the broad sense of the word and
that it is our duty before all things rigorously to test everything that
underlies our researches.


Section 105. (c) Imaginative Ideas.

Illusions of sense, hallucinations, and illusions proper taken as a
group, differ from imaginative representations because the individual
who has them is more or less passive and subject to the thing from which
they arise, while with the latter the individual is more active and
creates new images by the _combination_ of existing or only imagined
conditions. It does not matter whether these consist of the idea only,
or whether they are the product of word, manuscript, picture, sculpture,
music, etc. We have to deal only with their occurrence and their
results. Of course there is no sharp boundary between imaginative ideas
and sense-perception, etc. Many phenomena are difficult to classify and
even language is uncertain in its usage. The notion “illusion” has
indicated many a false ideal, many a product of incoherent fancy.

The activity of the imagination, taken in the ordinary sense, requires
analysis first of all. According to Meinong[325] there are two kinds of
imaginative images--a generative, and a constructive kind. The first
exhibits elements, the second unites them. Thus: I imagine some familiar
house, then I reproduce the idea of fire (generative), now I unite these
two elements, and imagine the house in question in flames
(constructive). This involves several conditions.

The conditions of generation offer no difficulties. The difficulty lies
in the constructive aspect of the activity, for we can imagine
astonishingly little. We can not imagine ourselves in the fourth
dimension, and although we have always had to make use of such
quantities, we all have the idea that the quantity A represents, e.g., a
line, A^{2}, a square, A^{3}, a cube, but as soon as we have to say what
image A^{5}, A^{6}, etc., represents, our mathematical language is at an
end. Even twelve men or a green flame seen through red glass or two
people speaking different things can barely be imagined with any
clearness. We have the elements but we can not construct their
compounds. This difficulty occurs also in the consideration of certain
objects. Suppose we are looking at an artistically complete angel; we
are always bothered by the idea that his wings are much too small to
enable him to fly. If an angel constructed like a man is to be borne by
his wings, they must be so gigantic as to be unreproducible by an
artist. Indeed a person slightly more grubby, and interested in
anatomy, will bother, at the sight of the most beautiful statue of an
angel, concerning the construction of the limbs, the wings, and their
relation to the skeleton. In certain directions, therefore, the
imagination is too weak to conceive an ethereal being in human form
floating in the air. Further, one authority points out that we think
more frequently of centaurs than of human beings with serpentine bodies,
not because centaurs are more æsthetic but because horses are more
massive than serpents. I do not believe this to be the true explanation,
for otherwise we should have had to imagine people with canine bodies,
inasmuch as we see as many dogs as horses, if not more. But the fact is
correct and the explanation may be that we imagine a centaur because of
the appropriate size, the implied power, and because it is not a wide
leap from a horseman to a centaur. In short, here also we see that the
imagination prefers to work where difficulties are fewer. Thus, with the
ease of imagining an object there goes its definite possibility. I know
an old gentleman in A and another one in B who have never seen each
other, but I can easily imagine them together, speaking, playing cards,
etc., and only with difficulty can I think of them as quarreling or
betting. In the _possibility_ there is always a certain ease, and this
is appropriated by the imagination.

It is significant that when others help us and we happen to find
pleasure therein, we answer to very difficult demands upon the
imagination. In the opera the deviation from reality is so powerful that
it seems silly to one unaccustomed to it. But we do not need the
unaccustomed person. We need only to imagine the most ordinary scene in
an opera, i.e., a declaration of love, sung; an aria declining it; an
aria before committing suicide; a singing choir with a moral about this
misfortune. Has anything even remotely like it ever been seen in real
life? But we accept it quietly and find it beautiful and affecting
simply because others perform it without difficulty before our eyes and
we are willing to believe it possible.

The rule to be derived from all the foregoing is this. Whenever we
believe a statement to be based on imagination, or to have been learned
from some imaginative source, we must always connect it with its most
proximate neighbors, and step by step seek out its elements and then
compound them in the simplest possible form. We may, in this fashion,
get perhaps at the proper content of the matter. Of course it need not
yield another imaginary image. And its failure to do so would be an
objection if the compound were the end of the work and were to be used
in itself. But that is not the case. All that is required is to derive
a certain starting-point from the hodge-podge of uncertainties and
unintelligibility. When the construction is made it must be compared
with all the material at hand and tested by that material. If the two
agree, and only when they agree, may it be assumed that the
starting-point has been properly chosen. But not to make this
construction means to feel around aimlessly, and to give up the job
before it has been really begun.

Let us take the simplest possible instance of such a situation. In a
bowling alley, two youths, A and B, had a lively quarrel, in which A
held the ball in his hand and threatened to throw it at B’s head. B,
frightened, ran away, A pursued him, after a few steps threw the ball
into the grass, caught B, and then gave him an easy blow with the flat
of his hand on the back of his head. B began to wabble, sank to the
ground, became unconscious, and showed all the signs of a broken head
(unconsciousness, vomiting, distention of the pupils, etc.). All the
particular details of the event are unanimously testified to by many
witnesses, non-partisan friends of A and B, and among them the parish
priest. Simulation is completely excluded inasmuch as B, a simple
peasant lad, certainly did not know the symptoms of brain-fever, and
could not hope for any damages from the absolutely poor A. Let us now
consider what the nearest facts are. The elements of the case are: B
sees a heavy ball in A’s hand; A threatens B with it and pursues him; B
feels a blow on the head. The compounding of these elements results in
the invincible assumption on B’s part that A had struck him on the head
with the ball. The consequence of this imaginative feeling was the
development of all the phenomena that would naturally have followed if B
had actually been struck on the head.

It would be wrong to say that these cases are so rare as to be useless
in practice. We simply do not observe them for the reason that we take
much to be real because it is confirmed reliably. More accurate
examination would show that many things are merely imaginative. A large
portion of the contradictions we meet in our cases is explicable by the
fact that one man is the victim of his fancies and the other is not. The
great number of such fancies is evinced by the circumstance that there
can nowhere be found a chasm or boundary between the simplest fancies of
the normal individual and the impossible imaginings of the lunatic.
Every man imagines frequently the appearance of an absent friend, of a
landscape he has once seen. The painter draws even the features of an
absent model; the practised chess-master plays games without having the
board before him; persons half asleep see the arrival of absentees;
persons lost in the wood at night see spirits and ghosts; very nervous
people see them at home, and the lunatic sees the most extraordinary and
disgusting things--all these are imaginations beginning with the events
of the daily life, ending with the visions of diseased humanity. Where
is the boundary, where a lacuna?

Here, as in all events of the daily life, the natural development of the
extremely abnormal from the ordinary is the incontrovertible evidence
for the frequency of these events.

Of course one must not judge by one’s self. Whoever does not believe in
the devil, and never as a child had an idea of him in mind, will never
see him as an illusion. And whoever from the beginning possesses a
restricted, inaccessible imagination, can never understand the other
fellow who is accompanied by the creatures of his imagination. We
observe this hundreds of times. We know that everybody sees a different
thing in clouds, smoke, mountain tops, ink blots, coffee stains, etc.;
that everybody sees it according to the character and intensity of his
imagination, and that whatever seems to be confused and unintelligible
is to be explained as determined by the nature of the person who
expresses or possesses it.

So in the study of any work of art. Each is the portrayal of some
generality in concrete form. The concrete is understood by anybody who
knows enough to recognize it. The generality can be discovered only by
him who has a similar imagination, and hence each one draws a different
generalization from the same work of art. This variety holds also in
scientific questions. I remember how three scholars were trying to
decipher hieroglyphs, when that branch of archæology was still very
young. One read the inscription as a declaration of war by a nomadic
tribe, another as the acquisition of a royal bride from a foreign king;
and the third as an account of the onions consumed by Jews contributing
forced labor. “Scientific” views could hardly of themselves have made
such extraordinary differences; only imagination could have driven
scholars in such diverse directions.

And how little we can apprehend the imaginations of others or judge
them! This is shown by the fact that we can no longer tell whether
children who vivify everything in their imagination see their fancies as
really alive. It is indubitable that the savage who takes his fetish to
be alive, the child that endows its doll with life, would wonder if
fetish and doll of themselves showed signs of vitality--but whether
they really take them to be alive is unknown to the adult. And if we can
not sympathetically apprehend the views and imaginings of our own youth,
how much less possible is it so to apprehend those of other people. We
have to add to this fact, moreover, the characteristic circumstance that
less powerful effects must be taken into consideration. The power of
imagination is much more stimulated by mild, peaceful impressions than
by vigorous ones. The latter stun and disquiet the soul, while the
former lead it to self-possession. The play of ideas is much more
excited by mild tobacco smoke, than by the fiery column of smoking
Vesuvius; the murmur of the brook is much more stimulating than the roar
of the stormy sea. If the converse were true it would be far easier to
observe the effects in others. We see that a great impression is at
work, our attention is called to its presence, and we are then easily in
the position of observing its effect in others. But the small,
insignificant phenomena we observe the less, the less obvious their
influence upon the imagination of others appears to be. Such small
impressions pass hundreds of times without effect. For once, however,
they find a congenial soul, their proper soil, and they begin to
ferment. But how and when are we to observe this in others?

We rarely can tell whether a man’s imagination is at work or not.
Nevertheless, there are innumerable stories of what famous men did when
their imagination was at work. Napoleon had to cut things to pieces.
Lenau used to scrape holes in the ground. Mozart used to knot and tear
table-cloth and napkins. Others used to run around; still others used to
smoke, drink, whistle, etc. But not all people have these
characteristics, and then we who are to judge the influence of the
imagination on a witness or a criminal are certainly not present when
the imagination is at work. To get some notion of the matter through
witnesses is altogether too unsafe a task. Bain once justly proposed
keeping the extremities quiet as a means of conquering anger. Thus it
may be definitely discovered whether a man was quite angry at a given
instant by finding out whether his hands and feet were quiet at the
time, but such indices are not given for the activity of imagination.

Moreover, most people in whom the imagination is quite vigorously at
work know nothing about it. Du Bois-Reymond says somewhere, “I’ve had a
few good ideas in my life, and have observed myself when I had them.
They came altogether involuntarily, without my ever having thought of
them.” This I do not believe. His imagination, which was so creative,
worked so easily and without effort that he was not aware of its
activity, and moreover, his fundamental ideas were so clear that
everything fell into lines spontaneously without his being conscious of
it later. This “working” of the imagination is so effortless to
fortunate natures that it becomes an ordinary movement. Thus Goethe
tells of an imaginary flower which broke into its elements, united
again, broke again, and united in another form, etc. His story reveals
one of the reasons for the false descriptions of perception. The
perception is correct when made, then the imagination causes movements
of ideas and the question follows which of the two was more vigorous,
the perceptive or the imaginal activity? If the one was intenser, memory
was correct; if the other, the recollection was erroneous. It is hence
important, from the point of view of the lawyer, to study the nature and
intensity of witnesses’ imagination.[326] We need only to observe the
influence of imaginal movements on powerful minds in order to see
clearly what influence even their weak reflection may have on ordinary
people. Schopenhauer finds the chief pleasure of every work of art in
imagination; and Goethe finds that no man experiences or enjoys anything
without becoming productive.

Most instructive is the compilation of imaginative ideas given by
Höfler[327] and put together from the experiences of scholars,
investigators, artists, and other important persons. For our purposes it
would be better to have a number of reliable statements from other
people which would show how normal individuals were led astray by their
imaginations. We might then learn approximately what imaginative notions
might do, and how far their limits extend. Sully calls attention to the
fact that Dickens’s characters were real to him and that when the novel
was completed, its dramatis personæ became personal memories. Perhaps
all imaginative people are likely to take their imaginings as actual
remembered events and persons. If this happens to a witness, what
trouble he may cause us!

A physician, Dr. Hadekamp, said that he used to see the flow of blood
before he cut the vein open. Another physician, Dr. Schmeisser, confirms
this experience. Such cases are controlled physically, the flow of blood
can not be seen before the knife is removed. Yet how often, at least
chronologically, do similar mistakes occur when no such control is
present? There is the story of a woman who could describe so accurately
symptoms which resulted from a swallowed needle, that the physicians
were deceived and undertook operations which only served to show that
the woman had merely imagined it all. A similar case is that of a man
who believed himself to have swallowed his false teeth. He even had
serious feelings of choking which immediately disappeared on the
discovery of the teeth under his night-table. A prominent oculist told
me that he had once treated for some time a famous scholar because the
latter so accurately described a weakening of the retina that the
physician, in spite of his objective discoveries, was deceived and
learned his mistake only when it appeared that the great scholar
fortunately had been made game of by his own imagination. Maudsley tells
how Baron von Swieten once saw burst a rotten corpse of a dog, and, for
years after, saw the same thing whenever he came to the same place. Many
people, Goethe, Newton, Shelley, William Black, and others, were able
completely to visualize past images. Fechner tells of a man who claimed
voluntarily to excite anywhere on his skin the feeling of pressure,
heat, and cold, but not of cut, prick or bruise, because such
imaginations tended to endure a long time. There is the story of another
man who had a three days’ pain in his finger because he had seen his
child crush an analogous finger.

Abercrombie tells of an otherwise very excitable person who believed in
the reality of the luck that a fortune-teller had predicted for him, and
some authorities hold that practically everybody who eagerly awaits a
friend hears his step in every sound. Hoppe’s observation that pruritus
vulvæ excites in imaginative women the illusion of being raped is of
considerable importance, and we criminalists must watch for it in
certain cases. Lieber tells of a colored preacher who so vividly painted
the tortures in hell that he himself could merely cry and grunt for
minutes at a time. Müller cites a lady who was permitted to smell from
an empty bottle and who regularly lost consciousness when she was told
that the bottle contained laughing gas. Women often assert that when
about to change their homes they often see the new residence in dreams
just as it really appears later on. Then there is a story of a man blind
for fourteen years who nevertheless saw the faces of acquaintances and
was so troubled thereby that the famous Graefe severed his optic nerve
and so released him from his imagination.

Taine describes the splendid scene in which Balzac once told Mad. de
Girardin that he intended to give Sandeau a horse. He did not do so, but
talked so much about it that he used to ask Sandeau how the horse was.
Taine comments that it is clear that the starting point of such an
illusion is a voluntary fiction. The person in question knows it as
such in the beginning but forgets it at the end. Such false memories are
numerous among barbarous peoples and among raw, untrained, and childish
minds. They see a simple fact; the more they think of it the more they
see in it; they magnify and decorate it with environing circumstances,
and finally, unite all the details into a whole in memory. Then they are
unable to distinguish what is true from what is not. Most legends
develop in this way. A peasant assured Taine that he saw his sister’s
soul on the day she died,--though it was really the light of a brandy
bottle in the sunset.

In conclusion, I want to cite a case I have already mentioned, which
seems to me significant. As student I visited during vacation a village,
one of whose young peasant inhabitants had gone to town for the first
time in his life. He was my vacation play-mate from earliest childhood,
and known to me as absolutely devoted to the truth. When he returned
from his visit, he told me of the wonders of the city, the climax of
which was the menagerie he had visited. He described what he saw very
well, but also said that he had seen a battle between an anaconda and a
lion. The serpent swallowed the lion and then many Moors came and killed
the serpent. As was immediately to be inferred and as I verified on my
return, this battle was to be seen only on the advertising posters which
are hung in front of every menagerie. The lad’s imagination had been so
excited by what he had seen that day that the real and the imagined were
thoroughly interfused. How often may this happen to our witnesses!

If the notion of imagination is to be limited to the activity of
representation, we must class under it the premonitions and forewarnings
which are of influence not only among the uneducated. Inasmuch as
reliable observations, not put together a posteriori, are lacking,
nothing exact can be said about them. That innumerable assertions and a
semi-scientific literature about the matter exists, is generally
familiar. And it is undeniable that predictions, premonitions, etc., may
be very vivid, and have considerable somatic influence. Thus, prophecy
of approaching death, certain threats or knowledge of the fact that an
individual’s death is being prayed for, etc., may have deadly effect on
excited people. The latter superstition especially, has considerable
influence. Praying for death, etc., is aboriginal. It has been traced
historically into the twelfth century and is made use of today. Twelve
years ago I was told of a case in which an old lady was killed because
an enemy of hers had the death-mass read for her. The old lady simply
died of fright. In some degree we must pay attention to even such
apparently remote questions.


(d) _Misunderstandings._

Section 106. (1) Verbal Misunderstandings.[328]

Here too it is not possible to draw an absolutely definite boundary
between acoustic illusions and misunderstandings. Verbally we may say
that the former occur when the mistake, at least in its main
characteristic, is due to the aural mechanism. The latter is intended
when there is a mistake in the comprehension of a word or of a sentence.
In this case the ear has acted efficiently, but the mind did not know
how to handle what had been heard and so supplements it by something
else in connection with matter more or less senseless. Hence,
misunderstandings are so frequent with foreign words. Compare the
singing of immigrant school children, “My can’t three teas of tea” for
“My country ’tis of thee,” or “Pas de lieu Rhone que nous” with “Paddle
your own canoe.”[329]

The question of misunderstandings, their development and solution, is of
great importance legally, since not only witnesses but clerks and
secretaries are subject to them. If they are undiscovered they lead to
dangerous mistakes, and their discovery causes great trouble in getting
at the correct solution.[330] The determination of texts requires not
only effort but also psychological knowledge and the capacity of putting
one’s self in the place of him who has committed the error. To question
him may often be impossible because of the distance, and may be useless
because he no longer knows what he said or wanted to say. When we
consider what a tremendous amount of work classical philologists, etc.,
have to put into the determination of the proper form of some misspelled
word, we can guess how needful it is to have the textual form of a
protocol absolutely correct. The innocence or guilt of a human being may
depend upon a misspelled syllable. Now, to determine the proper and
correct character of the text is as a rule difficult, and in most cases
impossible. Whether a witness or the secretary has misunderstood, makes
no difference in the nature of the work. Its importance remains
unaffected, but in the latter case the examining justice, in so far as
he correctly remembers what he has heard, may avoid error. The mistakes
of the secretaries may in any event be reduced to a minimum if all
protocols are read immediately, and not by the secretary but by the
examining judge himself. If the writer reads them he makes the same
mistakes, and only a very intelligent witness will perceive them and
call attention to them. Unless it so happens the mistake remains.

I cite a few of the errors that I have observed. From a protocol with
the suspect: “On the twelfth of the month I left Marie Tomizil” (instead
of, “my domicile”). Instead of “irrelevant,”--“her elephant.” Very often
words are written in, which the dictator only says by the way; e.g.,
“come in,” “go on,” “hurry up,” “look out,” etc. If such words get into
the text at all it is difficult to puzzle out how they got in. How
easily and frequently people misunderstand is shown by the oath they
take. Hardly a day passes on which at least one witness does not say
some absolute nonsense while repeating it.

The discovery of such errors and the substitution of what is correct
brings us back to the old rule that the mere study of our own cases can
not teach us anything, since the field of view is too narrow, the
material too uniform, and the stimulation too light. Other disciplines
must be studied and examples from the daily life must be sought. Goethe,
in particular, can teach us here. In his little monograph, “Hör-,
Schreib-and Druckfehler,” he first tells that he had discovered the most
curious mistakes in hearing when he reread dictated letters, mistakes
which would have caused great difficulty if not immediately looked
after. The only means for the solution of these errors is, he says, “to
read the matter aloud, get thoroughly into its meaning and repeat the
unintelligible word so long that the right one occurs in the flow of
speech. Nobody hears all that he knows, nobody is conscious of all that
he senses, is able to imagine, or to think. Persons who have never been
to school tend to turn into German all Latin and Greek expressions. The
same thing happens just as much with words from foreign languages whose
pronunciation is unknown to the writer ... and in dictation it occurs
that a hearer sets his inner inclination, passion, and need in the place
of the word he has heard, and substitutes for it the name of some loved
person, or some much desired good morsel.” A better device for the
detection of errors than that suggested by Goethe cannot be found, but
the protocol or whatever else it may be must be _read_; otherwise
nothing helps. Many mistakes are due, as Münsterberg points out, to the
fact that the word is seen for just an instant, and it is easy to
misread a word so seen if some similar word had been heard or seen just
before. The most senseless corruptions of text occur often, and it seems
extraordinary how they may be overlooked. Andresen points out that the
reason for all popular explanations is the consciousness of language
which struggles against allowing any name to be an empty sound, and
still more, strives to give each term a separate meaning and an
indubitable intelligibility. The human mind acts here instinctively and
naïvely without any reflection, and is determined by feeling or
accident. Then it makes all kinds of transformations of foreign words.

This fits with the analogous observation that a group of Catholic patron
saints depend for their character on their names. Santa Clara makes
clear vision; St. Lucy sounds like lucida, and is the saint of the
blind; St. Mamertus is analogous to mamma, the feminine breast, and is
the patron saint of nurses and nursing women. Instructive substitutions
are Jack Spear, for Shakespeare, Apolda for Apollo; Great victory at le
Mans, for Great victory at Lehmanns; “plaster depot,” for “place de
Repos.”

Andresen warns us against going too far in analysis. Exaggerations are
easy, particularly when we want to get at the source of a
misunderstanding because of the illegibility of the style. Our task
consists, first of all, in getting at the correctness of what has been
said or written, otherwise we have nothing whatever to go by. Only when
that is quite impossible may we assume misunderstandings and seek them
out. The procedure then must be necessarily linguistic and psychological
and requires the consultation of experts in both fields. Certain
instructive misunderstandings of the most obvious sort occur when the
half-educated drop their dialect, or thoroughly educated people alter
the dialectical expressions and try to translate them into high German.

It is frequently important to understand the curious transposition in
meaning which foreign words get, e.g., commode, fidel, and famos. A
commode gentleman means in German, a pliable person; and a fidel lad is
not a loyal soul, but a merry, pleasure-seeking one; famos--originally
“famous,”--means expensive or pleasant.

It may be not unimportant to understand how names are altered. Thus, I
know a man who curiously enough was called Kammerdiener, whose father
was an immigrant Italian called Comadina, and I know two old men,
brothers, who lived in different parts of the country, one of whom was
called Joseph Waldhauser, the other Leopold Balthasar. In the course of
the generation the name had so completely changed that it is impossible
to say which is correct. Again, a family bearing the name Theobald is of
French origin and used really to be called Du Val. In Steiermark, which
had been over-run with Turks two hundred years ago, there are many
family names of Turkish origin. Thus Hasenöhrl may come from Hassan Öri;
Salata from Saladin; Mullenbock, from Mullei Beg; Sullman from Soliman.


Section 107. (2) _Other Misunderstandings._

The quantitative method of modern psychophysics may lead to an exact
experimental determination of such false conceptions and
misunderstandings as those indicated above, but it is still too young to
have any practical value. It is vitiated by the fact that it requires
artificial conditions and that the results have reference to artificial
conditions. Wundt has tried to simplify apparatus, and to bring
experiment into connection with real life. But there is still a far cry
from the psychological laboratory to the business of life. With regard
to misunderstandings the case is certainly so. Most occur when we do not
hear distinctly what another person is saying and supplement it with our
own notions. Here the misunderstanding is in no sense linguistic, for
words do not receive a false meaning. The misunderstanding lies in the
failure to comprehend the sense of what we have heard, and the
substitution of incorrect interpretations. Sometimes we may quite
understand an orator without having heard every word by simply adding
these interpretations, but the correctness of the additions is always
questionable, and not only nature and training, but momentary conditions
and personal attitude, make a considerable difference. The worst thing
about the matter is the fact that nobody is likely to be aware that he
has made any interpretations. Yet we do so not only in listening, but in
looking. I see on a roof in the distance four white balls about the
nature of which I am uncertain. While looking, I observe that one of the
balls stretches out head and tail, flaps its wings, etc., and I
immediately think, “Oh, those are four pigeons.” Now it may be true that
they are four pigeons, but what justification had I for such an
interpretation and generalization from the action of one pigeon? In this
instance, no doubt, it would have been difficult for me to make a
mistake, but there are many cases which are not so obvious and where the
interpretation is nevertheless made, and then the misunderstanding is
ready to hand. Once my wife and I saw from our seats in the car a
chimney-sweep who stood in a railroad station. As he bent over, looking
for a lost coin, my very myopic wife cried out, “Look at the beautiful
Newfoundland dog.” Now this is a conceivable illusion for a
short-sighted individual, but on what basis could my good lady interpret
what she saw into the judgment that it was a Newfoundland dog, and a
beautiful one at that? Taine illustrates a similar process with the
story of a child who asked why his mother had put on a white dress. He
was told that his mother was going to a party and had to put on her
holiday clothes for that purpose. After that, whenever the child saw
anybody in holiday attire, green or red or any other color, it cried
out,--“Oh, you have a white dress on!” We adults do exactly the same
thing. As Meinong says so well, we confuse identity with agreement. This
proposition would save us from a great many mistakes and
misunderstandings if kept in mind.

How frequently and hastily we build things out is shown by a simple but
psychologically important game. Ask anybody at hand how the four and the
six look on his watch, and let him draw it. Everybody calmly draws, IV
and VI, but if you look at your watch you will find that the four looks
so, IIII, and that there is no six. This raises the involuntary
question, “Now what do we see when we look at the watch if we do not see
the figures?” and the further question, “Do we make such beautiful
mistakes with all things?”

I assert that only that has been reliably seen which has been drawn. My
father asked my drawing teacher to teach me not to draw but to observe.
And my teacher, instead of giving me copies, followed the instruction by
giving me first one domino, then two, then three, one upon the other,
then a match box, a book, a candlestick, etc. And even today, I know
accurately only those objects in the household which I had drawn. Yet
frequently we demand of our witnesses minutely accurate descriptions of
things they had seen only once, and hastily at that.

And even if the thing has been seen frequently, local and temporal
problems may make great difficulties. With regard to the first class of
problems, Exner[331] cites the example of his journey from Gmunden to
Vienna in which, because of a sharp curve in the road, he saw everything
at Lambach reversed, although the whole stretch of road was familiar to
him. The railroad trains, the public buildings, the rivers, all the
notable places seemed to lie on the wrong side. This is particularly
characteristic if a city is entered, especially at night, through a
railroad terminal, and the locomotive is attached to the rear of the
train. In the daily life the alteration of objects by locations is
familiar. How different a landscape seems at night or in winter,
although it has been observed hundreds of times during the day or in
summer. It is good to look around frequently on the road, particularly
at cross-roads, if the way back is to be kept in mind. Even the starting
point may have a disturbing effect on the sense of place. For example,
if you have traveled numerous times on the train from A to B, and for
once you start your journey from C, which is beyond A, the familiar
stretch from A to B looks quite different and may even become
unrecognizable. The estimation of time may exercise considerable
influence on such and similar local effects. Under most circumstances we
tend, as is known, to reduce subjectively great time-spans, and hence,
when more time than customary is required by an event, this becomes
subjectively smaller, not only for the whole event but also for each of
its parts. In this way what formerly seemed to extend through an
apparently long period seems now to be compressed into a shorter one.
Then everything appears too soon and adds to the foreign aspect of the
matter.

The case is similar for time-differences. Uphues[332] cites an example:
“If a person has not heard a bell or anything else for some time and
then hears it again, the question whether the object existed in the
interval does not arise. It is recognized again and that is enough.”
Certainly it is enough for _us_, but whether the thing is true, whether
really the same phenomena or only similar ones have been noted, is
another question rarely asked. If the man or the bell is the same that
we now perceive anew, the inference is involuntarily drawn that they
must have persisted, but we eliminate altogether the lapse of time and
suppose unconsciously that the entity in question must have been on the
spot through the whole period. One needs only to observe how quickly
witnesses tend to identify objects presented for identification: e.g.
knives, letters, purses, etc. To receive for identification and to say
yes, is often the work of an instant. The witness argues, quite
unconsciously, in this fashion: “I have given the judge only one clew
(perhaps different from the one in question), now here again is a clew,
hence, it must be the one I gave him.” That the matter may have changed,
that there has been some confusion, that perhaps other witnesses have
given similar things, is not at all considered. Here again we have to
beware of confusing of identities with agreements.

Finally, we must consider fatigue and other conditions of excitation.
Everybody knows how things read late at night seem absolute nonsense,
and become simple and obvious the next morning. In the same way, we may
take a thing to be thus and so while tired in the evening, and in the
morning see our notion to be a coarse misunderstanding. Hoppe tells of a
hospital interne who became so excited and tired through frequent calls
that he heard the tick-tack of his watch as “Oh-doc-tor.” A witness who
has been subjected to a prolonged and fatiguing examination falls into a
similar condition and knows at the end much less than at the beginning.
Finally, he altogether misunderstands the questions put to him. The
situation becomes still worse when the defendant has been so subjected
to examination, and becomes involved, because of fatigue, etc., in the
famous “contradictions.” If “convincing contradictions” occur at the end
of a long examination of a witness or a defendant, it is well to find
out how long the examination took. If it took much time the
contradictions mean little.

The same phenomena of fatigue may even lead to suspicion of negligence.
Doctors, trained nurses, nursery maids, young mothers, etc., who became
guilty of “negligence” of invalids and children have, in many instances,
merely “misunderstood” because of great fatigue. It is for this reason
that the numerous sad cases occur in which machine-tenders,
switch-tenders, etc., are punished for negligence. If a man of this
class, year after year, serves twenty-three hours, then rests seven
hours, then serves twenty-three hours again, etc., he is inevitably
overtaken by fatigue and nervous relaxation in which signals, warnings,
calls, etc., are simply misunderstood. Statistics tend to show that the
largest number of accidents occur at the end of a period of service,
i.e., at the time of greatest fatigue. But even if this were not the
case some reference must be made to chronic fatigue. If a man gets only
seven hours’ rest after intense labor, part of the fatigue-elements must
have remained. They accumulate in time, finally they summate, and
exercise their influence even at the beginning of the service.
Socialists complain justly about this matter. The most responsible
positions are occupied by chronically fatigued individuals, and when
nature extorts her rights we punish the helpless men.

The case is the same with people who have much to do with money--tax,
post, bank, and treasury officials, who are obliged to attend rigorously
to monotonous work--the reception and distribution of money, easily grow
tired. Men of experience in this profession have assured me that they
often, when fatigued, take money, count it, sign a receipt and
then--return the money to the person who brought it. Fortunately they
recognize their mistake in the astonishment of the receiver. If,
however, they do not recognize it, or the receiver is sly enough calmly
to walk off with the money, if the sum is great and restitution not
easily possible, and if, moreover, the official happens to be in the bad
graces of his superiors, he does not have much chance in the prosecution
for embezzlement, which is more likely than not to be begun against
him.[333] Any affection, any stimulus, any fatigue may tend to make
people passive, and hence, less able to defend themselves.

A well known Berlin psychiatrist tells the following story: “When I was
still an apprentice in an asylum, I always carried the keys of the cells
with me. One day I went to the opera, and had a seat in the parquette.
Between the acts I went into the corridor. On returning I made a
mistake, and saw before me a door which had the same kind of lock as the
cell-doors in the asylum, stuck my hand into my pocket, took out my
key--which fitted, and found myself suddenly in a loge. Now would it not
be possible in this way, purely by reflex action, to turn into a
burglar?” Of course we should hardly believe a known burglar if he were
to tell us such a story.


(e) _The Lie._

Section 108. (1) 1. General Considerations.

In a certain sense a large part of the criminalist’s work is nothing
more than a battle against lies. He has to discover the truth and must
fight the opposite. He meets this opposite at every step. The accused,
often one who has confessed completely, many of the witnesses, try to
get advantage of him, and frequently he has to struggle with himself
when he perceives that he is working in a direction which he can not
completely justify. Utterly to vanquish the lie, particularly in our
work, is of course, impossible, and to describe its nature exhaustively
is to write a natural history of mankind. We must limit ourselves to the
consideration of a definite number of means, great and small, which will
make our work easier, will warn us of the presence of deception, and
will prevent its playing a part. I have attempted to compile forms of it
according to intent, and will here add a few words.[334]

That by the lie is meant the intentional deliverance of a conscious
untruth for the purpose of deception is as familiar as the variety of
opinion concerning the permissibility of so-called necessary lies, of
the pious, of the pedagogic, and the conventional. We have to assume
here the standpoint of absolute rigorism, and to say with Kant,[335]
“The lie in its mere form is man’s crime against his own nature, and is
a vice which must make a man disreputable in his own eyes.” We can not
actually think of a single case in which we find any ground for lying.
For we lawyers need have no pedagogical duties, nor are we compelled to
teach people manners, and a situation in which we may save ourselves by
lying is unthinkable. Of course, we will not speak all we know; indeed,
a proper silence is a sign of a good criminalist, but we need never lie.
The beginner must especially learn that the “good intention” to serve
the case and the so-called excusing “eagerness to do one’s duty,” by
which little lies are sometimes justified, have absolutely no worth. An
incidental word as if the accomplice had confessed; an expression
intending to convey that you know more than you do; a perversion of some
earlier statement of the witness, and similar “permissible tricks,” can
not be cheaper than the cheapest things. Their use results only in one’s
own shame, and if they fail, the defense has the advantage. The lost
ground can never be regained.[336]

Nor is it permissible to lie by gestures and actions any more than by
words. These, indeed, are dangerous, because a movement of the hand, a
reaching for the bell, a sudden rising, may be very effective under
circumstances. They easily indicate that the judge knows more about the
matter than he really does, or suggest that his information is greater,
etc. They make the witness or defendant think that the judge is already
certain about the nature of the case; that he has resolved upon
important measures, and other such things. Now movements of this kind
are not recorded, and in case the denial of blame is not serious, a
young criminalist allows himself easily to be misled by his desire for
efficiency. Even accident may help. When I was examining justice I had
to hear the testimony of a rather weak-minded lad, who was suspected of
having stolen and hidden a large sum of money. The lad firmly and
cleverly denied his guilt. During the examination a comrade entered who
had something official to tell me, and inasmuch as I was in the midst of
dictation he wanted to wait until the end of the sentence. Happening to
see two swords that had just been brought from a student duel, he took
one in his hand and examined the hilt, the point and the blade. The
defendant hardly saw this action before he got frightened, raised his
hands, ran to the sword-examiner, crying “I confess, I confess! I took
the money and hid it in the hollow hickory tree.”

This event was rather funny. Another, however, led, I will not say to
self-reproach, but to considerable disquiet on my part. A man was
suspected of having killed his two small children. As the bodies were
not found I undertook a careful search of his home, of the oven, of the
cellar, the drains, etc. In the latter we found a great deal of animal
entrails, apparently rabbits. As at the time of this discovery I had no
notion of where they belonged, I took them, and in the meantime had them
preserved in alcohol. The great glass receptacle which contained them
stood on my writing table when I had the accused brought in to answer
certain questions about one or two suspicious matters we had discovered.
He looked anxiously at the glass, and said suddenly, “Since you have got
it all, I must confess.” Almost reflexly I asked, “Where are the
corpses?” and he immediately answered that he had hidden them in the
environs of the city, where they were found. Clearly, the glass
containing the intestines had led him to the notion that the bodies were
found and in part preserved here, and when I asked him where they were
he did not observe how illogical the question would be if the bodies had
really been found. The whole thing was a matter of accident, but I still
have the feeling that the confession was not properly obtained; that I
should have thought of the effect of the glass and should have provided
against it before the accused was brought before me.

In the daily life such an open procedure is, of course, impossible, and
if the circumstances were to be taken for what they seem we should
frequently make mistakes. Everybody knows, e.g., how very few happy
marriages there are. But how do we know it? Only because the fortune of
close observation always indicates that the relation is in no way so
happy as one would like it to be. And externally? Has anybody ever seen
in even half-educated circles a street quarrel between husband and wife?
How well-mannered they are in society, and how little they show their
disinclination for each other. And all this is a lie in word and deed,
and when we have to deal with it in a criminal case we judge according
to the purely external things that we and others have observed. Social
reasons, deference for public opinion which must often be deceived, the
feeling of duty toward children, not infrequently compel deception of
the world. The number of fortunate marriages is mainly
overestimated.[337]

We see the same thing with regard to property, the attitude of parents
and children, the relation between superiors and inferiors, even in the
condition of health,--conduct in all these cases does not reveal the
true state of affairs. One after another, people are fooled, until
finally the world believes what it is told and the court hears the
belief sworn to as absolute truth. It is, perhaps, not too much to say
that we are far more deceived by appearances than by words. Public
opinion should least of all impose on us. And yet it is through public
opinion that we learn the external relations of the people who come
before us. It is called vox populi and is really rot. The phrases, “they
say,” “everybody knows,” “nobody doubts,” “as most neighbors agree,” and
however else these seeds of dishonesty and slander may be
designated--all these phrases must disappear from our papers and
procedure. They indicate only appearances--only what people _wanted_ to
have seen. They do not reveal the real and the hidden. Law too
frequently makes normative use of the maxim that the bad world says it
and the good one believes it. It even constructs its judgments thereby.

Not infrequently the uttered lies must be supported by actions. It is
well-known that we seem merry, angry, or friendly only when we excite
these feelings by certain gestures, imitations and physical attitudes.
Anger is not easily simulated with an unclenched fist, immovable feet,
and uncontracted brow. These gestures are required for the appearance of
real anger. And how very real it becomes, and how very real all other
emotions become because of the appropriate gestures and actions, is
familiar. We learn, hence, that the earnest assertor of his innocence
finally begins to believe in it a little, or altogether. And lying
witnesses still more frequently begin to hold their assertions to be
true. As these people do not show the common marks of the lie their
treatment is extraordinarily difficult.

It is, perhaps, right to accuse our age of especial inclination for that
far-reaching lie which makes its perpetrator believe in his own
creation. Kiefer[338] cites examples of such “self-deceiving liars.”
What drives one to despair is the fact that these people are such clever
liars that they make a game of the business. It is a piece of luck that
these lies, like every lie, betray themselves by the characteristic
intensity with which they seek to assume the appearance of truth. This
important mark of the lie can not be too clearly indicated. The number
and vigor of lies must show that we more frequently fail to think of
their possibility than if they did not exist at all. A long time ago I
read an apparently simple story which has helped me frequently in my
criminalistic work. Karl was dining with his parents and two cousins,
and after dinner said at school, “There were fourteen of us at table
to-day.” “How is it possible?” “Karl has lied again.” How frequently
does an event seem inexplicable, mysterious, puzzling. But if you think
that here perhaps, “Karl has lied again,” you may be led to more
accurate observation and hence, to the discovery of some hiatus by means
of which the whole affair may be cleared up.

But frequently contradictions are still more simply explained by the
fact that they are not contradictions, and by the fact that we see them
as such through inadequate comprehension of what has been said, and
ignorance of the conditions. We often pay too much attention to lies and
contradictions. There is the prejudice that the accused is really the
criminal, and that moves us to give unjustified reasons for little
accidental facts, which lead afterwards to apparent contradictions. This
habit is very old.

If we inquire when the lie has least influence on mankind we find it to
be under emotional stress, especially during anger, joy, fear, and on
the death-bed.[339] We all know of various cases in which a man, angry
at the betrayal of an accomplice, happy over approaching release, or
terrified by the likelihood of arrest, etc., suddenly declares, “Now I
am going to tell the truth.” And this is a typical form which introduces
the subsequent confession. As a rule the resolution to tell the truth
does not last long. If the emotion passes, the confession is regretted,
and much thought is given to the withdrawal of a part of the confession.
If the protocols concerning the matter are very long this regret is
easily observable toward the end.

That it is not easy to lie during intoxication is well known.[340] What
is said on the death-bed may always, especially if the confessor is
positively religious, be taken to be true. It is known that under such
circumstances the consciousness of even mentally disturbed people and
idiots becomes remarkably clear, and very often astonishing
illuminations result. If the mind of the dying be already clouded it is
never difficult to determine the fact, inasmuch as particularly such
confessions are distinguished by the great simplicity and clearness of
the very few words used.


Section 109. (2) _The Pathoformic Lie._

As in many other forms of human expression, there is a stage in the
telling of lies where the normal condition has passed and the diseased
one has not yet begun. The extreme limit on the one side is the harmless
story-teller, the hunter, the tourist, the student, the lieutenant,--all
of whom boast a little; on the other side there is the completely insane
paralytic who tells about his millions and his monstrous achievements.
The characteristic pseudologia phantastica, the lie of advanced
hysteria, in which people write anonymous letters and send messages to
themselves, to their servants, to high officials and to clergy, in order
to cast suspicion on them, are all diseased. The characteristic lie of
the epileptics, and perhaps also, the lies of people who are close to
the idiocy of old age, mixes up what has been experienced, read and
told, and represents it as the experience of the speaker.[341]

Still there is a class of people who can not be shown to be in any sense
diseased, and who still lie in such a fashion that they can not be well.
The development of such lies may probably be best assigned to
progressive habituation. People who commit these falsehoods may be
people of talent, and, as Goethe says of himself, may have “desire to
fabulate.” Most of them are people, I will not say who are desirous of
honor, but who are still so endowed that they would be glad to play some
grand part and are eager to push their own personality into the
foreground. If they do not succeed in the daily life, they try to
convince themselves and others by progressively broader stories that
they really hold a prominent position. I had and still have opportunity
to study accurately several well-developed types of these people. They
not only have in common the fact that they lie, they also have common
themes. They tell how important personages asked their advice, sought
their company and honored them. They suggest their great influence, are
eager to grant their patronage and protection, suggest their great
intimacy with persons of high position, exaggerate when they speak of
their property, their achievements, and their work, and broadly deny all
events in which they are set at a disadvantage. The thing by which they
are to be distinguished from ordinary “story-tellers,” and which defines
what is essentially pathoformic in them, is the fact that they lie
without considering that the untrue is discovered immediately, or very
soon. Thus they will tell somebody that he has to thank their patronage
for this or that, although the person in question knows the case to be
absolutely different. Or again, they tell somebody of an achievement of
theirs and the man happens to have been closely concerned with that
particular work and is able to estimate properly their relation to it.
Again they promise things which the auditor knows they can not perform,
and they boast of their wealth although at least one auditor knows its
amount accurately. If their stories are objected to they have some
extraordinarily unskilful explanation, which again indicates the
pathoformic character of their minds. Their lies most resemble those of
pregnant women, or women lying-in, also that particular form of lie
which prostitutes seem typically addicted to, and which are cited by
Carlier, Lombroso, Ferrero, as representative of them, and as a
professional mark of identification. I also suspect that the essentially
pathoformic lie has some relation to sex, perhaps to perversity or
impotence, or exaggerated sexual impulse. And I believe that it occurs
more frequently than is supposed, although it is easily known in even
its slightly developed stages. I once believed that the pathoformic lie
was not of great importance in our work, because on the one hand, it is
most complete and distinct when it deals with the person of the speaker,
and on the other it is so characteristic that it must be recognized
without fail by anybody who has had the slightest experience with it.
But since, I have noticed that the pathoformic lie plays an enormous
part in the work of the criminalist and deserves full consideration.


TOPIC IV. ISOLATED SPECIAL CONDITIONS.


Section 110. (a) Sleep and Dream.

If a phenomenon occurs frequently, its frequency must have a certain
relation to its importance to the criminalist. Hence, sleep and dream
must in any event be of great influence upon our task. As we rarely hear
them mentioned, we have underestimated their significance. The
literature dealing with them is comparatively rich.[342]

The physician is to be called in not only when we are dealing with
conditions of sleep and dream which are in the least diseased, i.e.,
abnormally intense sleepiness, sleep-walking, hallucinatory dreams,
etc., but also when the physiological side of sleep and dream are in
question, e.g., the need of sleep, the effect of insomnia, of normal
sleepiness, etc. The criminalist must study also these things in order
to know the kind of situation he is facing and when he is to call in the
physician for assistance. Ignorance of the matter means spoiling a case
by unskilful interrogation and neglect of the most important things. At
the very least, it makes the work essentially more difficult.

But in many cases the criminalist must act alone since in those cases
there is neither disease nor a physiological condition by way of
explanation but merely a simple fact of the daily life which any
educated layman must deal with for himself. Suppose, e.g., we are
studying the influence of a dream upon our emotions. It has been shown
that frequently one may spend a whole day under the influence of a
dream, that one’s attitude is happy and merry as if something pleasant
had been learned, or one is cross, afraid, excited, as if something
unhappy had happened. The reason and source of these attitudes is
frequently a pleasant or unpleasant dream, and sometimes this may be at
work subconsciously and unremembered. We have already shown that
so-called errors of memory are to a large extent attributable to
dreams.[343]

This effect of the dream may be of significance in women, excitable men,
and especially in children. There are children who consider their dreams
as real experiences, and women who are unable to distinguish between
dreams and real experience, while the senile and aged can not
distinguish dreams and memories because their memories and the power to
distinguish have become weakened.[344]

I know of an eight-year-old child who after dinner had gone looking for
chestnuts with a man. In the evening it came home happy but woke up in
tears and confessed that the man in question had raped it. Another case
concerns a great burglary which had caused its victims considerable
excitement. The second day after the event the ten or twelve-year-old
daughter of the victim asserted with certainty that she had recognized
the son of a neighbor among the thieves. In both cases there were
serious legal steps taken against the suspects, and in both cases the
children finally admitted, after much thinking, that they had possibly
dreamed the whole matter of their complaints.

The character-mark of such cases is the fact that the children do not
make their assertions immediately, but after one or two nights have
passed. Hence, whenever this occurs one must entertain at least the
suspicion that reality and dreams have been confused.

Similarly, Taine narrates that Baillarger once dreamed that he had been
made director of a certain journal, and believed it so definitely that
he told it to a number of people. Then there is the familiar dream of
Julius Scaliger. Leibnitz writes that Scaliger had praised in verse the
famous men of Verona. In dream he saw a certain Brugnolus who complained
that he had been forgotten. Later Scaliger’s son Joseph discovered that
there really had been a Brugnolus who had distinguished himself as
grammarian and critic. Obviously Scaliger senior had once known, and had
completely forgotten about him. In this case the dream had been just a
refreshing of the memory. Such a dream may be of importance, but is
unreliable and must be dealt with carefully.

To get at a point of departure concerning the nature of the sleep and
the dreams of any given person, we may classify them with reference to
the following propositions:[345] 1. The vividness of dreams increases
with their frequency. 2. The lighter the sleep the more frequent the
dreams. 3. Women sleep less profoundly than men and hence dream more. 4.
With increasing age dreams become rarer and sleep less profound. 5. Who
sleeps lightly needs less sleep. 6. The feminine need of sleep is
greater. I might add with regard to the last point that the fact that
women are better able to endure nursing children or invalids constitutes
only an apparent contradiction of this point. The need of sleep is not
decreased, but the goodwill and the joy of sacrifice is greater in woman
than in man.

The extraordinary things people do in half-dream and in sleep are
numerously exemplified by Jessen. Most of them are taken from the older
literature, but are quite reliable. A comparison indicates that such
somnambulistic conduct occurs most frequently among the younger, more
powerful, over-strained people, who, e.g., have not slept for two
successive nights, and then have been awakened from deep sleep. It is
remarkable that they often act intelligently under such
circumstances--that the physician writes the proper prescription or the
factory superintendent gives the proper orders, but neither knows
anything about it later on. Criminalistically their significance lies on
the one hand in the fact that they can be investigated with regard to
their correctness; and on the other that they occur to people who had no
reason to falsify. If a defendant tells about some such experience, we
lack the means and the power to make an accurate examination of the
matter, and tend for this reason to disbelieve him. Moreover, his very
position throws doubt upon his statements. But this is just the ground
for a careful study of similar occurrences in trustworthy people.[346]
All authorities agree that actions during sleepiness[347] occur almost
always in the first deep sleep, disturbed by dreams, of over-fatigued,
strong individuals.

An important circumstance is the phenomenon cited by Jessen and
others--the capacity of some people to fall calmly asleep in spite of
tremendous excitement. Thus, Napoleon fell into deep sleep during the
most critical moment at Leipzig. This capacity is sometimes cited as
evidence of innocence. But it is not convincing.

We have yet to mention the peculiar illusions of the phenomena of
movement which occur just before falling asleep. Panum tells how he once
inhaled ether, and then observed, lying in bed, how the pictures on the
wall went further and further back, came forward and withdrew, again and
again. Similar things happen to sleepy people. Thus, the preacher in
church seems progressively to withdraw and return. The criminalistic
significance of such illusions may be in the observation of movements by
people who are falling asleep, e.g., of thieves who seemed to be
approaching the witnesses’ beds, though standing still.

That sleeping people may be influenced in definite ways is indubitable.
Cases are mentioned in which sleepers could be made to believe any
story; they would dream of it, and later on believe it. There is in this
connection the story of the officer who acquired the love of a young
girl in this fashion; the girl had shown definite distaste for him at
first, but after he had told her during her sleep, in her mother’s
presence, of his love and loyalty, she began in the course of time to
return it. It is a fact that certain of our burglars believe similar
things, and carry them out in most cases with the assistance of red
light, to which they assign hypnotic power. They claim that with a
lantern with red glass they are able to do anything in the room
containing a sleeping individual, and can intensify his sleep by letting
the red light fall on his face, and speaking to him softly. Curiously
enough this is corroborated by a custom of our mountain lads. They cover
a lantern with a red cloth and go with it to the window of a sleeping
girl. It is asserted that when the red light falls on the latter’s face
and it is suggested to her softly to go along, she does so. Then a
pointed stone is placed in the girl’s way, she steps on it, it wakes her
up, and the crude practical joke is finished. It would be interesting,
at least, to get some scientific information concerning these cited
effects of red light upon sleeping people.

O. Mönnigshoff and F. Piesbergen[348] have thrown some light on the
profoundness of sleep--why, e.g., a person hears a thing today and not
at another time; why one is awakened and another not; why one is
apparently deaf to very loud noise, etc. These authorities found that
the profundity of sleep culminates in the third quarter of the second
hour. Sleep intensifies and grows deeper until the second quarter of the
second hour. In the second and third quarters of that hour, the
intensification is rapid and significant, and then it decreases just as
rapidly, until the second quarter of the third hour. At that point sleep
becomes less and less profound until morning, in the second half of the
fifth hour. At this moment the intensity of sleep begins again to
increase, but in contrast with the first increase is very light and
takes a long time. Sleep, then, reaches its culmination in one hour out
of five and a half; from that culmination-point it decreases until it
reaches the general level of sleep.


Section 111. (b) Intoxication.

Apart from the pathological conditions of intoxication, especially the
great intolerance toward alcohol,[349] which are the proper subjects for
the physician, there is a large group of the stigmata of intoxication
which are so various that they require a more accurate study than usual
of their causes and effects. As a rule, people are satisfied to
determine the degree of intoxication by the answers to a few stereotyped
questions: Did the man wabble while walking? Was he able to run? Could
he talk coherently? Did he know his name? Did he recognize you? Did he
show great strength? An affirmative answer to these questions from two
witnesses has been enough to convict a man.[350]

As a rule, this conviction is justified, and it is proper to say that if
a person is still sufficiently in control of himself to do all these
things he must be considered capable of understanding the difference
between right and wrong. But this is not always the case. I do not say
that irrationality through drink must always obtain when the drunkard is
unable to remember what happened while he was drunk. His inability is
not determinative, because the circumstances following a deed have no
reflex effect. Even if after the deed a person is ignorant of what he
has done it is still possible that he was aware of its nature while
committing it, and this possibility is the determinative factor. But the
knowledge of what is being done does not in itself make the doer
responsible, for if the drunkard beats the policeman he knows that he is
fighting somebody; he could not do so without knowing it, and what
excuses him is the fact that while he was drunk, he was not aware that
he was fighting a policeman, that so far as he is capable of judgment at
all, he judges himself to be opposed to some illegal enemy, against whom
he must defend himself.

If it be said in opposition that a drunkard is not responsible if he
does, when drunk, what he would not do when sober, this again would be
an exaggeration. Why, is shown by the many insults, the many revelations
of secrets, the many new friendships of slight intoxication. These would
not have occurred if the drunkard had been sober, and yet nobody would
say that they had occurred during a state of irresponsibility.

Hence, we can say only that intoxication excuses when an action either
follows directly and solely as the reflex expression of an impulse, or
when the drunkard is so confused about the nature of his object that he
thinks himself justified in his conduct. Hence, the legal expressions
(e.g., “complete drunkenness” of Austrian criminal law, and
“unconsciousness” of the German imperial criminal statute book) will in
practice be pushed one degree higher up than ordinary usage intends. For
complete intoxication or drunkenness into loss of consciousness usually
means that condition in which the individual lies stiff on the ground.
But in this condition he can not do anything, and is incapable of
committing a crime. It must follow that the statutes could not have been
thinking of this, but of the condition in which the individual is still
active and able to commit crimes by the use of his limbs, but absolutely
without the control of those limbs.

If we compare innumerable stories that are told, with verbal
reliability, about drunkards, or those that are readable in daily
papers, police news, and in legal texts, we find groups in which a
drunkard makes his bed on a wintry night on a snow bank, undresses
himself, carefully folds his clothes beside him, and runs away at the
approach of a policeman, climbs over a fence and runs so fast that he
can not be caught. Such a man certainly has not only the use of his
organs, but also uses them with comparative correctness in undressing,
folding his clothes, and in running away. If now somebody should pass
the drunkard’s lair and if he should think that a burglar is in his
house and should wound the passer-by, who would believe the drunkard
when he tells this story?

In the street there is frequent opportunity of observing some of the
arrests of drunkards who fight with fists and feet and teeth, and often
have to be taken to the police station in a wheel-barrow. Now if the man
has had the misfortune of recognizing the policeman in his first
opposition, and of giving his own name properly, we say that he has
“shown definite signs of responsibility,” and we sentence him. But in
most cases it was merely the instantaneous illumination of his cindery
mind (which was, perhaps, stimulated to the recognition of the policeman
and the pronunciation of his name by the latter’s rather bearish
remarks) which then dies away as swiftly as it rose, and is followed by
instinctive self-defense. Anybody who has frequently observed how
utterly senseless is the battle of a drunkard with the overwhelming
power of three or four or more people, and how he continues to struggle,
even when wholly or completely conquered, must feel convinced that such
a man is no longer responsible.

In the same way we must never forget that the prosecution of some very
habitual activity is in no sense evidence of responsibility. Especially
when some action has very fine-drawn limits, and the actor knows that a
false grip will result in questionable consequences, the habitual
movement will be made instinctively. The soldier will properly carry out
his obligations of service, the coachman drive home, unharness, and look
after the horses, even the locomotive engineer will complete his
difficult task without a break--then, however, they fall and sleep their
drunkenness off. Now, if something intervenes unexpectedly during the
performance of this habitual activity, especially some opposition, some
superfluous cajolement, correction, or similar thing, the intoxicated
actor is thrown completely out of gear, and can not be restored to it,
nor is he able properly to oppose this obstacle. Hence he acts against
it reflexly, and in most cases explosively.

It may be perceived that such a drunkard works unconsciously; having
been thrown out of gear by some sudden remark, he is unable to complete
what he is trying to do, and this develops a despairing expression of
emotion for which he is decidedly not responsible. A countless number of
popular maxims indicate the popular opinion that it is best to get out
of the way of a drunkard, never to help him, because he can best look
after himself. The public seems to know this very well, theoretically,
but in practice no wife applies this theory when her drunken husband
comes home; in practice the policeman looks after the drunkard, in
practice the peasant and the master quarrel with the drunken servant and
the apprentice,--and then everybody wonders when suddenly superiors are
hurt, maimed, and otherwise opposed.

The best evidence for the certain but very definite routine in which the
drunkard moves, is the example cited by Combe[351] concerning the porter
who, while drunk, had wrongly delivered a packet. Later on he could not
think where he had brought it, but as by chance he got drunk again, he
fetched the packet, and brought it to its proper destination. This
process indicates that the “in vino veritas” depends not merely on
speech, but on action, and that this coming to the surface of what is
really thought is the reason for so many insults offered during
intoxication. Such phenomena are best studied at the beginning of
narcosis, in which all the conditions of intoxication come together in a
much briefer period of time, and hence appear much more clearly. How
involuntarily the inmost thought breaks through under such
circumstances, is shown by an occurrence in a surgical clinic. An old
peasant was to have been subjected to a not dangerous but rare
operation. The famous surgeon of the University had one student after
another make a diagnosis, and asked one student after another what kind
of an operation he would perform. The peasant misunderstood it
altogether, and as he was half stupefied he cried out involuntarily:
“The old donkey is asking one loafer after another what to do. Nobody
knows anything, and yet they are going to operate on me.” Things that
are thought are expressed just as involuntarily during intoxication, and
thus the insults, etc., are accomplished.

What is never believed, but yet may be true, is the defence of a
prisoner that intoxication led him to steal. I know of a talented,
kindly, and thoroughly honorable young man, who during slight
intoxication steals everything he can lay his hands on. His drunkenness
is so light that he can remove with complete skill his comrades’
cigarette cases, pocket handkerchiefs, and worst of all, their
latchkeys. At the same time, he is still drunk enough to have great
difficulty in remembering, the next day, who the owners of these things
are. Now suppose a thief told such a story in court!

I cite from the excellent account of Hoffbauer,[352] the development of
intoxication: “At first the consumption of liquor intensifies the
feeling of physical health, or increases that health. It appears to have
a proportionately similar effect upon the powers of the mind. Ideas move
easily, expression is smoother and more adequate. The condition and
emotional attitude are such that one might very well always wish for
one’s self and one’s friends. Until this point no intoxication is
visible. The flow of ideas only increases and becomes more intense.
Excellent, appropriate notions occur to one, but there is effort to
restrain the irregular flow of thought. This state is visible in the
effort which must be used to carry on any rather involved story. The
ideas flow too rapidly to be easily ordered according to the
requirements of the story. At this point the beginning of intoxication
is already perceptible. In its development the flow of ideas becomes
continually stronger, the senses lose their ordinary sharpness, and as
these fail the imagination grows stronger. The drinker’s language is
now, at least in particular expressions and turns of speech, more
voluminous and poetical, and rather louder than is natural. The former
indicates an intensification of imaginative power, and the latter a
dulling of the senses which becomes more and more obvious in the
development of the intoxication. For the drinker speaks louder because
he hears his words less clearly than before, and judges the hearing of
his auditors by his own, although the vividness and the more rapid flow
of ideas induced by intoxication have a share in this. Soon the dulling
of the senses becomes still more obvious. For example, it is seen that a
person who is so drunk that he confuses otherwise well-known companions,
even if only for a minute, thinks he puts his glass softly on the
table, although it falls to the ground. And then there are still other
forms of physical helplessness to be perceived. From his speech it may
be judged that the connection between his ideas has significantly
decreased: although still very vivid, they are now like luminous sparks
that appear and disappear. This vividness of ideas, or their rapid flow,
gives the inebriate’s desires an unmanageable intensity which reason can
no longer control. He follows them instantaneously if some accident does
not turn him aside. His physical helplessness becomes now obvious in
stammering, in a wabbly gait, etc., until finally he falls into a deep
sleep in which physical and intellectual repair begin.

“If the conditions of intoxication were to be divided into periods, we
should have the following: In the first period of intoxication ideas
have only an extraordinary degree of vividness. The rule of the
understanding over actions is not altogether suppressed, so that the
drunken fellow is fully conscious of his external relations and is aware
of what is going on within and about him. But the rapid flow of ideas
hinders careful reflection and leads to an intensified excitability,
particularly to those emotional expressions which are characterized by
the more rapid flow. This is due to the familiar psychological law
according to which one emotional condition leads into another as it is
more like that other in tone. Anger and merriment, hence, show
themselves more and more among uneducated people who are not habituated
to the limitation of their emotional expression by reference to the
forms of the world of fashion. Without this control, every stimulation
intensifies the emotion, since every natural expression adds to its
vividness. The irritability taken in itself is at this stage less
dominant, inasmuch as the drinker is at the same time satisfied with
himself, and the self-satisfaction makes the irritability endurable.
Only some accidental circumstance can intensify and spread this
irritability. Such circumstances intensify the drunkard’s liveliness and
lead to the outbreak of merriment approximating upon hilarity, then to a
verbal quarrel, which need not yet be a real quarrel and may be
conducted in all friendship. It seems that in most cases the
irritability is excited through the fact that the drunkard’s
self-satisfaction speedily lapses, or that he is disturbed in doing
things about which he is conceited. Now so long as the intoxication does
not exceed this stage, its effects and the outbreaks of its passions may
be suppressed. The drinker is here still self-possessed and is not
likely to lose control of himself unless he is progressively excited
thereto.

“In the next period of intoxication, the drunkard still has his senses,
although, all in all, they are considerably weaker than usual, and he is
somewhat beside himself. Memory and understanding have quite left him.
Hence, he acts as if the present moment were the only one, the idea of
the consequences of his actions having no effect upon him because he no
longer sees the connection between the two. And since his whole past has
disappeared from his mind he can not consider his more remote
circumstances. He acts, therefore, as he might if the memories of his
circumstances and ideas of the consequences of his actions did not
control his conduct, and lead him to rule himself. The slightest
excitation may awaken all his strongest passion which then carry him
away. Again, the slightest excuse may turn him from what he has in mind.
In this condition he is much more dangerous to himself and others
because he is impelled not only by the irresistible force of his
passions, but because, also, he rarely knows what he is doing and must
be considered a pure fool.

“In the last period, the drunkard has so lost his senses that he has no
more idea of his external environment.”

With regard to particular conditions, it may be held that the quantity
of drink is indifferent. Apart from the fact that we know nothing about
the quantity of alcohol a man has taken when we hear merely about so and
so many liters of wine or so and so much brandy, the influence of
quantities is individual, and no general rule whatever can be laid down.
As a matter of fact, there are young and powerful men who may become
quite foolish on half a glass of wine, especially when they are angry,
frightened, or otherwise excited, and there are weak old people who can
carry unbelievable quantities. In short, the question of quantity is
altogether foolish. The appearance and constitution of an individual
offers as little ground for inference as quantity. The knowledge of a
man’s regular attitude toward the consumption of alcohol is a safer
guide. Hellenbach asserts that wine has always the same influence on the
same individual; one always becomes more loquacious, another more
silent, a third more sad, a fourth merrier. And up to a certain limit
this is true, but there is always the question of what the limit is,
inasmuch as many individuals pass through different emotional conditions
at different stages. It often happens that a person in the first stage
who wants to “embrace the world and kiss everybody,” may change his mood
and become dangerous. Thus, anybody who has seen him several times in
the first stage may make the mistake of believing that he can not pass
it. In this direction explanations must be made very carefully if they
are not to be false and deceptive.

It is important, also, to know how a man drinks. It is known that a
small quantity of wine can intoxicate if it is soaked up with bread
which is repeatedly dipped into the wine. Wine drunk in the cellar works
with similar vigor if one laughs, is merry, is vexed, while drinking, or
if a large variety of drinks is taken, or if they are taken on an empty
stomach. For the various effects of alcohol, and for its effects on the
same person under different conditions, see Münsterberg’s “Beitrage zur
Experimentellen Psychologie,” Heft IV.

The effect of alcohol on memory is remarkable in so far as it often
happens that many people lose their memory only with respect to a single
very narrow sphere. Many are able to remember everything except their
names, others everything except their residence, still others everything
except the fact that they are married, and yet others every person
except their friends (though they know all the policemen), and the last
class are mistaken about their own identity. These things are believed
like many another thing, when told by a friend, but never under any
circumstances when the defendant tells them in the court room.


Section 112. (c) Suggestion.

The problems of hypnotism and suggestion are too old to permit the mere
mention of a few books, and are too new to permit the interpretation of
the enormous literature. In my “Manual for Examining Judges,” I have
already indicated the relation of the subject to criminal law, and the
proper attitude of criminalists to it. Here we have only to bear in mind
the problem of characteristic suggestion; the influence of the judge on
the witnesses, the witnesses upon each other, the conditions upon the
witnesses. And this influence, not through persuasion, imagination,
citation, but through those still unexplained remote effects which may
be best compared with “determining.” Suggestion is as widespread as
language. We receive suggestions through the stories of friends, through
the examples of strangers, through our physical condition, through our
food, through our small and large experiences. Our simplest actions may
be due to suggestion and the whole world may appear subject to the
suggestion of a single individual. As Emerson says somewhere, nature
carries out a task by creating a genius for its accomplishment; if you
follow the genius you will see what the world cares about.

This multiple use of the word “suggestion” has destroyed its early
intent. That made it equivalent to the term “suggestive question.” The
older criminalists had a notion of the truth, and have rigorously
limited the putting of suggestive questions. At the same time,
Mittermaier knew that the questioner was frequently unable to avoid them
and that many questions had to suggest their answers. If, for example, a
man wants to know whether A had made a certain statement in the course
of a long conversation, he must ask, for good or evil, “Has A said that
...?”

Mittermaier’s attitude toward the problem shows that he had already seen
twenty-five years ago that suggestive questions of this sort are the
most harmless, and that the difficulty really lies in the fact that
witnesses, experts, and judges are subject, especially in great and
important cases, to the influence of public opinion, of newspapers, of
their own experiences, and finally, of their own fancies, and hence give
testimony and give judgments in a way less guided by the truth than by
these influences.

This difficulty has been made clear by the Berchthold murder-trial in
München, in which the excellent psychiatrists Schrenck-Notzing and
Grashey had their hands full in answering and avoiding questions about
witnesses under the influence of suggestion.[353] The development of
this trial showed us the enormous influence of suggestion on witnesses,
and again, how contradictory are the opinions concerning the
determination of its value--whether it is to be determined by the
physician or by the judge; and finally, how little we know about
suggestion anyway. Everything is assigned to suggestion. In spite of the
great literature we still have too little material, too few
observations, and no scientifically certain inferences. Tempting as it
is to study the influence of suggestion upon our criminalistic work, it
is best to wait and to give our attention mainly to observation, study,
and the collection of material.[354]




Produced by Dianne Bean and David Widger






HISTORY OF THE IMPEACHMENT OF ANDREW JOHNSON PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

BY THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND HIS TRIAL BY THE SENATE FOR HIGH CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS IN OFFICE

1868

By Edmund G. Ross

Burt Franklin Research & Source Works Series #94




PREFACE.

Little is now known to the general public of the history of the attempt
to remove President Andrew Johnson in 1868, on his impeachment by the
House of Representatives and trial by the Senate for alleged high crimes
and misdemeanors in office, or of the causes that led to it. Yet it was
one of the most important and critical events, involving possibly the
gravest consequences, in the entire history of the country.

The constitutional power to impeach and remove the President had lain
dormant since the organization of the Government, and apparently had
never been thought of as a means for the satisfaction of political
enmities or for the punishment of alleged executive misdemeanors, even
in the many heated controversies between the President and Congress that
had theretofore arisen. Nor would any attempt at impeachment have been
made at that time but for the great numerical disparity then existing
between the respective representatives in Congress of the two political
parties of the country.

One-half the members of that Congress, both House and Senate, are now
dead, and with them have also gone substantially the same proportion
of the people at large, but many of the actors therein who have passed
away, lived long enough to see, and were candid enough to admit, that
the failure of the impeachment had brought no harm to the country, while
the general judgment practically of all has come to be that a grave and
threatening danger was thereby averted.

A new generation is now in control of public affairs and the destinies
of the Nation have fallen to new hands. New issues have developed and
will continue to develop from time to time; and new dangers will arise,
with increasing numbers and changing conditions, demanding in their turn
the same careful scrutiny, wisdom and patriotism in adjustment. But
the principles that underlie and constitute the basis of our political
organism, are and will remain the same; and will never cease to demand
constant vigilance for their perpetuation as the rock of safety upon
which our federative system is founded.

To those who in the study of the country's past seek a broader and
higher conception of the duties of American citizenship, the facts
pertaining to the controversy between the Executive and Congress as to
the restoration and preservation of the Union, set out in the following
pages, will be interesting and instructive. No one is better fitted than
the author of this volume to discuss the period of reconstruction
in which, as a member of the Federal senate, he played so potent and
patriotic a part, and it is a pleasure to find that he has discharged
his task with so much ability and care. But it is profoundly hoped that
no coming generation will be called upon to utilize the experiences
of the past in facing in their day, in field or forum, the dangers of
disruption and anarchy, mortal strife and desolation, between those of
one race, and blood, and nationality, that marked the history of America
thirty years ago.

DAVID B. HILL.



CHAPTER 1. -- THE PROBLEM OF RECONSTRUCTION.

MR. LINCOLN'S PLAN

The close of the War of the Rebellion, in 1865, found the country
confronted by a civil problem quite as grave as the contest of arms that
had been composed. It was that of reconstruction, or the restoration of
the States lately in revolt, to their constitutional relations to the
Union.

The country had just emerged from a gigantic struggle of physical force
of four years duration between the two great Northern and Southern
sections. That struggle had been from its inception to its close, a
continuing exhibition, on both sides, of stubborn devotion to a cause,
and its annals had been crowned with illustrations of the grandest
race and personal courage the history of the world records. Out of a
population of thirty million people, four million men were under arms,
from first to last, and sums of money quite beyond the limit of ordinary
comprehension, were expended in its prosecution. There was bloodshed
without stint. Both sides to the conflict fought for an idea--on the one
side for so-called State Rights and local self-government--on the other
for national autonomy as the surest guaranty of all rights--personal,
local, and general.

The institution of negro slavery, the basis of the productive industries
of the States of the South, which had from the organization of the
Government been a source of friction between the slave-holding and
nonslave-holding sections, and was in fact the underlying and potent
cause of the war, went under in the strife and was by national edict
forever prohibited.

The struggle being ended by the exhaustion of the insurgents, two
conspicuous problems demanding immediate solution were developed: The
status of the now ex-slaves, or freedmen--and the methods to be adopted
for the rehabilitation of the revolted States, including the status of
the revolted States themselves. The sword had declared that they had
no constitutional power to withdraw from the Union, and the result
demonstrated that they had not the physical power--and therefore that
they were in the anomalous condition of States of though not States
technically in the Union--and hence properly subject to the jurisdiction
of the General Government, and bound by its judgment in any measures
to be instituted by it for their future restoration to their former
condition of co-equal States.

The now ex-slaves had been liberated, not with the consent of their
former owners, but by the power of the conqueror as a war measure, who
not unnaturally insisted upon the right to declare absolutely the future
status of these persons without consultation with or in any way by the
intervention of their late owners. The majority of the gentlemen in
Congress representing the Northern States demanded the instant and
complete enfranchisement of these persons, as the natural and logical
sequence of their enfreedment. The people of the late slave States, as
was to have been foreseen, and not without reason, objected--especially
where, as was the case in many localities, the late slaves largely
out-numbered the people of the white race: and it is apparent from
subsequent developments that they had the sympathy of President Lincoln,
at least so far as to refuse his sanction to the earlier action of
Congress relative to restoration.

To add to the gravity of the situation and of the problem of
reconstruction, the people of the States lately in rebellion were
disfranchised in a mass, regardless of the fact that many of them
refused to sanction the rebellion only so far as was necessary to their
personal safety.

It was insisted by the dominant element of the party in control of
Congress, that these States were dead as political entities, having
committed political suicide, and their people without rights or the
protection of law, as malcontents.

It is of record that Mr. Lincoln objected to this doctrine, and to all
propositions that contemplated the treatment of the late rebellious
States simply as conquered provinces and their people as having
forfeited all rights under a common government, and under the laws of
Nations entitled to no concessions, or even to consideration, in any
proposed measures of restoration. That he had no sympathy with that
theory is evidenced by the plan of restoration he attempted to establish
in Louisiana.

It was at this point that differences arose between Mr. Lincoln and his
party in Congress, which became more or less acute prior to his death
and continued between Congress and Mr. Johnson on his attempt to carry
out Mr. Lincoln's plans for restoration.

The cessation of hostilities in the field thus developed a
politico-economic problem which had never before confronted any
nation in such magnitude and gravity. The situation was at once novel,
unprecedented, and in more senses than one, alarming. Without its due
and timely solution there was danger of still farther disturbance of a
far different and more alarming character than that of arms but lately
ceased; and of a vastly more insidious and dangerous complexion. The war
had been fought in the open. The record of the more than two thousand
field and naval engagements that had marked its progress and the march
of the Union armies to success, were heralded day by day to every
household, and all could forecast its trend and its results. But the
controversy now developed was insidious--its influences, its weapons,
its designs, and its possible end, were in a measure hidden from the
public--public opinion was divided, and its results, for good or
ill, problematical. The wisest political sagacity and the broadest
statesmanship possible were needed, and in their application no time was
to be lost.

In his annual message to Congress, December 8th, 1863, Mr. Lincoln
had to a considerable extent outlined his plan of Reconstruction;
principally by a recital of what he had already done in that direction.
That part of his message pertinent to this connection is reproduced here
to illustrate the broad, humane, national and patriotic purpose that
actuated him, quite as well as his lack of sympathy with the extreme
partisan aims and methods that characterized the measures afterward
adopted by Congress in opposition to his well-known wishes and views,
and, also, as an important incident to the history of that controversy
and of the time, and its bearing upon the frictions that followed
between Congress and Mr. Lincoln's successor on that subject. Mr.
Lincoln said:

When Congress assembled a year ago the war had already lasted twenty
months, and there had been many conflicts on both land and sea, with
varying results. The rebellion had been pressed back into reduced
limits; yet the tone of public feeling and opinion, at home and abroad,
was not satisfactory. With other signs, the popular elections, then just
past, indicated uneasiness among ourselves, while, amid much that was
cold and menacing, the kindest words coming from Europe were uttered in
accents of pity that we were too blind to surrender a hopeless cause.
Our commerce was suffering greatly by a few armed vessels built upon
and furnished from foreign shores; and we were threatened with such
additions from the same quarter as would sweep our trade from the
sea and raise our blockade. We had failed to elicit from European
Governments anything hopeful upon this subject. The preliminary
Emancipation Proclamation, issued in September, was running its assigned
period to the beginning of the new year. A month later that final
proclamation came, including the announcement that colored men of
suitable condition would be received into the army service. The policy
of emancipation, and of employing black soldiers, gave to the future a
new aspect, about which hope and fear and doubt contended in uncertain
conflict. According to our political system, as a matter of civil
administration, the General Government had no lawful power to effect
emancipation in any State; and for a long time it had been hoped that
the rebellion could be suppressed without resorting to it as a military
measure. It was all the while deemed possible that the necessity for it
might come, and that, if it should, the crisis of the contest would then
be presented. It came, and, as was anticipated, was followed by dark and
doubtful days. Eleven months have now passed, and we are permitted to
take another review. The rebel borders are pressed still further back,
and by the complete opening of the Mississippi the country dominated
by the rebellion is divided into distinct parts, with no practical
communication between them. Tennessee and Arkansas have been
substantially cleared of insurgent control, and influential citizens in
each, owners of slaves and advocates of slavery at the beginning of
the rebellion, now declare openly for emancipation in their respective
States. Of those States not included in the Emancipation Proclamation,
Maryland and Missouri, neither of which three years ago would tolerate
any restraint upon the extension of slavery into the new Territories,
only dispute now as to the best mode of removing it within their own
limits.

Of those who were slaves at the beginning of the rebellion, full one
hundred thousand are now in the United States military service; about
one half of which number actually bear arms in the ranks; thus giving
the double advantage of taking so much labor from the insurgent cause,
and supplying the places which must otherwise be filled with so many
white men. So far as tested, it is difficult to say they are not as good
soldiers as any. No servile insurrection, or tendency to violence or
cruelty, has marked the measure of emancipation and arming the
blacks. Those measures have been discussed in foreign countries, and
contemporary with such discussion the tone of sentiment there is much
improved. At home the same measures have been fully discussed, and
supported, criticised, and denounced, and the annual elections following
are highly encouraging to those whose official duty it is to bear the
country through this great trial. Thus we have the new reckoning. The
crisis which threatened to divide the friends of the Union is past.

Looking now to the present, and future, and with reference to a
resumption of national authority within the States wherein that
authority has been suspended, I have thought fit to issue a
Proclamation, a copy of which is herewith transmitted. On examination
of this Proclamation it will appear, as is believed, that nothing is
attempted beyond what is amply justified by the Constitution. True, the
form of an oath is given, but no man is coerced to take it. The man
is only promised a pardon in case he voluntarily takes the oath. The
Constitution authorizes the Executive to grant or withhold the pardon
at his own absolute discretion, and this includes the power to grant on
terms, as is fully established by judicial and other authorities.

It is also proffered that, if in any of the States named a State
Government shall be, in the mode prescribed, set up, such Government
shall be recognized and guaranteed by the United States, and that under
it the State shall, on the constitutional conditions, be protected
against invasion and domestic violence. The constitutional obligation of
the United States to guarantee to every State in the Union a republican
form of government, and to protect the State, in the cases stated, is
explicit and full. But why tender the benefits of this provision only
to a State Government set up in this particular way? This section
contemplates a case wherein the element within a State favorable to a
republican government, in the Union, may be too feeble for an opposite
and hostile external to or even within the State; and such are precisely
the cases with which we are dealing.

Any attempt to guaranty and protect a revived State Government,
constituted in whole, or in preponderating part, from the very element
against whose hostility it is to be protected, is simply absurd. There
must be a test by which to separate the opposing elements, so as to
build only from the sound; and that test is a sufficiently liberal one
which accepts as sound whoever will make a sworn recantation of his
former unsoundness.

But if it be proper to require, as a test of admission to the political
body, an oath of allegiance to the Constitution of the United States,
and to the Union under it, why also to the laws and Proclamation in
regard to slavery? Those laws and Proclamations were enacted and put
forth for the purpose of aiding in the suppression of the rebellion.
To give them their fullest effect, there had to be a pledge--for their
maintenance. In my judgment they have aided, and will further aid, the
cause for which they were intended. To now abandon them would be not
only to relinquish a lever of power, but would also be a cruel and an
astounding breach of faith. I may add at this point, that while I remain
in my present position, I shall not attempt to retract or modify the
Emancipation Proclamation; nor shall I return to slavery any person
who is free by the terms of the Proclamation, or by any of the acts of
Congress. For these and other reasons it is thought best that support
of these measures shall be included in the oath; and it is believed the
Executive may lawfully claim it in return for pardon and restoration
of forfeited rights, when he has clear constitutional power to withhold
altogether or grant upon terms which he shall deem wisest for the public
interest. It should be observed, also, that this part of the oath is
subject to the modifying and abrogating power of legislation and supreme
judicial decision.

The proposed acquiescence of the National Executive in any reasonable
temporary State arrangement for the freed people is made with the view
of possibly modifying the confusion and destitution which must, at
best, attend all classes by a total revolution of labor throughout whole
States. It is hoped that the already deeply afflicted people of
those States may be somewhat more ready to give up the cause of their
affliction, if, to this extent, this vital matter be left to themselves;
while no power of the National Executive to prevent an abuse is abridged
by the proposition.

The suggestion in the Proclamation as to maintaining the political
frame-work of those States on what is called reconstruction, is made in
the hope that it may do good without danger of harm. It will save labor
and avoid great confusion.

But why any proclamation on this subject? This question is beset with
the conflicting views that the step might be delayed too long or taken
too soon. In some States the elements for resumption seem ready for
action, but remain inactive apparently for want of a rallying point. Why
shall A. adopt the plan of B., rather than B. that of A.? And if A. and
B. should agree, how can they know but that the General Government here
will reject their plan? By the Proclamation a plan is presented which
may be accepted by them as a rallying point, and which they may be
assured in advance will not be rejected here. This may bring them to act
sooner than they otherwise would.

The objection to a premature presentation of a plan by the National
Executive consists in the danger of committals on points which could
be more safely left to further developments. Care has been taken to so
shape the document as to avoid embarrassment from this source. Saying
that, on certain terms, certain classes will be pardoned, with rights
restored, it is not said that other classes on other terms will never be
included. Saying that reconstruction will be accepted if presented in
a specified way, it is not saying it will not be accepted in any other
way.

The movements, by State action, for emancipation in several of the
States not included in the Emancipation Proclamation, are matters of
profound gratulation, and while I do not repeat in detail what I have
heretofore so earnestly urged upon this subject, my general views and
feelings remain unchanged, and I trust that Congress will omit no fair
opportunity of aiding these important steps to a great consummation.

In the midst of other cares, however important, we must not lose sight
of the fact that the war power is still our main reliance. To that power
alone can we look, for a time, to give confidence to the people in the
contested regions that the insurgent power will not again over-run them.
Until that confidence shall be established, little can be done anywhere
for what is called reconstruction. Hence our chiefest care must still
be directed to the Army and Navy, who have thus far borne their hardest
part nobly and well. And it may be esteemed fortunate that in giving the
greatest efficiency to these indispensable arms, we do also honorably
recognize the gallant men, from commander to sentinel, who compose them,
to whom, more than to others, the world must stand indebted for the home
of freedom disenthralled, regenerated, enlarged and perpetuated.

Abraham Lincoln. December 8, 1863.

The following is the Proclamation of Amnesty and Reconstruction referred
to in the foregoing Message, and further illustrates Mr. Lincoln's plan
for the restoration of the Union:

PROCLAMATION OF AMNESTY AND RECONSTRUCTION.

BY THE PRESIDENT ON THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

Whereas, in and by the Constitution of the United States, it is provided
that the President "shall have the power to grant reprieves and pardons
for offenses against the United States, except in cases of impeachment;"
and

Whereas, a rebellion now exists whereby the loyal State governments of
several States have for a long time been subverted, and many persons
have committed, and are guilty of treason against the United States; and

Whereas, with reference to said rebellion and treason, laws have been
enacted by Congress, declaring forfeitures and confiscations of property
and liberation of slaves, all upon terms and conditions therein stated,
and also declaring that the President was thereby authorized at any
time thereafter, by proclamation, to extend to persons who may have
participated in the existing rebellion, in any State or part thereof,
pardon and amnesty, with such exceptions and at such times and on such
conditions as he may deem expedient for the public welfare; and

Whereas, the Congressional declaration for limited and conditional
pardon accords with well established judicial exposition of the
pardoning power; and

Whereas, with reference to said rebellion, the President of the United
States has issued several proclamations, with provisions in regard to
the liberation of slaves; and

Whereas, it is now desired by some persons heretofore engaged in said
rebellion to resume their allegiance to the United States, and to
reinaugurate loyal State Governments within and for their respective
States; therefore,

I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States, do proclaim,
declare, and make known to all persons who have, directly or by
implication, participated in the existing rebellion, except as
hereinafter excepted, that a full pardon is hereby granted to them and
each of them, with restoration of all rights of property, except as to
slaves and in property cases where rights of third parties shall have
intervened, and upon the condition that every such person shall take
and subscribe an oath, and thenceforward keep and maintain said
oath inviolate, and which oath shall be registered for permanent
preservation, and shall be of the tenor and effect following, to-wit:

I, ___ __ ___, do solemnly swear, in presence of Almighty God, that I
will henceforth faithfully support, protect, and defend the Constitution
of the United States, and the Union of the States thereunder; and that
I will, in like manner, abide by and faithfully support all acts of
Congress passed during the existing rebellion with reference to slaves,
so long and so far as not repealed, modified or held void by Congress,
or by the decision of the Supreme Court; and that I will, in like
manner, abide by and faithfully support all proclamations of the
President made during the existing rebellion having reference to slaves,
so long and so far as not modified or declared void by decision of the
Supreme Court. So help me God.

The persons exempted from the benefits of the foregoing provisions are
all who are, or shall have been, civil or diplomatic officers or agents
of the so-called Confederate Government: all who have left judicial
stations under the United States to aid the rebellion; all who are or
shall have been military or naval officers of said so-called Confederate
Government above the rank of Colonel in the army or Lieutenant in the
Navy; all who have left seats in the United States Congress to aid
the rebellion; all who resigned commissions in the army or navy of
the United States and afterward aided the rebellion; and all who have
engaged in any way in treating colored persons, or white persons in
charge of such, otherwise than lawfully as prisoners of war, and which
persons may have been found in the United States service as soldiers,
seamen, or in any capacity.

And I do further proclaim, declare, and make known that whenever, in
any of the States of Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee,
Alabama, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina and North Carolina, a number
of persons, not less than one-tenth in number of the votes cast in such
State at the Presidential election of the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and sixty, each having taken the oath aforesaid and not
having since violated it, and being a qualified voter by the election
laws of the State existing immediately before the so-called act
of secession, and excluding all others, shall reestablish a State
government which shall be republican, and in no wise contravening said
oath, such shall be recognized as the true government of the State, and
the State shall receive thereunder the benefits of the constitutional
provision which declares that "the United States shall guarantee to
every state in this Union a republican form of government, and shall
protect each of them against invasion; and, on the application of the
legislature, or the executive (when the legislature cannot be convened)
against domestic violence."

And I do further proclaim, declare, and make known, that any provision
which may be adopted by such State government in relation to the freed
people of such State, which shall recognize and declare their permanent
freedom, provide for their education, and which may yet be consistent
as a temporary arrangement with their present condition as a laboring,
landless, and homeless class, will not be objected to by the National
Executive.

And it is suggested as not improper that, in constructing a loyal
State government in any State, the name of the State, the boundary, the
subdivisions, the constitution, and the general code of laws, as before
the rebellion, be maintained, subject only to the modifications made
necessary by the conditions hereinbefore stated, and such others, if
any, not contravening said conditions, and which may be deemed expedient
by those framing the new State government.

To avoid misunderstanding, it may be proper to say, that whether
members sent to Congress from any State shall be admitted to seats,
constitutionally rests exclusively with the respective houses, and
not to any extent with the Executive. And still further, that this
proclamation is intended to present to the people of the States wherein
the National authority has been suspended; and loyal State governments
have been subverted, a mode in and by which the National authority and
loyal State governments, may be re-established within said States, or,
in any of them; and while the mode presented is the best the Executive
can suggest, with his present impressions, it must not be understood
that no other possible mode would be acceptable.

Given under my hand at the City of Washington, the eighth day of
December, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-three, and of the Independence of the United States of America,
the eighty-eighth.

[L. S.]

By the President: Abraham Lincoln. William H. Seward, Secretary of
State.

How the revolted States could be most successfully and expeditiously
restored to their constitutional relations to the Union on the cessation
of hostilities, was the momentous question of the hour, upon which there
were views and schemes as varied and antagonistic as were the mental
differences and political disagreements of those who felt called upon
to engage in the stupendous work. As history had recorded no similar
conditions, and therefore no demand for the solution of such a problem,
there were no examples or historic lights for the guidance of those upon
whom the task had fallen.

It is apparent that Mr. Lincoln maintained the indestructibility of
the States and the indivisibility of the Union--that the resolutions of
secession were null and void, and that the States lately in rebellion
were never in fact but only in theory out of the Union--that they
retained inherently, though now dormant, their State autonomy and
constitutional rights as before their revolutionary acts, except as
to slavery, and that all their people had to do, to re-establish their
former status, as he declared to the Emperor of the French when that
potentate was about to recognize the Confederacy, was to resume their
duties as loyal, law-abiding citizens, and reorganize their State
Governments on a basis of loyalty to the Constitution and the Union. The
terms he proposed to formally offer them were first illustrated in the
case of Louisiana, early in 1863, and later in the foregoing Message
and Proclamation; and clearly indicated what was to be his policy and
process of reconstruction.

Messrs. Flanders and Hahn were admitted to the House of Representatives
as members from Louisiana agreeably to the President's views thus
outlined. They had been chosen at an election ordered by the Governor
of the State (Gov. Shepley), who had undoubtedly been permitted, if not
specially authorized by the President, to take this step, but they were
the last to be received from Louisiana under Mr. Lincoln's plan, as
the next Congress resolved to receive no more members from the seceded
States till joint action by the two Houses therefor should be had.

Prior to the election at which these gentlemen were chosen, Mr. Lincoln
addressed a characteristic note to Gov. Shepley, which was in effect
a warning that Federal officials not citizens of Louisiana must not
be chosen to represent the State in Congress, "We do not," said he,
referring to the South, "particularly need members of Congress from
those States to get along with legislation here. What we do want is the
conclusive evidence that respectable citizens of Louisiana are willing
to be members of Congress and to swear support to the Constitution, and
that other respectable citizens are willing to vote for them and send
them. To send a parcel of Northern men as Representatives, elected,
as would be understood, (and perhaps really so) at the point of the
bayonet, would be disgraceful and outrageous."

Mr. Lincoln would tolerate none of the "carpet-bagging" that afterwards
became so conspicuous and offensive under the Congressional plan of
Reconstruction.

These steps for reconstruction in Louisiana were followed by the
assembling of a convention to frame a new constitution for that State.
The convention was organized early in 1864, and its most important act
was the prompt incorporation of an antislavery clause in its organic
law. By a vote of 70 to 16 the convention declared slavery to be forever
abolished in the State. The new Constitution was adopted by the people
of the State on the 5th day of the ensuing September by a vote of 6,836
in its favor, to 1,566 against it. As the total vote of Louisiana in
1860 was 50,510, the new government had fulfilled the requirement of
the President's Proclamation. It was sustained by more than the required
one-tenth vote.

In a personal note of congratulation to Gov. Hahn, of Louisiana, the
President, speaking of the coming convention, suggested that "some of
the colored people be let in, as for instance, the very intelligent, and
especially those who have fought gallantly in our ranks." "They would,"
said he, "probably help in some trying time in the future TO KEEP THE
JEWEL OF LIBERTY IN THE FAMILY OF FREEDOM."

This action in regard to Louisiana was accompanied, indeed in some
particulars preceded, by similar action in Arkansas. A Governor was
elected, an anti-slavery Constitution adopted, a State Government duly
installed, and Senators and Representatives in Congress elected, but
were refused admission by Congress. Mr. Sumner, when the credentials
of the Senators-elect were presented, foreshadowing the position to be
taken by the Republican leaders, offered a resolution declaring that
"a State pretending to secede from the Union, and battling against the
General Government to maintain that position, must be regarded as a
rebel State subject to military occupation and without representation
on this floor until it has been readmitted by a vote of both Houses of
Congress; and the Senate will decline to receive any such application
from any such rebel State until after such a vote by both Houses."

A few weeks later, on the 27th of June, 1864, this resolution was in
effect reported back to the Senate by the Judiciary Committee, to which
it had been referred, and adopted by a vote of 27 to 6. The same action
was had in the House of Representatives on the application of the
Representatives-elect from Arkansas for admission to that body.

This was practically the declaration of a rupture between the President
and Congress on the question of Reconstruction. It was a rebuke to Mr.
Lincoln for having presumed to treat the seceded States as still in any
sense States of the Union. It was in effect a declaration that those
States had successfully seceded--that their elimination from the
Union was an accomplished fact--that the Union of the States had been
broken--and that the only method left for their return that would be
considered by Congress was as conquered and outlying provinces, not even
as Territories with the right of such to membership in the Union; and
should be governed accordingly until such time as Congress should see
fit (IF EVER, to use the language of Mr. Stevens in the House) to
devise and establish some form whereby they could be annexed to or
re-incorporated into the Union.

It was at this point--on the great question of Reconstruction, or more
properly of Restoration--that the disagreements originated between the
Executive and Congress which finally culminated in the impeachment of
Mr. Lincoln's successor; and that condition of strained relations was
measurably intensified when, on the following July 4th, a bill was
passed by Congress making provision for the reorganization and admission
of the revolted States on the extreme lines indicated by the above
action of Congress and containing the very extraordinary provision that
the President, AFTER OBTAINING THE CONSENT OF CONGRESS, shall recognize
the State Government so established. That measure was still another and
more marked rebuke by Congress to the President for having presumed to
initiate a system of restoration without its consultation and advice.
Naturally Mr. Lincoln was not in a mood to meekly accept the rebuke
so marked and manifestly intended; and so the bill not having passed
Congress till within the ten days preceding its adjournment allowed
by the Constitution for its consideration by the President, and as
it proposed to undo the work he had done, he failed to return it to
Congress--"pocketed" it--and it therefore fell. He was not in a mood to
accept a Congressional rebuke. He had given careful study to the duties,
the responsibilities, and the limitations of the respective Departments
of, the Government, and was not willing that his judgment should be
revised, or his course censured, however indirectly, by any of its
co-ordinate branches.

Four days after the session had closed, he issued a Proclamation in
which he treated the bill merely as the expression of an opinion
by Congress as to the best plan of Reconstruction--"which plan," he
remarked, "it is now thought fit to lay before the people for their
consideration."

He further stated in this Proclamation that he had already presented one
plan of restoration, and that he was "unprepared by a formal approval of
this bill to be inflexibly committed to any single plan of restoration,
and was unprepared to declare that the free State Constitutions and
Governments already adopted and installed in Louisiana and Arkansas,
shall be set aside and held for naught, thereby repelling and
discouraging the loyal citizens who have set up the same as to further
effort, and unprepared to declare a constitutional competency in
Congress to abolish slavery in the States, though sincerely hoping that
a constitutional amendment abolishing slavery in all the States might be
adopted."

While, with these objections, Mr. Lincoln could not approve the bill, he
concluded his Proclamation with these words:

"Nevertheless, I am fully satisfied with the plan of restoration
contained in the bill as one very proper for the loyal people of any
State choosing to adopt it, and I am and at all times shall be prepared
to give Executive aid and assistance to any such people as soon as
military resistance to the United States shall have been suppressed in
any such State and the people thereof shall have sufficiently returned
to their obedience to the Constitution and laws of the United States--in
which Military Governors will be appointed with directions to proceed
according to the bill."

"It must be frankly admitted," says Mr. Blaine in reciting this record
in his 'Thirty Years of Congress,' "that Mr. Lincoln's course was in some
of its respects extraordinary. It met with almost unanimous dissent on
the part of the Republican members, and violent criticism from the more
radical members of both Houses. * * * Fortunately, the Senators and
Representatives had returned to their States and Districts before the
Reconstruction Proclamation was issued, and found the people united and
enthusiastic in Mr. Lincoln's support."

In the last speech Mr. Lincoln ever made, (April 11th, 1865) referring
to the twelve thousand men who had organized the Louisiana Government,
(on the one-tenth basis) he said:

"If we now reject and spurn them, we do our utmost to disorganize and
disperse them. We say to the white man, you are worthless, or worse.
We will neither help you or be helped by you. To the black man we say,
'this cup of liberty which these, your old masters hold to your lips,
we will dash from you, and leave you to the chances of gathering the
spilled and scattered contents IN SOME VAGUE AND UNDEFINED WHEN AND
WHERE AND HOW.' If this course, discouraging and paralyzing to both
white and black, has any tendency to bring Louisiana into proper
practical relations with the Union, I have so far been unable to
perceive it. If, on the contrary, they reorganize and sustain the new
Government of Louisiana, the converse of all this is made true. We
encourage the hearts and nerve the arms of twelve thousand men to adhere
to their work and argue for it, and proselyte for it, and fight for it,
and grow it, and ripen it to a complete success. The colored man, too,
in seeing all united for him, is inspired with vigilance and with
energy and daring to the same end. Grant that he desires the elective
franchise. HE WILL YET ATTAIN IT SOONER BY SAVING THE ALREADY ADVANCED
STEPS TOWARD IT THAN BY RUNNING BACK OVER THEM. Concede that the new
Government of Louisiana is only to what it should be as the egg to the
fowl; we shall sooner have the fowl by hatching the egg than by smashing
it."

It is manifest that Mr. Lincoln intuitively foresaw the danger of a
great body of the people becoming accustomed to government by military
power, and sought to end it by the speediest practicable means. As he
expressed it, "We must begin and mould from disorganized and discordant
elements: nor is it a small additional embarrassment that we, the loyal
people, differ among ourselves as to the mode, manner, and measure of
reconstruction."

Louisiana was wholly in possession of the Union forces and under
loyal influence in 1863, and in his judgment the time had come for
reconstructive action in that state--not merely for the purpose of
strengthening and crystallizing the Union sentiment there, at a great
gate-way of commerce, that would become a conspicuous object-lesson to
foreign governments in behalf of more favorable influences abroad, but
also to the encouragement of Union men and the discouragement of the
rebellion in all the other revolted States. He had fortified his own
judgment, as he frankly declared, "by submitting the Louisiana plan in
advance to every member of the Cabinet, and every member approved it."

The steps taken in Louisiana were to be but a beginning. The nature of
subsequent proceedings on his part must be governed by the success of
this--that under then existing conditions it was inexpedient, in view
of further possible complications, to forecast further proceedings, and
especially to attempt to establish, at the outset, and under the chaotic
conditions of the time, a general system of reconstruction applicable to
all the States and to varying conditions. So the beginning was made in
Louisiana. It is manifest that the purpose of this immediate action was
two-fold--not only to restore Louisiana to the Union at the earliest
practicable day--but also to so far establish a process of general
restoration before Congress should reconvene at the coming December
session, that there would be no sufficient occasion or excuse for
interfering with his work by the application of the exasperating
conditions that had been foreshadowed by that body.

On this point Mr. Welles, his Secretary of the Navy, testifies that at
the close of a Cabinet meeting held immediately preceding Mr. Lincoln's
death, "Mr. Stanton made some remarks on the general condition of
affairs and the new phase and duties upon which we were about to enter.
He alluded to the great solicitude which the President felt on this
subject, his frequent recurrence to the necessity of establishing civil
governments and preserving order in the rebel States. Like the rest of
the Cabinet, doubtless, he had given this subject much consideration,
and with a view of having something practical on which to base action,
he had drawn up a rough plan or ordinance which he had handed to the
President.

"The President said he proposed to bring forward that subject, although
he had not had time as yet to give much attention to the details of the
paper which the Secretary of War had given him only the day before; but
that it was substantially, in its general scope, the plan which we had
sometimes talked over in Cabinet meetings. We should probably make some
modifications, prescribe further details; there were some suggestions
which he should wish to make, and he desired all to bring their minds to
the question, for no greater or more important one could come before
us, or any future Cabinet. He thought it providential that, this great
rebellion was crushed just as Congress had adjourned, AND THERE WERE
NONE OF THE DISTURBING ELEMENTS OF THAT BODY TO HINDER AND EMBARRASS US.
If we were wise and discreet, we should reanimate, the States and get
their governments in successful operation, with order prevailing and the
Union reestablished, BEFORE CONGRESS CAME TOGETHER IN DECEMBER. This he
thought important. We could do better, accomplish more without than with
them. There were men in Congress who, if their motives were good, were
nevertheless impracticable, and who possessed feelings of hate and
vindictiveness in which he did not sympathize and could not participate.
Each House of Congress, he said, had the undoubted right to receive
or reject members, the Executive had no control in this matter. But
Congress had NOTHING TO DO WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENTS, which the
President could recognize, and under existing laws treat as other
States, give the same mail facilities, collect taxes, appoint judges,
marshals, collectors, etc., subject, of course, to confirmation. There
were men who objected to these views, BUT THEY WERE NOT HERE, AND WE
MUST MAKE HASTE TO DO OUR DUTY BEFORE THEY CAME HERE."

The subjugated States were in a condition that could not be safely
permitted to continue for any indefinite period. It would be
inconsistent with the purpose of the war, incongruous to the American
system and idea of government, and antagonistic to American political,
or even commercial or social autonomy. Naturally upon Mr. Lincoln would
fall largely the duty and responsibility of formulating and inaugurating
some method of restoration. With the abolition of slavery, the
most difficult of settlement of all the obstacles in the way of
reconstruction had been removed. Naturally, too, during the later months
of the war, when it became manifest that the end of the struggle was
near, the question of reconstruction and the methods whereby it could be
most naturally, speedily, and effectively accomplished, came uppermost
in his mind. A humane, just man, and a sincere, broad-brained, patriot
and far-seeing statesman, he instinctively rejected the many drastic
schemes which filled a large portion of the public press of the North
and afterwards characterized many of the suggestions of Congressional
action. With him the prime purpose of the war was the preservation of
the political, territorial and economic integrity of the Republic--in a
word, to restore the Union, without needless humiliation to the defeated
party, or the imposition of unnecessarily rigorous terms which could
but result in future frictions--without slavery--and yet with sufficient
safeguards against future disloyal association of the sections; and that
purpose had been approved by an overwhelming majority of the people in
his re-election in 1864.

In these purposes and methods Mr. Lincoln appears to have had the active
sympathy and co-operation of his entire Cabinet, more especially of Mr.
Stanton, his Secretary of War. Indeed, Mr. Stanton is understood, from
the record, to have been the joint author, with Mr. Lincoln, of the
plan of reconstruction agreed upon at the later meetings of the Cabinet
immediately prior to Mr. Lincoln's death. Mr. Stanton proposed to put
it in the form of a military order--Mr. Lincoln made an Executive order.
The plan was embodied in what afterwards became known as the "North
Carolina Proclamation," determined upon by Mr. Lincoln at his last
Cabinet meeting and promulgated by Mr. Johnson shortly after his
accession to the Presidency as Mr. Lincoln's successor, and is inserted
in a subsequent chapter.

Mr. Lincoln unquestionably comprehended the peculiar conditions under
which the Republican party had come to the control of the legislative
branch of the Government, and fully realized the incapacity of the
dominant element in that control for the delicate work of restoration
and reconstruction--leading a conquered and embittered people back
peacefully and successfully, without unnecessary friction, into
harmonious relations to the Union.

No such responsibility, no such herculean task, had ever before, in the
history of civilization, devolved upon any ruler or political party.

Mr. Lincoln seems to have realized the incapacity of party leaders
brought to the surface by the tumult and demoralization of the time,
whose only exploits and experiences were in the line of destruction and
who must approach the task with divided counsel, to cope successfully
with the delicate and responsible work of restoration the close of
the war had made imperative. He comprehended the incongruities which
characterized that great party better than its professed leaders, and
foresaw the futility of any effort on its part, at that time and in its
then temper, to the early establishment of any coherent or successful
method of restoration. Hence, unquestionably, his prompt action in that
behalf, and his failure to call the Congress into special session, to
the end that there should be no time unnecessarily consumed and lost
in the institution of some efficient form of civil government in the
returning States--some form that would have the sanction of intelligent
authority competent to restore and enforce public order, without the
dangers of delay and consequent disorder that must result, and did
afterwards result, from the protracted debates sure to follow and did
follow the sudden precipitation of the questions of reconstruction and
reconciliation upon a mass of Congressmen totally inexperienced in the
anomalous conditions of that time, or in the methods most needed for
their correction.

That Mr. Lincoln contemplated the ultimate and not remote
enfranchisement of the late slaves, is manifest from his suggestion to
Gov. Hahn, of Louisiana, hereinbefore quoted in connection with the
then approaching Convention for the re-establishment of State Government
there, and again still more manifest from his last public utterance on
April 11, 1865, deprecating the rejection by Congress of his plan for
the restoration of Louisiana, in which, he said, speaking of that action
by Congress rejecting the Louisiana bill: "Grant that the colored male
desires the elective franchise. He will attain it sooner by saving the
already advanced steps towards it than by running back over them."

It is also apparent in the light of the succeeding history of that time
and of that question, that if Mr. Lincoln's views had been seconded
by Congress, the enfranchisement of the negro would have been, though
delayed, as certain of accomplishment, and of a vastly higher and more
satisfactory plane--and the country saved the years of friction and
disgraceful public disorder that characterized the enforcement of the
Congressional plan afterwards adopted.

As to the success of Mr. Lincoln's plans, had they been sanctioned, or
even had they not been repudiated by Congress, Mr. Blaine, in his
book, asserts that Mr. Lincoln, "By his four years of considerate and
successful administration, by his patient and positive trust in the
ultimate triumph of the Union, realized at last as he stood upon the
edge of the grave--he had acquired so complete an ascendancy over
the public, control in the loyal states, that ANY POLICY MATURED AND
ANNOUNCED BY HIM WOULD HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY A VAST MAJORITY OF HIS
COUNTRYMEN."

It was indicative of the sagacious foresight of Mr. Lincoln that he did
not call the Congress into special session at the close of the war, as
would have been natural and usual, before attempting the establishment
of any method for the restoration of the revolted States. The fact that
he did not do so, but was making preparations to proceed immediately
in that work on his own lines and in accordance with his own ideas, and
with the hearty accord of his entire Cabinet, of itself affords proof
that he was apprehensive of obstruction from the same element of his
party that subsequently arose in opposition to Mr. Johnson on that
question, and that he preferred to put his plans into operation before
the assembling of Congress in the next regular winter session, in order
that he might be able then to show palpable results, and induce Congress
to accept and follow up a humane, peaceful and satisfactory system of
reconstruction. Mr. Lincoln undoubtedly hoped thus to avoid unnecessary
friction. Having the quite unlimited confidence of the great mass of the
people of the country, of both parties and on both sides of the line of
hostilities, there seem to be excellent reasons for believing that
he would have succeeded, and that the extraordinary and exasperating
differences and local turmoils that followed the drastic measures which
were afterward adopted by Congress over the President's vetoes, would
have been in a very large degree avoided, and THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN NO
IMPEACHMENT--either of Mr. Lincoln had he lived, or of Mr. Johnson after
him.

It was the misfortune of the time, and of the occasion, which determined
Mr. Lincoln to institute a plan of restoration during the interim
of Congress, that the Republican party, then in absolute control of
Congress, was in no sense equipped for such a work. Its first and great
mission had been the destruction of slavery. Though not phrased in
formal fashion, that was the logic of its creation and existence. It was
brought into being purely as an anti-slavery party, illustrated in the
fact that its membership included every pronounced anti-slavery man,
known as abolitionists, in the United States. All its energies, during
all its life up to the close of the war had been bent to that end. It
had been born and bred to the work of destruction. It came to destroy
slavery, and its forces had been nurtured, to the last day of the war,
in pulling down--in fact, did not then wholly cease.

The work of restoration--the rebuilding of fallen States--had now come.
The Republican party approached that work in the hot blood of war and
the elation of victory--a condition illy fitting the demands of exalted
statesmanship so essential to perfect political effort.

Never had nation or party thrust upon it a more delicate duty or graver
responsibility. It was that of leading a conquered people to build a
new civilization wholly different from the one in ruins. It was first
to reconcile two races totally different from each other, so far as
possible to move in harmony in supplanting servile by free labor, and
the slave by a free American citizen. The transition was sudden, and the
elements antagonistic in race, culture, self-governing power--indeed, in
all the qualities which characterize a free people.

There was a wide margin for honest differences between statesmen
of experience. A universal sentiment could not obtain. The accepted
political leaders of the time were illy equipped to meet the issue--much
less those who had been brought to prominence, and too often to control,
in the hot blood of war and the frictions of the time, when intemperate
denunciation and a free use of the epithets of "rebel," and "traitor,"
had become a ready passport to public honors. It was a time when the
admonition to make haste slowly was of profound significance. A peril
greater than any other the civil war had developed, overhung the nation.
Greater than ever the demand for courage in conciliation--for divesting
the issues of all mere partyism, and the yielding of something by the
extremes, both of conservatism and radicalism.



CHAPTER II. --  THE BALTIMORE CONVENTION.

LINCOLN AND JOHNSON NOT NOMINATED AS REPUBLICANS.

Mr. Lincoln had been elected President in 1860, distinctively as a
Republican. In 1864, however, the conditions had changed. The war had
been in progress some three years, during which the insurgents had
illustrated a measure of courage, endurance, and a command of the
engineries of successful warfare that had not been anticipated by the
people of the North. It was seen that to insure the success of the
Union cause it was imperative that there should be thorough unity and
cooperation of the loyal people of all parties--that it was no time
for partisan division among those who hoped ever to see a restored
Republic--that it was necessary to lay aside, as far as possible, mere
partisan issues, and to unite, in the then approaching campaign, upon a
non-partisan, distinctively Union ticket and platform.

Mr. Lincoln had given so satisfactory an administration so wisely,
efficiently, and patriotically had he conducted his great office, that
he was on all sides conceded to be the proper person for nomination
and election. The Convention of 1861 was not called as a Republican
Convention, but distinctively as a Union Convention.

"The undersigned," so ran the call, "who by original appointment,
or subsequent delegation to fill vacancies, constitute the Executive
Committee created by the National Convention held at Chicago on the 10th
day of May, 1860, do hereby call upon all QUALIFIED VOTERS WHO DESIRE
THE UNCONDITIONAL MAINTENANCE OF THE UNION, THE SUPREMACY OF THE
CONSTITUTION, AND THE COMPLETE SUPPRESSION OF THE EXISTING REBELLION,
WITH THE CAUSE THEREOF, by vigorous war, and all apt and effective
means; to send delegates to a convention to assemble at Baltimore, on
Tuesday, the 7th day of June, 1864, at 12 o'clock noon, for the purpose
of presenting candidates for the offices of President and Vice President
of the United States."

The delegates met pursuant to this call. Hon. Edwin D. Morgan, of New
York, Chairman of the Union National Committee, called the Convention
to order, and Robert J. Breckinridge, of Kentucky, was chosen temporary
Chairman. In the course of his introductory address, Mr. Breckinridge
said:

Passing over many things which it would be right for me to say, did the
time serve, and were this the occasion--let me add,--you are a Union
party. Your origin has been referred to as having occurred eight years
ago. In one sense it is true. But you are far older than that. I see
before me not only primitive Republicans and primitive Abolitionists,
but I see also primitive Democrats and primitive Whigs. * * * As a Union
party I will follow you to the ends of the earth, and to the gates
of death. But as an Abolition party--as a Republican party--as a Whig
party--as a Democratic party--as an American party, I will not follow
you one foot.

Mr. William Dennison, of Ohio, was chosen President of the Convention.
On taking the chair he said:

'In no sense do we meet as members or representatives of either of the
old political parties which bound the people, or as the champions of any
principle or doctrine peculiar to either. The extraordinary condition
of the country since the outbreak of the rebellion has, from necessity,
taken from the issues of these parties their practical significance, and
compelled the formation of substantially new political organizations;
hence the organization of the Union Party--if party it can be called--of
which this Convention is for the purpose of its assembling, the
accredited representative, and the only test of membership in which is
an unreserved, unconditional loyalty to the Government and the Union.'

After perfecting its organization the Convention proceeded to ballot
for a nominee for the Presidency, and Mr. Lincoln was unanimously
nominated--the Missouri delegation at first casting its 22 votes for
Gen. Grant, but afterwards changing them to Mr. Lincoln, giving him the
total vote of the Convention--506--on the first and only ballot.

Nominations for the Vice Presidency being next in order, Mr. Lyman
Tremaine, of New York, an old time Democrat, nominated Daniel S.
Dickinson, another old time Democrat and a very distinguished citizen of
that State. In his nominating speech Mr. Tremaine again emphasized that
this Convention was a Union, and not a partisan body, in these words:

'It was well said by the temporary and by the permanent Chairman, that
we meet not here as Republicans. If we do, I have no place in this
Convention; but, like Daniel S. Dickinson, when the first gun was fired
on Sumter, I felt that I should prove false to my revolutionary ancestry
if I could have hesitated to cast partisan ties to the breeze, and rally
around the flag of the Union for the preservation of the Government.'

The Indiana delegation nominated Andrew Johnson, also a Democrat,
and the nomination was seconded by Mr. Stone, speaking for the Iowa
delegation.

In the earlier proceedings of the Convention there had seemed a
disposition to exclude the Tennessee delegation, and Parson Brownlow, an
old line Whig, being called on for a speech, evidenced in the course of
his remarks the small part which partisan considerations were permitted
to play in the purposes and proceedings of the Convention. He said:

'There need be no detaining this Convention for two days in discussions
of various kinds, and the idea I suggest to you as an inducement not to
exclude our delegation is, that we may take it into our heads, before
the thing is over, to present a candidate from that State in rebellion,
for the second office in the gift of the people. We have a man down
there whom it has been my good luck and bad fortune to fight untiringly
and perseveringly for the past twenty-five years--Andrew Johnson.
For the first time, in the Providence of God, three years ago we got
together on the same platform, and we are fighting the devil, Tom
Walker, and Jeff. Davis, side by side.'

Mr. Horace Maynard, a conspicuous Republican of Tennessee, said:

'Mr. President, we but represent the sentiment of those who sent here
the delegation from Tennessee, when we announce that if no one else
had made the nomination of Andrew Johnson, which is now before the
Convention, it would have been our duty to make it by one of our own
delegation. That citizen, known, honored, distinguished, has been
presented to this Convention for the second place in the gift of the
American people. It needs not that I should add words of commendation
of him here. From the time he rose in the Senate of the United States,
where he then was, on the 17th day of December, 1860, and met the
leaders of treason face to face, and denounced them there, and declared
that the laws of the country must and should be enforced, for which he
was hanged in a effigy in the City of Memphis, in his own State, by the
hands of a negro slave, and burned in effigy, I know not in how many
places throughout that portion of the country--from that time, on during
the residue of that session of the Senate until he returned to Tennessee
after the firing upon Fort Sumter, when he was mobbed in the City of
Lynchburg, Virginia--on through the memorable canvass that followed in
Tennessee, till he passed through Cumberland Gap on his way North
to invoke the aid of the Government for his people--his position of
determined and undying hostility to this rebellion that now ravages
the land, has been so well known that it is a part of the household
knowledge of many loyal families in the country. * * * When he sees your
resolutions that you have adopted here by acclamation, he will respond
to them as his sentiments, and I pledge myself by all that I have to
pledge before such an assemblage as this, that whether he be elected to
this high place, or whether he retire to private life, he will adhere to
those sentiments, and to the doctrine of those resolutions, as long as
his reason remains unimpaired, and as long as breath is given him by his
God.

Two ballots were taken on the nomination for Vice President. Mr.
Johnson, whose nomination was known to be desired by Mr. Lincoln and
his friends because of his prominence as a Southern Democrat and an
influential supporter of the Union cause in his State, received 200
votes on the first ballot, and 404 on the second--the delegations
of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri,
Tennessee, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Iowa, Minnesota, Oregon,
West Virginia, Kansas, Nebraska, Colorado, and Nevada, voting solidly
for him--Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Kentucky, Wisconsin and Minnesota,
only, being divided.

Thus a Republican and a Democrat were made the nominees of the
Convention, and its non-partisan character found further expression
in the first three Resolutions of the Platform adopted, which were as
follows:

Resolved, 1st. That it is the highest duty of every American citizen to
maintain against all their enemies the integrity of the Union and the
paramount authority of the Constitution and laws of the United States;
and that laying aside ALL DIFFERENCES OF POLITICAL OPINION, we pledge
ourselves as Union men, animated by a common sentiment and aiming at a
common object, to do everything in our power to aid the Government
in quelling by force of arms the rebellion now raging against its
authority, and in bringing to the punishment due to their crimes the
rebels and traitors arrayed against it.

2nd. That we approve the determination of the Government of the United
States not to compromise with Rebels, or to offer them any terms of
peace, except such as may be based upon an unconditional surrender
of their hostility and a return to their just allegiance to the
Constitution and laws of the United States, and that we call upon the
Government to maintain their position, and to prosecute the war with the
utmost possible vigor to the complete suppression of the Rebellion, in
full reliance upon the self-sacrificing patriotism, the heroic valor
and the undying devotion of the American people to their country and its
free institutions.

3rd. That as slavery was the cause, and now constitutes the strength, of
this Rebellion, and as it must be, always and everywhere, hostile to
the principles of Republican Government, justice and the National safety
demand its utter and complete extirpation from the soil of the Republic;
and that, while we uphold and maintain the acts and proclamation by
which the Government in its own defense, has aimed a death blow at this
gigantic evil, we are in favor, furthermore, of such an amendment to
the Constitution, to be made by the people in conformity with its
provisions, as shall terminate and forever prohibit the existence of
slavery within the limits or jurisdiction of the United States.

So there seems to be good ground for saying that this was in no sense a
partisan Convention, but, on the contrary, that it was a Convention of
the loyal people of the Northern and Border States, of all parties, who
were ready to lay aside party creeds and partisan considerations, the
better to make common cause for the preservation of the Union.

Before the war, Mr. Johnson had been a Democratic Senator from
Tennessee, and during the war, a gentleman of great influence in support
of the Union cause. So pronounced and effective had been his loyalty
that Mr. Lincoln appointed him a Brigadier General and Military Governor
of Tennessee, to accept which he resigned his seat in the Senate, and so
judicious and successful had been his administration of that office in
behalf of the Union cause and of Union men, that Tennessee was the first
of the revolted States to be readmitted to representation in Congress
after the close of the war.

So it may be said of Mr. Johnson that he was a persistent and consistent
Union Democrat of the old school--for war so long as war might be
necessary to the preservation of the Union--for peace when the war was
ended by the abandonment of the struggle by the insurgents--and for
the restoration of the Union on terms consistent with then existing
conditions--without slavery, which was dead--and the return of the
people of the South to their loyalty to and support of the Government
without debasing exactions--after they had laid down their arms.
Aggressively radical so long as the people of the South continued in
rebellion, he was considerate and merciful so soon as they yielded
themselves to the authority of law and of the Union.

Like Mr. Lincoln, he opposed the idea strenuously advanced by Sumner,
and Stevens, and that wing of the Republican party which they led, that
the States in rebellion had committed suicide and were therefore
dead and without rights, or entitled to consideration, even, in any
proposition that might be adopted for their rehabilitation.

This record very effectually disposes of the criticisms of Mr. Johnson's
course, so common after he came to the Presidency and growing out of his
disagreements with the extremists of Congress, that he had deserted
and betrayed the Republican party after it had elected him to the Vice
Presidency and thus made him Mr. Lincoln's immediate successor--the
facts of history showing that neither Mr. Lincoln nor Mr. Johnson were
elected by the Republican party as Republicans, nor by the Democratic
party as Democrats, but by a union of all parties of the North
distinctively as a Union party and on a Union ticket and platform for
the preservation of the Union and the destruction of slavery--and when
those purposes were accomplished, the war ended and the Union party
disbanded and was never heard of again. Mr. Lincoln, had he lived,
would doubtless have still been a Republican, as Mr. Johnson was still
a Democrat, as before the war--the purpose of that war and of the
Convention that nominated him having been accomplished--and under no
obligations, especially of a partisan character, to adopt or promote the
partisan purposes relative to reconstruction or otherwise, that came to
actuate the Republican party.

As stated. Mr..Johnson had, during the later years of the war, been
acting as Military Governor of Tennessee, of which State he had been a
citizen nearly all his life. His administration had been so efficient
that Tennessee was practically restored to the Union at the close of the
War, and so satisfactory to the loyal people of the country, that though
an old line Democrat and a Southern man, Mr. Johnson's nomination by the
National Convention for Vice President on the ticket with Mr. Lincoln
for President, was, as has been shown, logical and consistent. Though
a pronounced State Rights Democrat and a citizen of a Southern State
in rebellion, he regarded himself as a citizen of the United States,
to which he owed his first allegiance. State Rights meant to him, the
rights of the States IN the Union, and not OUT of the Union.

In evidence of the confidence and esteem in which Mr. Johnson was
generally held by those who knew him and knew of the valuable services
he had rendered the cause of the Union, the following letter from Mr.
Stanton, then secretary of War under Mr. Lincoln, is here reproduced.
It was written to Mr. Johnson on his tender to the War Office of his
resignation of the Military Governorship of Tennessee to accept the
office of Vice President of the United States:

War Department, Washington, March 3, 1865.

Sir:--This Department has accepted your resignation as Brigadier General
and Military Governor of Tennessee. Permit me on this occasion to tender
to you the sincere thanks of this Department for your patriotic and able
services during the eventful period through which you have exercised the
highest trust committed to your charge. In one of the darkest hours of
the great struggle for National existence, against rebellious foes, the
Government called you from the comparatively safe and easy duties of
civil life to place you in front of the enemy and in a position of
personal toil and danger, perhaps more hazardous than was encountered
by any citizen or military officer of the United States. With patriotic
promptness you assumed the post, and maintained it under circumstances
of unparalleled trial, until recent events have brought safety and
deliverance to your State and to the integrity of the Constitutional
Union, for which you so long and so gallantly periled all that is dear
to man on earth. That you may be spared to enjoy the new honors and
perform the high duties to which you have been called by the people of
the United States, is the sincere wish of one who in every official
and personal relation has found you worthy of the confidence of the
Government and the honor and esteem of your fellow citizens.

Your obedient servant,

Edwin M. Stanton.

His Excellency, Andrew Johnson, Vice-President elect.



CHAPTER III. --  MR. JOHNSON'S ACCESSION TO THE PRESIDENCY.

THE RECONSTRUCTION ERA.

Mr. Johnson succeeded to the Presidential office on the death of
Mr. Lincoln, April 15th, 1865. The conditions of the time were
extraordinary. The war, so far as operations in the field were
concerned, was at an end. The armies of the rebellion had been
vanquished and practically disbanded. The States lately in revolt
were prostrate at the feet of the conqueror, powerless for further
resistance. But the general rejoicing over the happy termination of the
strife had been inexpressibly saddened by the brutal assassination of
the President who had so wisely and successfully conducted his great
office and administered all its powers to the attainment of that happy
result, and it was not unnatural or strange that the shocking event
should greatly re-inflame the passions of the strife that the joys of
peace had at last well nigh laid.

It was an especial misfortune that he who had so wisely and safely
conducted the Nation through the conflict of arms and had foreshadowed
his beneficent measures of peace and the restoration of the shattered
Republic, was taken away as he and the Nation stood at last at the open
door of successful rehabilitation on a broader and grander basis than
had ever been reached in all previous efforts of man at Nation building.
From day to day he had watched, with his hand on the key-board, the
development and trend of events. They had resulted as he had planned,
and he had become the most conspicuous, the best loved, and the most
masterful of living man in the control of the future. In his death the
Union lost its most sagacious and best trusted leader, and, the South
its ablest, truest, and wisest friend.

It was under these circumstances that Mr. Johnson came to the Presidency
as Mr. Lincoln's successor--without a moment of warning or an hour of
preparation for the discharge of the crushing responsibilities that had
so suddenly fallen to his direction.

Actuated, doubtless, and not unnaturally, by feelings of resentment
over the manner and circumstances of Mr. Lincoln's death, Mr. Johnson at
first gave expression to a spirit of hostility toward the leaders of the
rebellion, and foreshadowed a somewhat rigorous policy in his methods
of Reconstruction in accordance with the views of the leaders of the
Republican party in Congress who had differed with Mr. Lincoln on that
subject; but later on, under the advice of his Cabinet--notably, it is
understood, of Mr. Seward--and under the responsibility of action--his
views became modified, till in time, it is not impossible, but by no
means certain, that he went even beyond the humane, natural and logical
views and purposes of Mr. Lincoln in that regard.

This did not comport with the purposes of the Congressional faction that
had opposed Mr. Lincoln's plans, which faction, under the pressure of
the general indignation over his murder, quickly rose to the absolute
control of Congress. Mr. Lincoln no longer stood in their way, and Mr.
Johnson was then comparatively unknown to the great mass of the dominant
party, and therefore at a corresponding disadvantage in the controversy.
He had risen step by step to his new position from the humblest walks
of Southern life, and each succeeding step to advancement had been made
through personal conflicts such as few men in public life in this or any
other country had ever borne. It was not unnatural, therefore, that he
should have faith in himself, and in the superiority of his judgment, or
little in that of others--and more especially when he was approached by
those who had opposed Mr. Lincoln's plans in an attitude of dictation,
and with suggestions and unsought advice as to the course he should
pursue in the then absorbing question of the restoration of the States
lately in rebellion--himself a citizen of one of those States, and for
the preservation of which, as a State in the Union, he had staked his
life.

As with Mr. Lincoln, so with Mr. Johnson--the first thing to be done, or
sought, was the restoration of the Union by the return of the States
in rebellion to their allegiance to the Constitution and laws of the
country. Mr. Lincoln, to use one of his characteristic Western phrases,
had "blazed the way," and Mr. Johnson took up that trail. A few weeks
after his inauguration he issued a Proclamation outlining a plan for
the reorganization of the State of North Carolina. That paper was
confessedly designed as a general plan and basis for Executive action in
the restoration of all the seceded States. Mr. Lincoln had, of course,
foreseen that that subject would come up very shortly, in the then
condition of affairs in the South, and it had therefore been considered
in his later Cabinet meetings, as stated, more especially at the
meeting immediately preceding his death, and a plan very similar to that
afterwards determined upon by Mr. Johnson, if not identically so, was
at that meeting finally adopted. That plan was set out in the North
Carolina Proclamation, the essential features and general character of
which became so conspicuous a factor in the subsequent controversies
between the President and Congress. It was as follows:

Whereas: The Fourth Section of the Fourth Article of the Constitution
of the United States declares that the United States shall guarantee
to every State in the Union a Republican form of Government, and
shall protect each of them against invasion and domestic violence; and
whereas, the President of the United States is, by the Constitution,
made Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy, as well as chief civil
executive officer of the United States, and is bound by solemn oath
faithfully to execute the office of President of the United States,
and to take care that the laws be faithfully executed; and whereas, the
rebellion which has been waged by a portion of the people of the United
States against the properly constituted authority of the Government
thereof in the most violent and revolting form, but whose organized
and armed forces have now been almost entirely overcome has, in its
revolutionary progress, deprived the people of the State of North
Carolina of all civil government: and whereas, it becomes necessary and
proper to carry out and enforce the obligations of the United States
to the people of North Carolina in securing them it, the enjoyment of a
republican form of Government:

Now, therefore, in obedience to the high and solemn duties imposed upon
me by the Constitution of the United States, and for the purpose of
enabling the loyal people of said State to organize a State Government;
whereby justice may be established, domestic tranquility insured, I,
Andrew Johnson, President of the United States and Commander-in-Chief
of the Army and Navy of the United States, do hereby appoint William W.
Holden Provisional Governor of the State of North Carolina, whose duty
it shall be, at the earliest practicable period, to prescribe such
rules and regulations as may be necessary and proper for convening it
Convention, composed of delegates to be chosen by that portion of the
people of the said State who are loyal all to the United States and
no others, for the purpose of altering or amending the Constitution
thereof; and with authority to exercise, within the limits of said
State, all the powers necessary and proper to enable such loyal
people of the State of North Carolina to restore said State to its
constitutional relations to the Federal Government, and to present such
a republican form of State Government as will entitle the said State
to the guarantee of the United States therefor, and its people to
protection by the United States against invasion, insurrection and
domestic violence: PROVIDED, that in any election that may be hereafter
held for choosing delegates to any State Convention as aforesaid, no
person shall be qualified as an elector, or shall be eligible as a
member of such Convention, unless he shall have previously taken and
subscribed to the oath of amnesty, as set forth in the President's
Proclamation of May 29th, A. D. 1865, and is a voter qualified as
prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the State of North Carolina
in force immediately before the 20th of May, A. D. 1861, the date of
the so-called ordinance of secession; and the said Convention, when
convened, or the legislature that may be thereafter assembled, will
prescribe the qualifications of electors, and the eligibility of persons
to hold office under the Constitution and laws of the State--a power
the people of the several States comprising the Federal Union have
rightfully exercised from the origin of the Government to the present
time. And I do hereby direct:

First--That the Military Commander of the Department, and all officers
in the Military and Naval service, aid and assist the said Provisional
Governor in carrying into effect this Proclamation, and they are
enjoined to abstain from, in any way, hindering, impeding, or
discouraging the loyal people from the organization of a State
Government as herein authorized.

Second--That the Secretary of State proceed to put in force all laws
of the United States, the administration whereof belongs to the State
Department, applicable to the geographical limits aforesaid.

Third--That the Secretary of the Treasury proceed to nominate for
appointment assessors of taxes, and collectors of customs and revenue,
and such other officers of the Treasury Department as are authorized by
law, and put in execution the revenue laws of the United States within
the provisional limits aforesaid. In making appointments, the preference
shall be given to qualified loyal persons residing in the districts
where their respective duties are to be performed. But if suitable
residents of the district shall not be found, then persons residing in
other States or districts shall be appointed.

Fourth--That the Postmaster General proceed to establish postoffices and
post routes, and put into execution the postal laws of the United States
within the said State, giving to loyal residents the preference of
appointments: but if suitable residents are not found, then to appoint
agents, etc., from other States.

Fifth--That District Judges for the judicial districts in which North
Carolina is included, proceed to hold courts within said State, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act of Congress. The Attorney
General will instruct the proper officers to libel, and bring to
judgment, confiscation and sale, property subject to confiscation, and
enforce the administration of justice within said State in all matters
within the cognizance and jurisdiction of the Federal Courts.

Sixth--That the Secretary of the Navy take possession of all public
property belonging to the Navy Department within said geographical
limits, and put in operation all Acts of Congress in relation to naval
affairs having application to said State.

Seventh--That the Secretary of the Interior put in force all laws
relating to the Interior Department applicable to the geographical
limits aforesaid.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the United States to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington, this 29th day of May, in the year, of
our Lord 1865, and of the Independence of the United States the 89th.

By the President: Andrew Johnson. William H. Seward. Secretary of State.

North Carolina was the first of the revolted States to which this
identical plan of reconstruction, or reorganization, was applied by Mr.
Johnson. Its application to the several States then lately in revolt,
was continued till the meeting of Congress in the following December,
1865.

On this matter Mr. Johnson, himself, testifies in his communication to
the Senate in 1867, relating to the removal of Mr. Stanton, that "This
grave subject (Reconstruction) had engaged the attention of Mr. Lincoln
in the last days of his life, and the plan according to which it was
to be managed had been prepared and was ready for adoption. A leading
feature of that plan was that it was to be carried out by Executive
authority. * * * The first business, transacted in the Cabinet after I
became President was this unfinished business of my predecessor. A plan
or scheme of reconstruction had been prepared for Mr. Lincoln by Mr.
Stanton. It was approved, and at the earliest moment practicable was
applied, in the form of a proclamation, to the State of North Carolina,
and afterwards became the basis of action in turn for the other States."

Mr. Stanton also testified before the House Impeachment Committee
of 1867, that he had "entertained no doubt of the authority of the
President to take measures for the reorganization of the rebel States
on the plan proposed, during the vacation of Congress, and agreed in the
plan specified in the proclamation in the case of North Carolina."

In the first attempt to impeach the President, in 1867, Mr. Johnson's
method of Reconstruction was the most conspicuous feature of the
prosecution. It was insisted by the extremists that it was a departure
from Mr. Lincoln's plan--an unwarranted assumption of authority by Mr.
Johnson--that its purpose was the recognition of the people of the South
as American citizens with the rights of such, and even as an act not
far removed from treason. In reference to this action of the President,
General Grant was called before the Committee and testified as follows:

Question: I wish to know whether, at or about the time of the war being
ended, you advised the President that it was, in your judgment, best to
extend a liberal policy towards the people of the South, and to restore
as speedily as possible the fraternal relations that existed prior to
the war between the sections?

Answer: I know that immediately after the close of the rebellion there
was a very fine feeling manifested in the South, and I thought we ought
to take advantage of it as soon as possible.

Ques. I understood you to say that Mr. Lincoln had inaugurated a policy
intended to restore these governments?

Ans. Yes Sir.

Ques. You were present when the subject was brought before the Cabinet?

Ans. I was present, I think, twice before the assassination of Mr.
Lincoln, when a plan was read.

Ques. I want to know whether the plan adopted by Mr. Johnson was
substantially the plan which had been inaugurated by Mr. Lincoln as the
basis for his future action.

Ans. Yes sir: substantially. I do not know but that it was verbatim the
same.

Ques. I suppose the very paper of Mr. Lincoln was the one acted on?

Ans. I should think so. I think that the very paper which I heard read
twice while Mr. Lincoln was President, was the one which was carried
right through.

Ques. What paper was that?

Ans. The North Carolina Proclamation.

In additional testimony that Mr. Johnson was endeavoring to carry out
Mr. Lincoln's methods of reconstruction, the following extracts from
a speech by Gov. O. P. Morton, of Indiana, delivered at Richmond, that
State, Sept. 29th, 1865, are here inserted:

An impression has gotten abroad in the North that Mr. Johnson has
devised some new policy by which improper facilities are granted for the
restoration of the rebel States, and that he is presenting improperly
and unnecessarily hurrying forward the work of reconstruction, and that
he is offering improper facilities for restoring those who have been
engaged in the rebellion to the possession of their civil and political
rights.

It is one of my purposes here this evening to show that so far as his
policy of amnesty and reconstruction is concerned, he has absolutely
presented nothing new, but that he has simply presented, and is simply
continuing THE POLICY WHICH MR. LINCOLN PRESENTED TO THE NATION ON THE
8TH OF DECEMBER, 1863. Mr. Johnson's policy differs from Mr. Lincoln's
in some restrictions it contains, which Mr. Lincoln's did not contain.
His plan of reconstruction is absolutely and simply that of Mr. Lincoln,
nothing more or less, with one difference only, that Mr. Lincoln
required that one-tenth of the people of the disloyal States should be
willing to embrace his plan of reconstruction, whereas Mr. Johnson says
nothing about the number; but, so far as it has been acted upon yet, it
has been done by a number much greater than one-tenth. * * * Their plans
of amnesty and reconstruction cannot be distinguished from each other
except in the particulars already mentioned, that Mr. Johnson proposed
to restrict certain persons from taking the oath, unless they have a
special pardon from him, whom Mr. Lincoln permitted to come forward and
take the oath without it. * * * That was Mr. Lincoln's policy at
the time he was nominated for re-election by the Union Convention at
Baltimore, last summer; and in that convention the party sustained him
and strongly endorsed his whole policy, of which this was a prominent
part. MR. LINCOLN WAS TRIUMPHANTLY AND OVERWHELMINGLY RE-ELECTED UPON
THAT POLICY.

In his last annual message to Congress, December, 1864, he again brings
forward this same policy of his, and presents it to the Nation.

Again, on the 12th of April, 1865, only two days before his death, he
referred to and presented this policy of amnesty and reconstruction.
That speech may be called his last speech, his dying words to his
people. It was after Richmond had been evacuated. It was the day after
they had received the news of Lee's surrender. Washington City was
illuminated. A large crowd came in front of the White House and Mr.
Lincoln spoke to them from one of the windows. He referred to the
organization of Louisiana under his plan of amnesty and reconstruction,
and in speaking of it he gave the history of his policy. He said:

In my annual message of December, 1863, and accompanying the
Proclamation, I presented a plan of reconstruction, as the phrase
goes, which I promised if adopted by any State, would be acceptable and
sustained by the Executive Government of this Nation. I distinctively
stated that this was a plan which might possibly be acceptable, and also
distinctively protested that the Executive claimed no right to say when
or whether members should be admitted to seats in Congress from such
States.

The new constitution of Louisiana, (said Mr. Lincoln) declaring
emancipation for the whole State, practically applies the Proclamation
to that part previously exempted. It does not adopt apprenticeship for
freed people, and is silent, as it could not well be otherwise, about
the admission of members to Congress. As it applied to Louisiana, every
member of the Cabinet approved the plan of the message. * * * Now, we
find Mr. Lincoln, just before his death; referring in warm and strong
terms to his policy of amnesty and reconstruction, and giving it
his endorsement; giving to the world that which had never been given
before--the history of that plan and policy--stating that it had been
presented and endorsed by every member of that able and distinguished
Cabinet of 1863. Mr. Lincoln may be said to have died holding out to the
Nation his policy of amnesty and reconstruction. It was held out by him
at the very time the rebels laid down their arms. Mr. Lincoln died by
the hand of an assassin and Mr. Johnson came into power. He took Mr.
Lincoln's Cabinet as he had left it and he took Mr. Lincoln's policy of
amnesty and reconstruction as he had left it, and as he had presented
it to the world only two days before his death. MR. JOHNSON HAS HONESTLY
AND FAITHFULLY ATTEMPTED TO ADMINISTER THAT POLICY, which had been
bequeathed by that man around whose grave a whole world has gathered as
mourners. I refer to these for the purpose of showing that Mr. Johnson's
policy is not a new one, but that he is simply carrying out a policy
left to him by his lamented predecessor--a policy that had been ENDORSED
BY THE WHOLE NATION IN THE REELECTION OF MR. LINCOLN.

Again Gov. Morton said:

An impression has gotten abroad in the North that Mr. Johnson has
devised some new policy by which improper facilities are granted for the
restoration of the rebel States and that he is presenting improperly and
unnecessarily hurrying forward the work of reconstruction, and that
he is offering improper facilities for restoring those who have been
engaged in rebellion, to the possession of their civil and political
rights. It is one of my purposes here this evening to show that so
far as his policy of amnesty and reconstruction is concerned, he has
absolutely presented nothing new, that he has simply presented, and is
SIMPLY CONTINUING THE POLICY WHICH MR. LINCOLN PRESENTED TO THE NATION
ON THE 8TH OF DECEMBER, 1863.

The following are extracts from Mr. Johnson's Message to Congress, in
December, 1865, on the re-assembling of that body--the first session of
the 39th Congress. Indicating, as it did, a policy of reconstruction at
variance with the views of the Congressional leaders, it may be said
to have been another incident out of which arose the conditions that
finally, led to his impeachment. Mr. Johnson said:

I found the States suffering from the effects of a civil war. Resistance
to the General Government appeared to have exhausted itself. The United
States had recovered possession of its forts and arsenals, and their
armies were in the occupation of every State which had attempted to
secede. Whether the territory within the limits of those States should
be held as conquered territory, under Military authority emanating from
the President as head of the Army, was the first question that presented
itself for decision. Military Governments, established for an indefinite
period, would have offered no security for the early suppression of
discontent; would have divided the people into the vanquishers and the
vanquished; and would have envenomed hatred rather than have restored
affection. Once established, no precise limit to their continuance was
conceivable. They would have occasioned an incalculable and exhausting
expense. * * * The powers of patronage and rule which would have been
exercised, under the President, over a vast and populous and naturally
wealthy region, are greater than, under a less extreme necessity, I
should be willing to entrust to any one man. They are such as, for
myself, I should never, unless on occasion of great emergency, consent
to exercise. The wilful use of such powers, if continued through
a period of years, would have endangered the purity of the General
Administration and the liberty of the States which remained loyal. * * *
The policy of military rule over conquered territory would have implied
that the States whose inhabitants may have taken part in the rebellion
had, by the act of those inhabitants, ceased to exist. But the
true theory is, that ALL PRETENDED ACTS OF SECESSION WERE, FROM THE
BEGINNING, NULL AND VOID. THE STATES CAN NOT COMMIT TREASON, nor screen
the individual citizens who may have committed treason, any more than
they can make valid treaties, or engage in lawful commerce with any
foreign power. The States attempting to secede placed themselves in a
condition where their vitality was IMPAIRED, BUT NOT EXTINGUISHED--THEIR
FUNCTIONS SUSPENDED, BUT NOT DESTROYED.

Reports had been circulated in the North, and found ready credence with
a great many, that the people of the South were as a rule, insubordinate
and indisposed to accept the changed conditions there, and that
insubordination and turmoil were the rule. To ascertain the facts in
this regard, during the later months of 1865 Mr. Johnson commissioned
General Grant and others to make a tour of inspection and investigation
of the condition of affairs in the Southern States, especially as to
their disposition with reference to the acceptance by the people of
those States, of their changed relations to the Union, and to report to
him the results of their observations.

On the 10th of December, 1865, on motion of Mr. Cowan, of Pennsylvania,
the following resolution was adopted by the Senate:

Resolved, That the President of the United States be, and he is hereby
requested to furnish the Senate information of the state of that
portion of the Union lately in rebellion; whether the rebellion has been
suppressed and the United States put again in possession of the States
in which it existed; whether the United States courts are restored, post
offices re-established and the revenue collected; and also whether the
people of those States have reorganized their State governments, and
whether they are yielding obedience to the laws and Government of the
United States. And at the same time furnish to the Senate copies of such
reports as he may have received from such officers or agents appointed
to visit that portion of the Union.

December 19th, 1865, in response to this resolution of the Senate, the
President transmitted the following Message to the Senate inclosing Gen.
Grant's Report:

In reply to the resolution adopted by the Senate on the 12th inst., I
have the honor to state that the rebellion waged by a portion of the
people against the properly constituted authorities of the Government
of the United States has been suppressed; that the United States are in
possession of every State in which the insurrection existed; and that,
as far as could be done, the courts of the United States have been
restored, postoffices re-established, and steps taken to put into
effective operation the revenue laws of the country. As the result of
the measures instituted by the Executive, with the view of inducing a
resumption of the functions of the States comprehended in the inquiry
of the Senate, the people in North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia,
Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee, have
reorganized their respective State Governments, and 'are yielding their
obedience to the laws and Government of the United States' with more
willingness and greater promptitude than under the circumstances
could reasonably have been anticipated. The proposed amendment to the
Constitution, providing for the abolition of slavery forever within the
limits of the country, has been ratified by each one of those States,
with the exception of Mississippi, from which no official information
has yet been received; and in nearly all of them measures have
been adopted or are now pending, to confer upon freedmen rights
and privileges which are essential to their comfort, protection and
security. In Florida and Texas, the people are making considerable
progress in restoring their State Governments, and no doubt is
entertained that they will at the Federal Government. In that portion of
the Union lately in rebellion, the aspect of affairs is more promising
than, in view of all the circumstances, could have been expected. The
people throughout the entire South evince a laudable desire to renew
their allegiance to the Government, and to repair the devastations of
war by a prompt and cheerful return to peaceful pursuits. An abiding
faith is entertained that their actions will conform to their
professions, and that, in acknowledging the supremacy of the
Constitution and laws of the United States, their loyalty will be given
unreservedly to the Government; whose leniency they cannot fail to
appreciate, and whose fostering care will soon restore them to a
condition of prosperity. It is true, that in some of the States the
demoralizing effects of war are to be seen in occasional disorders; but
these are local in character, not frequent in occurrence, and are
really disappearing as the authority of the civil law is extended and
sustained. * * * From all the information in my possession, and from
that which I have recently derived from the most reliable authority, I
am induced to cherish the belief that sectional animosity is surely
and rapidly merging itself into a spirit of nationality, and that
representation, connected with a properly adjusted system of taxation,
will result in a harmonious restoration of the relations of the States
and the National Union.

Andrew Johnson.

The following is General Grant's Report transmitted to Congress with the
foregoing Message:

Headquarters Armies of the United States, Washington, D. C., Dec. 18,
1865.

Sir:--In reply to your note of the 16th inst., requesting a report from
me giving such information as I may be possessed, coming within the
scope of the inquiries made by the Senate of the United States, in their
resolution of the 12th inst., I have the honor to submit the following:

With your approval, and also that of the Honorable Secretary of War, I
left Washington City on the 27th of last month for the purpose of making
a tour of inspection through some of the Southern States, or States
lately in rebellion, and to see what changes were necessary to be made
in the disposition of the Military forces of the country; how these
forces could be reduced and expenses curtailed, etc., and to learn as
far as possible, the feelings and intentions of the citizens of those
States towards the General Government.

The State of Virginia being so accessible to Washington City, and
information from this quarter therefore being readily obtained, I
hastened through the State without conversing or meeting with any of its
citizens. In Raleigh, North Carolina, I spent one day; in Charleston,
South Carolina, I spent two days; Savannah and Augusta, Georgia, each
one day. Both in traveling and while stopping, I saw much and conversed
freely with the citizens of those States, as well as with officers
of the Army who have been stationed among them. The following are the
conclusions come to by me:

I am satisfied that the mass of the thinking men of the South accept
the present situation of affairs in good faith. The questions which
have heretofore divided the sentiments of the people of the two
sections--Slavery and State Rights, or the right of a State to secede
from the Union--they regard as having been settled forever by the
highest tribunal--arms--that man can resort to. I was pleased to
learn from the leading men whom I met, that they not only accepted the
decision arrived at, as final, but that now, when the smoke of battle
has cleared away, and time has been given for reflection, this decision
has been a fortunate one for the whole country, they receiving like
benefits from it with those who opposed them in the field and in
council.

Four years of war, during which law was executed only at the point of
the bayonet throughout the States in rebellion, have left the people
possibly in a condition not to yield that ready obedience to civil
authority the American people have been in the habit of generally
yielding. This would render the presence of small garrisons throughout
those States necessary until such time as labor returns to its proper
channels and civil authority is fully established. I did not meet
anyone, either those holding places under the Government or citizens of
the Southern States, who think it practicable to withdraw the Military
from the South at present. The white and black mutually require
the protection of the General Government. There is such universal
acquiescence in the authority of the General Government throughout
the portions of the country visited by me, that the mere presence of
a military force, without regard to numbers, is sufficient to maintain
order. The good of the country and economy require that the force kept
in the interior where there are many freedmen (elsewhere in the Southern
States than at forts upon the sea coast, no more is necessary,) should
all be white troops. The reasons for this are obvious without mentioning
any of them. The presence of black troops, lately slaves, demoralizes
labor both by their advice and by furnishing in their camps a resort
for freedmen for long distances around. White troops generally excite no
opposition, and therefore a small number of them can maintain order in
a given district. Colored troops must be kept in bodies sufficient to
defend themselves. It is not thinking men who would use violence towards
any class of troops sent among them by the General Government, but the
ignorant in some cases might, and the late slave seems to be imbued with
the idea that the property of his late master should of right belong to
him, or at least should have no protection from the colored soldiers.
There is danger of collision being brought on by such causes.

My observations lead me to the conclusion that the citizens of the
Southern States are anxious to return to self government within the
Union as soon as possible; that while reconstructing they want and
require protection from the Government; that they are in earnest
in wishing to do what they think is required by the Government, not
humiliating to them as citizens, and that if such is pointed out they
would pursue it in good faith. It is to be regretted that there cannot
be a greater commingling at this time between the citizens of the two
sections, and particularly with THOSE ENTRUSTED WITH THE LAWMAKING
POWER.

I did not give, the operation of the Freedmen's Bureau that attention I
would have done if more time had been at my disposal. Conversations on
the subject, however, with officers connected with the Bureau, led me
to think that in some of the States its affairs have not been conducted
with good judgment and economy, and that the belief, widely spread
among the freedmen of the Southern States, that the land of their former
masters will, at least in part, be divided among them, has come from
the agents of this Bureau. This belief is seriously interfering with the
willingness of the freedmen to make contracts for the coming year. In
some form the Freedmen's Bureau is an absolute necessity until civil law
is established and enforced, securing to the freedmen their rights and
full protection. At present, however, it is independent of the Military
establishment of the country, and seems to be operated by the different
agents of the Bureau according to their individual notions, every where.
Gen. Howard, the able head of the Bureau, made friends by the just
and fair instructions and advice he gave; but the complaint in South
Carolina was that, when he left, things went on as before. Many, perhaps
the majority of the agents of the Bureau, advised the freedmen that by
their industry they must expect to live. To this end they endeavor to
secure employment for them: to see that both contracting parties
comply with their agreements. In some instances; I am sorry to say,
the freedman's mind does not seem to be disabused of the idea that a
freedman has a right to live without care or provision for the future.
The effect of the belief in the division of lands is idleness and
accumulation in camps, towns, and cities. In such cases, I think it will
be found that vice and disease will tend to the extermination, or great
reduction of the colored race. It cannot be expected that the opinions
held by men at the South can be changed in a day, and therefore the
freedmen require for a few years not only laws to protect them, but the
fostering care of those who will give them good counsel and in whom they
can rely.

U. S. Grant, Lieutenant General.

This report was at once vigorously denounced in and out of Congress,
by the extremists. Mr. Sumner characterized it in the Senate, as a
"whitewashing report." The standing of General Grant in the country at
large, however, was such that few had the indiscretion to attack him
openly.

The controlling element of the party which had elected Lincoln and
Johnson, had acquiesced for a time in the plan of reconstruction
foreshadowed by Mr. Lincoln and adopted by Mr. Johnson, but during the
summer of 1865, frictions developed between Mr. Johnson and those who
on Mr. Lincoln's death had assumed the leadership in the work of
reconstruction and other matters of administration, came to take the
opposite ground, from the first occupied by Sumner and other extremists
in Congress--that the States lately in rebellion had destroyed
themselves by their own act of war, and had thereby forfeited all the
rights of Statehood and were but conquered provinces, subject solely to
the will of the conqueror.

From that point their ways parted and widened from month to month,
till bitter hostility, political and personal, came to mark even their
official intercourse.

Mr. Johnson was practically unknown to the great mass of the people
of the North till he succeeded to the Presidency. He was in no sense
regarded as or assumed to be the leader of the dominant party; while
those who on Mr. Lincoln's death became leaders of the dominant party
in opposition to Mr. Johnson's administration and policies, were
widely known and of long public experience, and had correspondingly the
confidence of their party.

So, in the strife that ensued, as it became embittered with the lapse
of time, Mr. Johnson was at great disadvantage, and made little or
no headway, but rather lost ground as the controversy progressed. His
moderate, conservative views, radically expressed, in regard to what
should be the methods of reconstruction and the restoration of the
Union, found little favor with the mass of the veterans of the Union
armies who had but lately returned from the victorious fields of the
South, their blood not yet cooled after the fury and heat of the strife
while to many, who had witnessed the horrors of war at a safe distance,
with the cessation of hostilities in the field, to which they had been
only anxious spectators, became suddenly enthused over issues that
others had fought out in battle, and vigorously vicious towards Mr.
Johnson for presuming to treat the conquered people of the South as
American citizens and entitled to the rights of such, after having
laid down their arms and peacefully returned to their homes and their
respective callings.

This temper, permeating, as it did, the dominant party of practically
every Northern State, was not unstintingly reflected upon the National
Capitol in the return to Congress of a large majority in both Houses,
of men who sympathized with and reflected back again upon their
constituents the most extreme views as to what should be the policy of
the Government towards the South.

These views characterized the legislation of the time. Partisan rancor
was unbridled, and found expression not only in coercive legislation of
various grades of severity, but in placing the Southern States generally
under almost absolute military control, and in the practical abrogation
of the common rights of American citizenship in most of them.

Quite every act of this sort of legislation was passed over the official
protest of the President, and each of these protests seemed but to add
emphasis to each succeeding act of Congress in that line, till it
seemed that there could be no end to the strife, so long as Mr. Johnson
remained in the Presidential office.

The ostensible basis of the disagreement which in a few months after
the accession of Mr. Johnson to the Presidency began to develop
between himself and the Republican leaders in Congress, was the plan
of reconstruction put in operation by him during the recess of Congress
that year, 1865, and outlined in his North Carolina Proclamation. It
availed not, that that plan had been adopted originally by Mr. Lincoln
a few days before his death--that it had been concurred in by his entire
Cabinet and would undoubtedly have been carried out successfully by him
had he lived that plan was made the ground of criticism of Mr. Johnson
by the extreme party element in control of Congress, which persistently
accused him of having abandoned the plan initiated by Mr. Lincoln, and
of setting up another of his own, for purely personal and ambitious
purposes, and to the detriment of the peace of the country.

Mr. Johnson may have been opinionated and headstrong, a characteristic
of a great many people of strong convictions of duty and purpose; while
the overwhelming numerical strength of the dominant party in and out of
Congress made it seemingly indifferent, reckless and inconsiderate
of the convictions, as of the rights and prerogatives of the Chief
Executive treating him more as a clerk whose sole duty it was to
register without suggestion the decrees of Congress.

That Mr. Lincoln, had he lived, would have pursued much the same policy
of reconstruction, is clearly indicated by the established fact that he
had determined to adopt precisely the initial measures thereto which
Mr. Johnson did inaugurate and attempt to carry out. But Mr. Lincoln's
superior ability in statecraft, his rare tact and knowledge of men,
and his capacity for moulding and directing public opinion, seeming
to follow where he actually led, would doubtless have secured a more
favorable result. And more than all else, it can scarcely be doubted,
that the unbounded confidence of the people in his patriotism and
capacity to direct public affairs, would have enabled him to dictate
terms of reconstruction strictly on the lines he had marked out, and
would have commanded the general support of the country, regardless of
partisan divisions, notwithstanding the well known fact that at the time
of his death there were unmistakable indications of alienation from him
of the extreme element of his party because of his conservative views as
to the proper methods of reconstruction.

Meantime, in the effort to hamper the President, as far as it was
possible for Congress to do, the Tenure-of-Office Act was passed,
early in 1867. The ostensible purpose of that Act was to restrict the
authority of the President in the selection of his Cabinet advisers, and
his power over appointments generally. Its specific purpose, at least so
far as the House of Representatives was concerned, and measurably so
in the Senate, was to prevent his removal of the Secretary of War, Mr.
Stanton, with the manifest if not avowed intent, as the sequel shows, to
make that Secretary not only independent of his chief, but also to make
him the immediate instrument of Congress in whatever disposition of the
Army, or of military affairs generally relating to the government of the
Southern States, the majority of Congress might dictate. In a word, the
Congress, in that Act, virtually assumed, or attempted to assume, that
control of the Army which the Constitution vests on the President.

The first effort to impeach the President, in 1867, was based upon
a general accusation of high crimes and misdemeanors without literal
specification. The second, in 1868, was based upon his alleged violation
of the Tenure-of-Office Act, in the removal of Mr. Stanton.

While it is undoubted, as already shown, that Mr. Lincoln and Mr.
Johnson were in accord as to the methods to be adopted for the
restoration of the revolted States, it was Mr. Johnson's misfortune that
he had not Mr. Lincoln's capacity for so great and so peculiar a task;
though a gentleman of proven patriotism, ability, of a kindly, genial
nature, and with record of valuable public service. Hampered by his lack
of political finesse and intricate knowledge of state-craft, and in view
of the conditions of that time, and the people with whom he had to deal,
it was obvious from the outset that the result of the controversy
could hardly be otherwise than disastrous to him. Mr. Lincoln would
undoubtedly have been met by the same character of opposition, and from
the same source. But there would have been the appearance at least of
mutual concession, and while the APPEARANCE of concession would have
been on Mr. Lincoln's side, the actual concession, so far as essentials
were involved, would have been on the other.

Mr. Johnson was a Democrat of pronounced type and profound convictions,
and in no sense did he depart from his faith. He belonged to the
school of Jackson and Jefferson. He had not the electric intuitions and
impetuous will of the former, nor the culture and genius of the latter.
He adhered more religiously to the letter of the Constitution than
either. To him it was the one law of supreme obligation, that never
ceased its guarantees. As fittingly expressed by one of his Counsel, Mr.
Groesbeck, in the trial: "He was not learned and scholarly--not a man
of many ideas or of much speculation--but the Constitution had been the
study of his life, and by a law of the mind he was only the truer to
that which he did know."

As had Mr. Lincoln, Mr. Johnson keenly appreciated the importance of the
people of the South returning at once to the Union, free and independent
American citizens, clothed with all the rights, privileges and
obligations common to such. In his Cabinet Councils, and to a degree
supreme in that board sat William H. Seward, as he had throughout Mr.
Lincoln's administration, than whom the Republic has produced no wiser,
more sagacious, or patriotic statesman. He gave the subject his intense
devotion in the maturity of his great powers.

There too, sat Secretary Welles, another of Mr. Lincoln's advisers, and
a devoted friend of the Constitution and the sanctity of the Union. Each
of these men, thoroughly patriotic, and efficient, and untiring in the
administration of their respective Departments, had commenced with the
deluge of blood, and they now hoped to crown their official careers by
a triumphant peace that would Honor their lives and glorify the Nation.
These men had a salutary influence over Mr. Johnson, and greatly
modified the asperities of his disposition.

Mr. Johnson believed, as did Mr. Lincoln, that the revolted States were
still States of the Union--that all the pretended acts of secession
were null and void, and that the loyal people therein had the right to
reconstruct their State Governments on the basis proposed to them first
by Mr. Lincoln, and after him by Mr. Johnson, and thus the right to
representation in the General Government.

It was upon this question that parties divided during the reconstruction
period. Mr. Lincoln, foreseeing danger in such a division, was anxious
to bring those States into such relation that the people generally
would consider them as virtually in the Union, without reference to the
abstract question. It was with this view, undoubtedly, that he advocated
the admission of Members and Senators whenever one-tenth of the voting
population of 1860 should organize State Governments and ask for
readmission. He would not only not countenance, but repelled the
doctrine of "State Suicide," as it was called, and which came to
characterize the methods of reconstruction subsequently adopted.

It is true, that on many occasions Mr. Johnson charged that the Congress
was only a Congress of part of the States, and that its acts were
therefore without validity. Yet he continued to execute those laws,
and what to him was a very unpleasant duty, the law which set aside
the State Governments organized under his own direction, so that
notwithstanding his violent denunciations of the acts of Congress, and
his personal opinions, he did not presume to act upon them. Angry and
undignified language was uttered on both sides. Many of his speeches
were violent and in bad taste and temper. So were a great many speeches
uttered by senators and members of the House, and those bodies too often
acted upon them.

It is therefore but repeating recorded history to say that Mr. Johnson
was earnestly seeking to carry out Mr. Lincoln's plan of reconstruction,
which was upon consultation with his entire Cabinet, more especially
with Mr. Stanton, adopted by him as the basis for the restoration of the
revolted States.

Yet, with these facts of record, that action was afterwards assailed
by the Republican leaders in and out of Congress, who assumed to have
become Mr. Lincoln's executors in the work of reconstruction, as not
only an abandonment of the plan instituted by him, but a surrender
of the issues fought out and the results accomplished by the war just
closed notwithstanding very many of these critics of Mr. Johnson had but
a few months before criticised Mr. Lincoln with quite equal severity for
his suggestion of this same method of restoration.

Nor will it suffice to say that, though professing submission and
loyalty, the people of the South were still hostile to the Union, and
that there was no safety there for Union men. It is true that there came
to be violence and disorder there upon the rejection by Congress of Mr.
Johnson's plan of restoration.

These were the inevitable results of the conditions. There would also
have been disorder and violence in the North and to a far greater
degree, had the results of the war been reversed--an arbitrary and
tyrannical system of restoration insisted upon--the established order of
things destroyed homes broken up the people impoverished, and hordes
of unscrupulous adventurers swarmed up from the South and overrun
the country in pursuit of schemes of political chicanery and personal
ambition, peculation and plunder, as was the South after the close of
the war.

But when the fight was on, an overwhelmingly partisan House, as a last
resort, in the hope of at once ending, by removal, all opposition on
the part of the President to the views and aims of the dominant party
in Congress, resorted to the first project of impeachment set out in the
succeeding chapter.



CHAPTER IV. --  FIRST ATTEMPT TO IMPEACH THE PRESIDENT.

THE ASHLEY INDICTMENT.

The initiation of formal proceedings for the impeachment and removal of
President Johnson occurred in the House of Representatives on January
7th, 1867, in the introduction of three separate resolutions for his
impeachment, by Messrs. Loan and Kelso, of Missouri, and Mr. Ashley of
Ohio. As Mr. Ashley's Resolution was the only one acted on by the House,
only the proceedings had thereon are here given, as follows:

Mr. Speaker:--I rise to perform a painful but, nevertheless, to me, an
imperative duty; a duty which I think ought not longer to be postponed,
and which cannot, without criminality on our part, be neglected. I had
hoped, sir, that this duty would have devolved upon an older and more
experienced member of this House than myself. Prior to our adjournment I
asked a number of gentlemen to offer the resolution which I introduced,
but upon which I failed to obtain a suspension of the rules.

Confident, sir, that the loyal people of this country demand the
adoption of some such proposition as I am about to submit, I am
determined that no effort on my part shall be wanting to see that their
expectations are not disappointed. * * * On my responsibility as a
Representative, and in the presence of this House, and before the
American people, I charge Andrew Johnson, Vice President and acting
President of the United States, with the commission of acts which in
contemplation of the Constitution, are high crimes and misdemeanors, for
which, in my judgment, he ought to be impeached. I therefore submit the
following:

I do impeach Andrew Johnson, Vice President and acting President of the
United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors:

I charge him with a usurpation of power and violation of law:

In that he has corruptly used the appointing power;

In that he has corruptly used the pardoning power;

In that he has corruptly used the veto power;

In that he has corruptly disposed of public property of the United
States;

In that he has corruptly interfered in elections, and committed acts
which, in contemplation of the Constitution, are high crimes and
misdemeanors: Therefore,

BE IT RESOLVED, That the Committee on the Judiciary be, and they are
hereby, authorized to inquire into the official conduct of Andrew
Johnson, Vice President of the United States, discharging the powers and
duties of the office of President of the United States, and to report to
this House, whether, in their opinion, the said Andrew Johnson, while in
said office, has been guilty of acts which are designed or calculated to
overthrow, subvert, or corrupt the Government of the United States, or
any department or office thereof; and whether the said Andrew Johnson
has been guilty of any act, or has conspired with others to do acts,
which, in contemplation of the Constitution, are high crimes and
misdemeanors, requiring the interposition of the constitutional power of
this House; and that said committee have power to send for persons and
papers, and to administer the customary oath to witnesses.

The question was taken on agreeing to the Resolution; and it was decided
in the affirmative--yeas 107, nays 39, not voting 45.

On the 2nd of March, 1867, the subject of impeachment again came up in
the House, and the following proceedings were had:

Mr. Wilson, of Iowa, (Rep.)--I am directed by the Committee on the
Judiciary to present a report relative to the official conduct of the
President of the United States.

Mr. Eldridge, (Dem.)--Mr. Speaker, I wish to raise a question of order:
I see by the clock that it is almost three o'clock in the morning; and
I believe this is the Sabbath day. I think we should not do any more
business tonight, except it be business of necessity or charity.

The Speaker.--This, in parliamentary view, is Saturday. The clerk will
read the report submitted by the gentleman from Iowa.

The clerk read as follows:

The Committee on the Judiciary, charged by the House with examination
of certain allegations, of high crimes and misdemeanors against the
President of the United States, submit the following report:

On the 7th day of January, 1867, the House, on the motion of the Hon.
James M. Ashley, a Representative from the State of Ohio, adopted the
following preamble and resolutions, to-wit:

The duty imposed upon this committee by this action of the House, was
of the highest and gravest character. No committee during the entire
history of the Government, has ever been charged with a more important
trust. The responsibility which it imposed was of oppressive weight,
and of a most unpleasant nature. Gladly would the committee have escaped
from the arduous labor imposed upon it by the Resolution of the House;
but once imposed, prompt, deliberate, and faithful action, with a view
to correct results, became its duty, and to this end it has directed its
efforts.

Soon after the adoption of the Resolution by the House, Hon. James M.
Ashley communicated to the committee, in support of his charges
against the President of the United States, such facts as were in his
possession, and the investigation was proceeded with, and has been
continued almost without, a day's interruption. A large number of
witnesses have been examined, many documents collected, and everything
done which could be done to reach a conclusion of the case. But the
investigation covers a broad field, embraces many novel, interesting,
and important questions, and involves a multitude of facts, while
most of the witnesses are distant from the Capital, owing to which the
committee, in view of the magnitude of the interests involved in its
action, have not been able to conclude its labors, and is not therefore
prepared to submit a definite and final report. If the investigation had
even approached completeness, the committee would not feel authorized
to present the result of the House at this late period of the session,
unless the charges had been so entirely negative as to admit of no
discussion, which, in the opinion of the committee, is not the case.

Certainly no affirmative report could be properly considered in the
expiring hours of this Congress.

The committee not having fully investigated all the charges prepared
against the President of the United States, it is deemed inexpedient to
submit any conclusion beyond the statement that sufficient testimony has
been brought to its notice to justify and demand a further prosecution
of the investigation.

The testimony which the committee has taken will pass into the custody
of the Clerk of the House, and can go into the hands of such committee
as may be charged with the duty of bringing this investigation to a
close, so that the labor expended upon it may not have been in vain.

The committee regrets its inability definitely to dispose of the
important subject committed to its charge, and presents this report for
its own justification, and for the additional purpose of notifying the
succeeding Congress of the incompleteness of its labors, and that they
should be completed.

James F. Wilson, Chairman. Francis Thomas, D. Morris, F. E. Woodbridge,
George S. Boutwell, Thomas Williams, Burton C. Cook, William Lawrence,

Mr. Ancona, the only Democrat on the committee, presented a minority
report, as follows:

The subscriber, one of the Judiciary Committee, to which was referred by
the House the inquiry into the official conduct of His Excellency, the
President of the United States, with a view to his impeachment upon
certain charges made by Hon. James M. Ashley, begs leave to submit the
following report:

The Committee refuses to allow a Report to be made giving to the House
at this time upon grounds which are no doubt satisfactory to themselves;
therefore, I cannot report the evidence upon which my conclusion is
based, which I would gladly do did the Committee deem it expedient. The
examination of witnesses and the records was commenced, as appears by
the majority report, about the time of the reference, to-wit: on the 7th
day of January, 1867, and continued daily. A large number of witnesses
has been examined, and everything done that could be, to bring the case
to a close, as appears by the majority report: and the majority have
come to the conclusion "that sufficient testimony had been brought
to its notice to justify and demand a further prosecution of the
investigation." I have carefully examined all the evidence in the case,
and do report that there is not one particle of evidence to sustain any
of the charges which the House charged the Committee to investigate,
and that the case is wholly without a particle of evidence upon which
impeachment could be founded, and that with all the effort that has been
made, and the mass of evidence that has been taken; the case is entirely
void of proof. I furthermore report that the most of the testimony that
has been taken is of a secondary character, and such as would not be
admitted in a court of justice.

In view of this conclusion I can see no good in a continuation of the
investigation. I am convinced that all the proof that can be produced
has been before the Committee, as no pains have been spared to give the
case a full investigation. Why, then, keep the country in a feverish
state of excitement upon this question any longer, as it is sure to end,
in my opinion, in a complete vindication of the President, if justice be
done him by the committee, of which I have no doubt,

A. J. Rogers.

The two reports were ordered printed and laid on the table.

This session of the House, and with it the Thirty-Ninth Congress, ended
a few hours later, the legislative day continuing till twelve o'clock,
noon, on Sunday, March 3rd. The House adjourned sine die at that hour,
when all unfinished business lapsed.

RENEWAL OF THE IMPEACHMENT.

The first session of the Fortieth Congress began on Monday, March 4th,
1867, and on the 7th, in the House of Representatives, Mr. Ashley (Rep.)
offered the following Preamble and Resolutions:

Whereas the House of Representatives of the Thirty-Ninth Congress
adopted, on the 7th of January, 1867, a Resolution authorizing an
inquiry into certain charges preferred against the President of the
United States; and whereas the Judiciary Committee, to whom said
Resolution and charges were referred, with authority to investigate
the same, were unable for want of time, to complete said investigation
before the expiration of the Thirty-Ninth Congress; and whereas in the
report submitted by said Judiciary Committee on the 2nd of March they
declare that the evidence taken is of such a character as to justify and
demand a continuation of the investigation by this Congress; therefore:

Be it Resolved by the House of Representatives, That the Judiciary
Committee, when appointed, be, and they are hereby, instructed to
continue the investigation authorized in said Resolution of Jan. 7th,
1867, and that they have power to send for persons and papers, and to
administer the customary oath to witnesses; and that the committee have
authority to sit during the sessions of the House and during any recess
which Congress or this House may take.

Resolved, That the Speaker be requested to appoint the Committee on the
Judiciary forthwith, and that the Committee so appointed be directed
to take charge of the testimony taken by the Committee of the last
Congress; and that said Committee have power to appoint a clerk at a
compensation not to exceed six dollars per day, and employ the necessary
stenographers.

At the close of the debate on Mr. Ashley's Resolution, it was adopted
without a division, its form being changed to the following:

Resolved, That the Committee on Judiciary be requested to report on
the charges against the President as aforesaid, on the first day of the
meeting of the House after the recess hereafter to be determined.

Congress adjourned a few days later. It re-assembled on the 3rd of July,
and on the 11th the following resolutions was offered by Mr. Stevens,
(Rep.) of Pennsylvania:

Resolved, That the Committee on the Judiciary, to whom was referred the
Resolution and Documents relative to the Impeachment of the President,
be directed to report the evidence at this session, with leave to make
further report if they shall deem proper.

That the impeachment enterprise was waning, and that its forces had
received little encouragement during the recess of the Congress that had
just closed, was evidenced by the fact that there could not be mustered
ayes enough to put the resolution to a vote, and Mr. Wilson, of Iowa,
moved the following substitute:

Resolved, That the Committee on Judiciary be, and they are hereby,
authorized and directed to have the usual number of copies of the
evidence taken by said committee relative to the Impeachment of the
President, printed and laid on the desks of Members of the House on the
first day of the next Congress, whether adjourned or regular.

The Resolution was adopted by a vote of 85 to 48, whereupon Mr. Stevens
dejectedly remarked that, "after the vote which had been taken on this
resolution, indicating the views of a majority of the House in regard to
it, I am willing to abandon it. I therefore move that the Resolution as
amended be laid on the table," which motion was agreed to.

On the 15th of July, 1867, Mr. Farnsworth, (Rep.) of Illinois, offered
the following resolution and demanded the previous question thereon:

Resolved, That the Committee on the Judiciary be discharged from
the further consideration of the question of the Impeachment of the
President of the United States, and that the testimony already taken by
said committee be printed for the use of the House.

The resolution was not seconded, and went over under the rules.

On the 25th of Nov. 1867, Mr. Boutwell (Rep.), on behalf of the
Judiciary Committee, submitted the report of the majority of that
committee, of the testimony taken in behalf of the proposed impeachment
of the President. The report recommended his impeachment.

Mr. Wilson, submitted the report of the minority of the Committee
(himself and Mr. Woodbridge), and moved the adoption of the following
resolution:

Resolved, That the Committee on the Judiciary be discharged from the
further consideration of the proposed impeachment of the President of
the United States, and that the subject be laid upon the table.

Mr. Marshall, on behalf of himself and Mr. Eldridge, the two Democratic
members of the committee, stated that though they had not signed the
minority report submitted by Mr. Wilson, they joined in support of
the resolution submitted by him, and asked leave to introduce and have
printed separate views.

This, the first session of the Fortieth Congress, then adjourned, Dec.
2nd, 1867.

The second session of the Fortieth Congress was begun on the same day,
and on the 5th, the impeachment question came up in its order in the
House, on the resolution reported from the Judiciary Committee:

That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be impeached of
high crimes and misdemeanors.

After a brief discussion of the order of business, the House adjourned
for that day.

The debate was closed on the 6th, by Messrs. Boutwell and Wilson,
the members of the Committee on the Judiciary having Charge of the
impeachment measure. The closing passages of Mr. Boutwell's speech were
as follows:

What is our position to-day? Can this House and the Senate, with the
knowledge they have of the Presidents purposes and of the character
of the men who surround him, give him the necessary power? (to remove
alleged dishonest officials.) Do they not feel that if he be alloyed
such power these places will be given to worse men? Hence, I say that
with Mr. Johnson in office from this time until the 4th of March, 1869,
there is no remedy for these grievances. These are considerations why we
should not hesitate to do that which justice authorizes us to do if we
believe that the President has been guilty of impeachable offenses.

Mr. Speaker, all rests here. To this House is given by the Constitution
the sole power of impeachment; and this power of impeachment furnishes
the only means by which we can secure the execution of the laws, and
those of our fellow citizens who desire the administration of the law
ought to sustain this House while it executes that great law which is in
its hands and which is nowhere else, while it performs a high and solemn
duty resting on it by which that man who has been the chief violator of
law shall be removed, and without which there can be no execution of the
law any where. Therefore the whole responsibility, whatever it may be,
for the non-execution of the laws of the country, is, (in the presence
of these great facts) upon this House. * * * I think that we can not do
otherwise than believe, that he has disregarded that great injunction of
the Constitution to take care that the laws be faithfully executed,
that there is but one remedy. The remedy is with this House, and it is
nowhere else. If we neglect or refuse to use our powers when the
case arises demanding decisive action, the Government ceases to be a
Government of law and becomes a Government of men.

Mr. Wilson, Chairman of the Committee, closed the debate in the
following remarks:

The gentleman from Massachusetts has remarked that the President may
interfere with the next Presidential election in the Southern States;
that he may station soldiers at the voting places and overawe the loyal
people of those States, especially the colored vote: and we must, I
suppose, guard against the possibility of this by his impeachment
and removal from office. This position, if I state it correctly, is
startling. Are we to impeach the President for what he may do in
the future? Do our fears constitute in the President high crimes and
misdemeanors? Are we to wander beyond the record of this case and found
our judgment on the possibilities of the future? This would lead us
beyond the conscience of this House.

Sir, we must be guided by some rule in this grave proceeding--something
more certain than an impossibility to arraign the President for a
specific crime--and when the gentleman from Massachusetts, in commenting
on one of the alleged offenses of the President, that we could not
arraign him for the specific crime, he disclosed the weakness of the
case we are now considering. If we cannot arraign the President for a
specific crime, for what are we to proceed against him? For a bundle of
generalities such as we have in the volume of testimony reported by the
committee to the House in this case? If we cannot state upon paper a
specific crime, how are we to carry this case to the Senate for trial?

At the close of his speech, Mr. Wilson moved to lay the subject of
impeachment on the table, and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Several motions were then made--to adjourn, to adjourn to a day certain,
etc.--which with roll calls practically consumed the day, and the motion
of Mr. Wilson went over.

The next day, Dec. 7th, the question again came up in its order, and
after several unsuccessful attempts to procure a vote on Mr. Wilson's
motion to lay the Impeachment Resolution on the table, Mr. Wilson, by
agreement, withdrew his motion, and called for the yeas and nays on the
adoption of the resolution:

That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be impeached for
high crimes and misdemeanors.

The yeas and nays were ordered, and the vote was yeas 57, nays 108.

So the resolution to impeach the President was rejected by the very
emphatic vote of 67 to 108--nearly two to one--and by a House two-thirds
Republican.

So ended the first effort to impeach the President--the first formal
action to that end having been taken on January 7, 1867, and the final
vote at the close, and its abandonment, December 7, 1867.

For eleven months the overwhelming Republican majority of the House had
been vigorously active in its search for evidence of criminality on the
part of the President that would warrant the basing of an impeachment.
No effort was left untried--no resource that promised a possible hope of
successful exploitation was neglected. Republican partisans were set to
the work of sleuth-hounds in the search for testimony in maintenance of
the charges preferred, and an ever ready partisan press teemed from the
beginning to the end of that time with animadversions upon Mr. Johnson's
administration and denunciation of his alleged desertion of Mr.
Lincoln's plan of restoration, of treachery to the party that had
elected him, and a demand for his impeachment.

To be lukewarm in that controversy, or even to fail to join in the
popular denunciation of Mr. Johnson was to put one's self at once under
suspicion with the great mass of the dominant party, and without the
pale of its consideration.

For eleven months the country was kept in the throes of partisan
turmoil--and for what? Simply to depose a President who had disappointed
the partisan and personal expectations and schemes of a rule or ruin
faction which was able, under the peculiar conditions of the time, to
subordinate to its purposes a large proportion of the dominant party of
that day.

The following are the material portions of the testimony taken by the
House Committee on the Judiciary under authority of the resolutions
passed by the House of Representatives on March 7, 1867, for the
impeachment of Andrew Johnson.

Eighty-nine witnesses were summoned before the committee. All of them
were rigidly examined, and several of them were called and examined the
second and third times. Their testimony fills more than twelve hundred
octavo pages of print.

The first witness was Gen. L. C. Baker, of the War Department. His
testimony related principally to a certain letter alleged to have been
written by Mr. Johnson, in 1864.

The first question propounded to him by Mr. Ashley, was as follows:

I wish you to state to the committee the contents, as nearly as you
can, of a letter which you have in your possession, written by Andrew
Johnson, some time in the early part of 1864, to a Southern man, giving
information as to the troops about the Capitol and elsewhere, and advice
to Jefferson Davis. State where that letter is, and give the contents as
nearly as you can, the history of it.

Mr. Baker answered that he knew there was a letter of that kind,
purporting to have been written by Andrew Johnson, when he was acting
Governor of Tennessee. That the letter was dated at Nashville and
directed to Jefferson Davis, and related to some declared policy that
had been adopted by the Confederacy--that the letter was being used to
secure an appointment--that reference was made to troops, but nothing
about localities where stationed, or numbers, and nothing about shipment
of armor, and that the letter was stolen from Andrew Johnson's table and
never sent.

The question was then asked of the witness by Mr. Ashley:

State whether the whole import of the letter written by Mr. Johnson,
was not to turn the whole power which he possessed in Tennessee, in a
certain contingency, over to the rebel cause?

Answer--No. I did not have that opinion of the letter exactly. From what
I recollect of it, the thing was that he was making a proposition making
suggestions as to what their policy should be.

Ques.--And if they accepted it?

Ans.--If they accepted it, my impression was that he was going with
them.

Ques.--With the rebels?

Ans.--Yes sir.

Question by the Chairman.--If there are any other letters that you have
seen of Mr. Johnson's written by him to any person connected with the
Confederate Government, or proposing to change the Administration of the
Government in their favor after he became President, or anything of a
public nature affecting the interests of the United States, please state
it and state all you know about such letters.

Ans.--I do not know of any letters of that character--or of any other
letters.

This constituted the substance of Gen. Baker's testimony. His
examination was very lengthy, embracing more of this character of
testimony, and about pardon brokerage, and other alleged corrupt
practices--all evidencing a determination and expectation to fix upon
Mr. Johnson a disposition to disloyalty and corruption, both before
and after his succession to the Presidency, but no such testimony was
obtained.

A considerable portion of the investigation was devoted to Mr. Johnson's
business and personal affairs, such as could have no possible connection
with or indicate implication in corrupt or disloyal practices of any
sort.

A strenuous effort appears to have been made by the Committee throughout
a long and searching examination of witnesses, and constitutes a
conspicuous feature of that investigation, to establish the charges
of corruption and disloyalty in the sale of public property, railways,
etc., that had been constructed and equipped, or seized and operated, by
the Government in connection with its military operations in the South.
Such an accusation had been made with great pertinacity by Mr. Johnson's
opponents, and was also then believed by a great many people to be true.

Among the parties examined by the committee, were Mr. James and Mr.
Burns, of Nashville, Tenn., and Senator Fowler, of that State, and
also the Secretary of war, Mr. Stanton. No facts whatever were elicited
showing a privity to corruption in these matters on the part of Mr.
Johnson.

The information obtained from Mr. Stanton, however, put an effectual
estoppel to further investigation of the charge of corrupt or disloyal
disposal of public property by the President. The following are extracts
from Mr. Stanton's testimony, as given on February 11, 1867:

Shortly after the surrender of the rebel armies, the attention of the
War Department was directed to the proper disposition to be made of the
railroads and railroad stock throughout the rebel States which came into
our possession, either by capture or construction. It was the subject of
a good deal of consultation and conference between the Secretary of War
and the Quartermaster General. It was the opinion of the Secretary
of War that it was wholly impracticable for the General Government to
operate these roads under any system, and that it would be greatly to
the advantage of the country to make such disposition as would allow
them, its speedily as possible, to become what they were designed for
channels of commerce and trade between the States, and that any terms on
which that could be done would be advantageous. This was especially the
case in regard to the Western and Southwestern roads, where it was said
there were large amounts of cotton that would be available to remove
North, in exchange for supplies to go South, of which it was said they
were greatly in want.

Ques.--In case of the construction of a railroad by the Government,
the Government furnishing the material and the labor, what has been the
custom of the Department in surrendering such roads to the companies
claiming them?

Ans.--In all instances, I think such roads have been surrendered in
the same manner as if they had been constructed by the companies. That
subject was talked of a good deal in conference between myself and the
Quartermaster General. My own views, that the great object on the part
of the Government, was to get these roads operated; and that to go
into an inquiry as to the cost of construction, would be impracticable,
either as to the cost of construction or as to any certain rule of
compensation, because many of them were constructed under the pressure
of war, and for temporary Purposes. The object of arriving at the cash
value or equivalent for the roads was not only impracticable, but really
of very little practical interest in comparison with the great end of
having the channels of commerce in the rebel states opened and carried
on, with a view of getting out their produce, furnishing supplies, and
getting commerce in its regular channels. In my own view, that appeared
to be the most, certain and most speedy system of reconstruction we
could adopt, and that it would tend more to establish harmony than any
other thing that could be done by the Government. In view of all this,
and after the most deliberate consideration we could give it, it was the
opinion of the Quartermaster General and myself--certainly my own--that
it would be impracticable to make any distinction: and so far as I know,
no distinction was made in any part of the country in reference to roads
built by the Government and roads that had been constructed by Companies
before the war commenced.

Mr. Stanton was asked this question:

Suppose the Government, at his own expense, had constructed seventy
miles of railroad in one of the rebel States, and that, at the close
of the war, a company should apply to the Executive Department of the
Government for a transfer of the road so constructed to it; by what
authority or provision of law would Executive Department be authorized
to transfer the road so constructed to the company making the
application?

Mr. Stanton answered:

I do not know of any act of Congress that directly, in terms, would
authorize any such transfer; but regarding the construction of the road,
in time of war, simply as a means, or instrument, of carrying on war,
when the war was over I would consider it strictly proven and within
the scope of the power of the General Commanding, or especially of the
President of the United States, as the Commander-in-Chief of the Army,
to render that instrument as available for peace purposes as possible.
And inasmuch as the road would be entirely useless unless it was
operated, and it would be for the benefit and interest of the public,
to have it operated as speedily as possible, I think it would be in the
interest of a wise discretion, and exercising proper authority, to turn
over that road to any company or individual who would operate it; for,
in that way, he would be applying the war material to the only available
use to which it could be applied. * * * I would regard the rolling stock
as coming, to a certain extent, within the same principle. * * * No
transfer of title was at any time made, so far as I know, or could be
made, but only possession turned over. When the military use was no
longer required, the railroads were turned over to their original
owners, or their representatives, with permission to use them. These
railroads, their plant and track fixtures, real property, of which the
military authorities had only the possessory right and use, but the
rolling stock and equipments, and iron not laid down, were personal
property, which, by capture, or purchase, or construction, belonged to
the United States. Sale could be made, and was made, of the personal
property at values estimated by the proper officers. That which
constituted real estate, to-wit, the railroad track, fixtures, etc., the
military authorities might abandon altogether, or relinquish control and
turn over possession to those who would make a beneficial use of it by
working the road. Being in the nature of real estate, no title of
the Government or of other persons could be divested and conveyed
by military authority, but only the control relinquished and the use
permitted during the existence of military authority in the department
where the roads were situated.

The trend of a large portion of the testimony of witnesses called
by this committee to testify as to the charges preferred against Mr.
Johnson and relating to other allegations of the indictment, quite
clearly indicated that the charges were based solely upon common street
rumor, invented and given currency in partisan antagonism and for
partisan purposes, and that the witnesses were called in the hope and
expectation, on the part of the majority of the House, of developing
proof of disloyalty and corruption on the part of the President, and,
if not criminal connivance, at least, criminal knowledge of a conspiracy
for the assassination of Mr. Lincoln.

But these expectations and hopes, in all respects, were so utterly
disappointed, that there was pathos, at least, as the investigation
was protracted from month to month, with no indication of the hoped for
development, in the despondent inquiry of Mr. Thaddeus Stevens to one of
his colleagues of the Impeachment Committee, as the inquest approached
a close without results--"Well, HAVE YOU GOT ANYTHING, ANYHOW?" It was
more an ejaculation of anger and disgust at failure, than a query of one
seeking hoped for information.



CHAPTER V. --  THE TENURE-OF-OFFICE ACT.

ITS HISTORY AND PURPOSE--THE PRESIDENTS VETO MESSAGE.

Mr. Johnson's alleged violation of the act of Congress known as
the Tenure-of-Office Act, constituted the ostensible basis of his
impeachment in 1868. As stated, it had been passed for the purpose of
restricting the power of the President over Executive appointments. That
Act, therefore, becomes a very important and conspicuous incident in
the impeachment affair, as its alleged violation constituted the only
material accusation, set out in various forms, in the entire list of
charges.

The proceedings had on the passage of that bill are inserted at some
length here, as a technical knowledge of its history, character and
purpose, is essential to a correct apprehension of the controversy that
had arisen between the President and Congress.

The Tenure-of-Office bill was introduced in the Senate by Mr. Williams,
of Oregon, Dec. 3rd, 1866, and on the 5th was referred to the Committee
on Retrenchment. On the 10th Mr. Edmunds, in the name of the committee,
reported it back to the Senate with the following remarks:

The joint select Committee on Retrenchment, to whom was referred
the bill to regulate the tenure of offices, have had the same under
consideration, and have instructed me to report the bill back, with a
recommendation of certain amendments, which being adopted, the committee
are of the opinion that the bill ought to pass. I beg leave to say in
connection with this report that we have reported this bill and these
amendments regulating removals from office and appointments to office so
far as concerns officers whose nominations require the confirmation of
the Senate, and have adopted what appears to us to be a feasible
scheme in that respect, in no spirit of hostility to any party or
administration whatever, but in what we conceive to be the true
Republican interest of the country, under all administrations, under
the domination of all parties in the growth which is before us in the
future; and in that spirit I shall ask the attention of the Senate to
the bill when it comes to be considered. I move that the amendment be
printed, and that the bill be made the special order for Thursday next,
at one o'clock.

On the 10th of January, 1867, on motion of Mr. Edmunds, the bill was
taken up for consideration. As the first section of the bill was the
only portion over which there was any serious controversy, or pertinent
to this recital, only that section is produced here. It is as follows:

That every person (excepting the Secretaries of State, of the Treasury,
of War, of the Navy, and of the Interior, the Postmaster General, and
the Attorney General), holding any civil office to which he has been
appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and every
person who shall hereafter be appointed to any such office, and shall
become duly qualified to act therein, is, and shall be, entitled to hold
such office until a successor shall have been in like manner appointed
and duly qualified, except as herein otherwise provided.

Mr. Howe objected to the exception of the Cabinet officers from the
operation of the bill, and Mr. Edmunds responded that:

It did seem to the Committee, after a great deal of consultation and
reflection, that it was right and just that the Chief Executive of the
Nation, in selecting these named Secretaries, who, by law, and by the
practice of the country, and officers analogous to whom by the practice
of all other countries, are the confidential advisers of the Executive
respecting the administration of all his Departments, should be persons
who were personally agreeable to him, in whom he could place entire
confidence and reliance, and that whenever it should seem to him that
the state of relations, between him and any of them had become such
as to render this relation of confidence and trust and personal esteem
inharmonious, HE SHOULD IN SUCH CASE BE ALLOWED TO DISPENSE WITH THE
SERVICES OF THAT OFFICER IN VACATION AND HAVE SOME OTHER PERSON ACT IN
HIS STEAD. We thought that so much discretion, so much confidence, so
much respect ought to be properly attributed to the Chief Magistrate of
the Nation. It may happen that at some particular time--some people
may suppose that it has happened now--the Chief Magistrate for the time
being ought not to be invested with such powers; but the Committee have
recommended the adoption of this rule respecting the tenure-of-office
as a permanent and systematic, and as they believe, an appropriate
regulation of the Government for all administrations and for all time;
and it did appear to them (whether the reason may command itself to the
Senate or not), that it was just to the Executive, and on the whole
best for the interest of the Nation, that he should be allowed during
a recess of the Senate to change his confidential advisers if it should
appear to him to be fit, subject to that general responsibility which
every officer must be held to the public and to the Senate when they
meet again.

Mr. Williams said:

I prepared the original bill in this case, which contains in different
words the exception contained in the amendment reported by the
Committee. I do not regard the exception as of any real practical
consequence, because I suppose if the President and any head of a
Department should disagree so as to make their relations unpleasant,
and the President should signify a desire that the head of a Department
retire from the Cabinet, THAT WOULD FOLLOW WITHOUT ANY POSITIVE ACT OF
REMOVAL ON THE PART OF THE PRESIDENT.

Mr. Fessenden said:

The Constitution imposes upon the President of the United States the
duty of executing the laws; it does not impose that duty upon the
Secretaries. They are creatures of the law and not of the Constitution
directly. Some, and perhaps the greater part, of their functions are as
advisers of the President and to aid him in executing the laws in
their several Departments. There are some duties that are specifically
conferred upon them by Congress. Their relation to the President, as has
been well said by gentlemen, is that mostly of confidential advisers.
With the exception of the particular duties imposed upon them by law,
and on the Secretary of the Treasury more than on the others, they
do nothing of their own motion, but act by order of the President in
discharging the particular duties of their office. * * * That being the
peculiar condition of affairs it has always been considered since
the foundation of the Government, as a matter of course, as a general
rule--there may have been one or two exceptions, and I think there have
been, but I am not very positive on that point--that the President
might select such persons as he pleased to be members of his Cabinet. Of
course the confirmation of the Senate is necessary; but the general idea
of the Senate has been, whether they liked the men or not, to confirm
them without any difficulty, because in executing the great and varied
interests of this great country it is exceedingly important that there
should be the utmost harmony between those who are charged with that
execution.

The bill passed as reported and went to the House. That body amended it
by making Cabinet officers non-removable by the President without the
consent of the Senate, and sent the bill back to the Senate, when Mr.
Sherman said:

It (the Tenure-of-Office bill) ought to have been passed, and probably
would have been passed, long ago, if a different condition of affairs
had existed before. But when you propose to extend that principle
to Cabinet officers, a very different state of affairs arises, and
different circumstances apply to this subject. Now I say, that if a
Cabinet officer should attempt to hold his office for a moment beyond
the time when he retained the entire confidence of the President, I
would not vote to retain him, NOR WOULD I COMPEL THE PRESIDENT TO LEAVE
ABOUT HIM IN THESE HIGH POSITIONS A MAN IN WHOM HE DID NOT ENTIRELY
TRUST, both personally and politically. It would be unwise to require
him to administer the Government without agents of his own choosing.
It seems to me, therefore, that it would be unwise for the Senate to
engraft in this bill a provision that would enable a Cabinet officer
to hold on to his office in violation of the will of his Chief. * *
* Suppose the personal relations between a Cabinet officer and the
President became so unpleasant that they could have no personal
intercourse. The Senator from Wisconsin (Mr. Howe), says in such a case
the Cabinet officer would resign. Suppose he should hold on to his
power and position--what then? There is no power to remove him, and
the President can have no intercourse with him. Would you compel such a
state of affairs? It seems to me that it would be unwise to do so. That
the Senate had no such purpose is shown by its vote twice to make this
exception. That this provision does not apply to the present case, is
shown by the fact that its language is so framed as NOT TO APPLY TO THE
PRESENT PRESIDENT. * * * It would not prevent the present President from
removing the present Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, or the
Secretary of State.

A considerable number of Senators participated in the debate, which
was able and exhaustive to an exceptional degree, on both sides, and
occupied several days in the various stages of the proceeding.

Mr. Edmunds closed the debate in the Senate with the following remarks:

I do not rise to prolong the debate, but only to express the hope that
the debate on this question may terminate--that we may come to a vote.
* * * While I should be glad to occupy some time in reply to some things
that have fallen in the course of this debate, I feel it to be due to
the business of the Senate to abstain. I hope the Senate will disagree
to this amendment, (made by the House) and adhere to the bill as it
stands.

The vote was then taken, and resulted in 17 for agreeing to the House
amendment, and 28 against it.

The action of the Senate was reported to the House and Conference
Committees were appointed by the two houses.

On the 18th of February, the following substitute for the first section
of the bill was reported by the Committee of Conference and adopted by
both Houses, and the bill went to the President:

Provided, That the Secretaries of State, of the Treasury, of War, of
the Navy, and of the Interior, the Postmaster General and the Attorney
General, shall hold their offices respectively FOR AND DURING THE TERMS
OF THE PRESIDENT BY WHOM THEY MAY HAVE BEEN APPOINTED, and for one month
thereafter, subject to removal by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate.

On Monday, March 2nd, 1867, the President returned the bill to the
Senate, in which house it had originated, with his objections thereto,
as follows:

To the Senate of the United States:

I have carefully examined the bill to regulate the tenure of certain
civil offices. The material portion of the bill is contained in the
first section, and is of the effect following, namely:

"That every person holding any civil office to which he has been
appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and every
person who shall hereafter be appointed to any such office, and shall
become duly qualified to act therein, is and shall be entitled to
hold such office until a successor shall have been appointed by
the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, and duly
qualified; and that the Secretaries of State, of the Treasury, of
War, of the Navy, and of the Interior, the Postmaster General, and the
Attorney General, shall hold their offices respectively for and during
the term of the President by whom they may have been appointed, and
for one month thereafter, subject to removal by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate."

These revisions are qualified by a reservation in the fourth section,
"that nothing contained in the bill shall be construed to extend the
term of any office the duration of which is limited by law." In effect
the bill provides that the President shall not remove from their places
any of the civil officers whose terms of service are not limited by law
without the advice and consent of the Senate of the United States. The
bill, in this respect, conflicts, in my judgment, with the Constitution
of the United States. The question, as Congress is well aware, is by no
means a new one. That the power of removal is constitutionally vested
in the President of the United States is a principle which has been not
more distinctly declared by judicial authority and judicial commentators
than it has been uniformly practiced upon by the legislative and
executive departments of the Government. The question arose in the House
of Representatives so early as the 16th day of June, 1789, on the bill
for establishing an executive department, denominated "The Department of
Foreign Affairs." The first clause of the bill, after recapitulating the
functions of that officer and defining his duties, had these words: "To
be removable from office by the President of the United States." It was
moved to strike out these words, and the motion was sustained with
great ability and vigor. It was insisted that the President could not
constitutionally exercise the power of removal exclusive of the Senate;
that the Federalist so interpreted the Constitution when arguing for its
adoption by the several States; that the Constitution had nowhere
given the President power of removal, either expressly or by strong
implication; but on the contrary, had distinctly provided for removals
from office by impeachment only. A construction which denied the power
of removal by the President was further maintained by arguments drawn
from the danger of the abuse of the power; from the supposed tendency
of an exposure of public officers to capricious removal; to impair the
efficiency of the civil service; from the alleged injustice and hardship
of displacing incumbents, dependent upon their official stations,
without sufficient consideration; from a supposed want of responsibility
on the part the President, and from an imagined defect of guarantees
against a vicious President, who might incline to abuse the power.

On the other hand, an exclusive power of removal by the President was
defended as a true exposition of the text of the Constitution. It was
maintained that there are certain causes for which persons ought to
be removed from office without being guilty of treason, bribery, or
malfeasance, and that the nature of things demands that it should be so.
"Suppose," it was said, "a man becomes insane by the visitation of God,
and is likely to ruin our affairs; are the hands of Government to be
confined front warding off the evil? Suppose a person in office
not possessing the talents he was judged to have at the time of the
appointment, is the error not to be corrected; suppose he acquire
vicious habits and incurable indolence, or totally neglect the duties of
his office, which shall work mischief to the public welfare, is there
no way to arrest the threatened danger? Suppose he become odious and
unpopular by reason of the measures he pursues, and this he may do
without committing any positive offense against the law, must he
preserve his office in despite of the popular will? Suppose him grasping
for his own aggrandizement and the elevation of his connections by every
means short of the treason defined by the Constitution, hurrying your
affairs to the precipice of destruction, endangering your domestic
tranquility, plundering you of the means of defense, alienating the
affections of your allies, and promoting the spirit of discord, must the
tardy, tedious, desultory road, by way of impeachment, be traveled to
overtake the man who, barely confining himself within the letter of the
law, is employed in drawing off the vital principle of the Government?"
The nature of things, the great objects of society, the express objects
of the Constitution itself require that this thing should be otherwise.
To unite the Senate with the President "in the exercise of the power"
it was said, would involve us in the most serious difficulty. "Suppose
a discovery of any of these events should take place when the Senate
is not in session, how is the remedy to be applied? The evil could be
avoided in no other way than by the Senate sitting always." In regard
to the danger of the power being abused if exercised by one man, it was
said "that the danger is as great with respect to the Senate, who
are assembled from various parts of the continent, with different
impressions and opinions;" that such a body is more likely to misuse the
power of removal than the man whom the united voice of America calls to
the presidential chair. As the nature of Government requires the power
of removal, it was maintained "that it should be exercised in this way
by the hand capable of exerting itself with effect, and the power must
be conferred on the President by the Constitution as the executive
officer of the Government." Mr. Madison, whose adverse opinion in the
Federalist had been relied upon by those who denied the exclusive power,
now participated in the debate. He declared that he had reviewed his
former opinions, and he summed up the whole case as follows:

"The Constitution affirms that the executive power is vested in the
President. Are there exceptions to this proposition? Yes, there are.
The Constitution says that in appointing to office the Senate shall be
associated with the President, unless, in the case of inferior officers,
when the law shall otherwise direct. Have we (that is, Congress) a
right to extend this exception? I believe not. If the Constitution has
invested all executive power in the President, I return to assert
that the Legislature has no right to diminish or modify his executive
authority. The question now resolves itself into this: is the power of
displacing an executive power? I conceive that if any power whatever
is in the Executive, it is in the power of appointing, overseeing, and
controlling those who execute the laws. If the Constitution had
not qualified the power of the President in appointing to office by
associating the Senate with him in that business, would it not be clear
that he would have the right by virtue of his executive power to make
such appointment? Should we be authorized, in defiance of that clause
in the Constitution--the executive power shall be vested in the
President--to unite the Senate with the President in the appointment to
office? I conceive not. It is admitted that we should not be authorized
to do this, I think it may be disputed whether we have a right to
associate there in removing persons from office, the one power being as
much of an executive nature as the other; and the first is authorized by
being excepted out of the general rule established by the Constitution
in these words: 'The executive power shall be vested in the President.'"

The question thus ably and exhaustively argued was decided by the House
of Representatives, by a vote of 34 to 20, in favor of the principle
that the executive power of removal is vested by the Constitution in the
Executive, and in the Senate by the casting vote of the Vice President.
The question has often been raised in subsequent times of high
excitement, and the practice of the Government has nevertheless
conformed in all cases to the decision thus early made. * * * Chancellor
Kent's remarks on the subject are as follows:

"On the first organization of the Government it was made a question
whether the power of removal in case of officers appointed to hold
at pleasure resided nowhere but in the body which appointed, and, of
course, whether the consent of the Senate was not requisite to remove.
This was the construction given to the Constitution while it was pending
for ratification before the State conventions by the author of the
Federalist. But the construction which was given to the Constitution by
Congress, after great consideration and discussion, was different.
The words of the act (establishing the Treasury Department) are: 'And
whenever the same shall be removed from office by the President of
the United States, or in any other case of vacancy in the office, the
assistant shall act.' This amounted to a legislative construction of the
Constitution, and it has ever since been acquiesced in and acted upon
as decisive authority in the case. It applies equally to every other
officer of the Government appointed by the President, whose term of
duration is not specially declared. It is supported by the weighty
reason that the subordinate officers in the executive department ought
to hold at the pleasure of the head of the Department, because he is
invested generally with the executive authority, and the participation
in that authority by the Senate was an exception to a general principle
and ought to be taken strictly. The President is the great responsible
officer for the faithful execution of the law, and the power of removal
was incidental to that duty, and might often be requisite to fulfill
it."

Thus has the important question presented by this bill been settled, in
the language of the late Daniel Webster (who, while dissenting from it,
admitted that it was settled), by construction, settled by precedent,
settled by the practice of the Government, and settled by statute.

The events of the last war furnished a practical confirmation of the
wisdom of the Constitution as it has hitherto been maintained in many
of its parts, including that which is now the subject of consideration.
When the war broke out rebel enemies, traitors, abettors, and
sympathizers were found in every department of the Government, as well
in the civil service as in the land and naval military service. They
were found in Congress and among the keepers of the Capitol, in foreign
missions, in each and all of the Executive Departments, in the judicial
service, in the Post Office, and among the agents for conducting Indian
affairs; and upon probable suspicion they were promptly displaced by
my predecessor, so far as they held their offices under executive
authority, and their duties were confided to new and loyal successors.
No complaints against that power or doubts of its wisdom, were
entertained in any quarter.

Having at an early period accepted the Constitution in regard to the
executive office in the sense in which it was interpreted with the
concurrence of its founders, I have found no sufficient grounds in the
arguments now opposed to that construction or in any assumed necessity
of the times for changing those opinions. For these reasons I return
the bill to the Senate, in which House it originated, for the further
consideration of Congress, which the Constitution prescribes. Insomuch
as the several parts of the bill which I have not considered are matters
chiefly of detail, and are based altogether upon the theory of the
Constitution from which I am obliged to dissent, I have not thought
it necessary to examine them with a view to make them an occasion of
distinct and special objections. Experience, I think, has shown that it
is the easiest, as it is also the most attractive, of studies to frame
constitutions for the self-government of free States and nations.

But I think experience has equally shown that it is the most difficult
of all political labors to preserve and maintain such free constitutions
of self government when once happily established. I know no other way
in which they can be preserved and maintained except by a constant
adherence to them through the various vicissitudes of national
existence, with such adaptations as may become necessary, always to be
effected, however, through the agencies and in the forms prescribed in
the original constitutions themselves. Whenever administration fails
or seems to fail in securing any of the great ends for which Republican
Government is established, the proper course seems to be to renew the
original spirit and forms of the Constitution itself.

Andrew Johnson

The bill was promptly passed in both Houses over the President's veto
and became a law.

As pertinent and incident to the history of this controversy, is the
communication of the President notifying the Senate of the suspension of
Mr. Stanton, Aug. 12, 1867. The President said:

The Tenure-of-Office Act did not pass without notice. Like other acts,
it was sent to the President for approval. As is my custom I submitted
it to the consideration of my Cabinet for their advice whether I should
approve it or not. I was a grave question of constitutional law, in
which I would of course rely mostly upon the opinion of the Attorney
General, and of Mr. Stanton, who had once been Attorney General.
EVERY MEMBER OF MY CABINET ADVISED ME THAT THE PROPOSED LAW WAS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL. All spoke without doubt or reservation; but MR.
STANTON'S CONDEMNATION OF THE LAW WAS THE MOST ELABORATE AND EMPHATIC.
He referred to the Constitutional provisions, the debates in Congress,
especially to the speech of Mr. Buchanan when a Senator, to the
decisions of the Supreme Court, and to the usage from the beginning of
the Government through every successive administration, all concurring
to establish the right of removal as vested in the President. To all
these he added the weight of his own deliberate judgment, and advised me
that it was my duty to defend the power of the President from usurpation
and veto the law.

During the recess of Congress in the Summer of 1867, the President
suspended Mr. Stanton from the War Office and appointed Gen. Grant
Secretary of War ad interim. Gen. Grant was then understood as
supporting the President in his controversy with Mr. Stanton, and
promptly accepted the appointment, holding it until the following
December, when the change was duly reported to the Senate. The Senate
refused to sanction Mr. Stanton's suspension, and he consequently
resumed his position of Secretary of War and retained it until the close
of the Impeachment trial--the Senate then, in effect, by rejecting the
Impeachment, declaring that the President had the right to remove him.

Very naturally, after Mr. Stanton's restoration to the War Office by the
refusal of the Senate to sanction his suspension, the relations between
himself and the President were embittered and many efforts were made by
mutual friends to induce Mr. Stanton to resign. Conspicuous among these
were Gen. Grant, the General of the Army, and Gen. Sherman, the next in
rank, as shown in the following note from Gen. Sherman to the President;
but a few weeks before the crisis came. It explains itself, as showing
the relations then subsisting between the parties mentioned:

332 K St., Washington, Jan, 18th.

I regretted, this morning, to say that I had agreed to go down to
Annapolis, to spend Monday with Admiral Porter. Gen. Grant has to leave
for Richmond on Monday morning at 6 o'clock. At a conversation with the
General, after an interview wherein I offered to go with him on Monday
morning to Mr. Stanton and say it was our joint opinion that he should
resign, it was found impossible by reason of his going to Richmond and
my going to Annapolis. The General proposed this course. He will tell
you to-morrow and offer to go to Mr. Stanton to say that for the good
of the service of the country he ought to resign--this on Sunday. On
Monday, I will call on you, and if you think it necessary, I will do the
same--call on Mr. Stanton and tell him he should resign. If he will not,
then it will be time to consider ulterior measures. In the meantime, it
also happens that no necessity exists for precipitating measures.

Yours truly, W. T. Sherman.

On Saturday, February 23, 1868, the day following the removal of Mr.
Stanton, Mr. Johnson sent to the Senate the name of Mr. Thomas Ewing,
senior, of Ohio, as his successor. The Senate had adjourned for the day
when the President's Secretary reached the Capitol, between 12 and 1
o'clock, but the nomination was formally communicated on the following
Monday. Of this nomination, Mr. Blaine has written, that "no name could
have given better assurance of good intentions and upright conduct than
that of Mr. Ewing. He was a man of lofty character, of great eminence in
his profession of the law, and with wide and varied experience in public
life. He had held high rank as a Senator in the Augustan period of
the Senate's learning and eloquence, and he had been one of the
ablest members of the distinguished Cabinets organized by the only two
Presidents elected by the Whig Party. He had reached the ripe age
of seventy-eight years, but still in complete possession of all his
splendid faculties. He had voted for Mr. Lincoln at both elections, had
been a warm supporter of the contest for the Union, and was represented
by his own blood on many of the great battlefields of the war."

No notice was taken by the Senate of this nomination.

Here was offered an opportunity for the settlement of the dispute over
the War Office on fair and honorable terms to all parties concerned. But
that was not what the impeachers wanted. They wanted to get Mr. Johnson
out. They thought they had a pretext that they could sustain by
making it a party question, and did not want a settlement on any other
terms--so no attention was given to Mr. Ewing's nomination. It was
ignored and the impeachment movement went on.



CHAPTER VI. --  IMPEACHMENT AGREED TO BY THE HOUSE.

Mr. Johnson's veto of the Tenure-of-Office Bill, and the passage of that
bill over his veto, of course intensified the antagonism between himself
and Congress. He not unnaturally regarded that Act as an infringement
of the Executive function which it was his duty to his office and to
himself to resent. The culmination came upon his official notification
to the Senate on February 21st, 1868, of his removal of Mr. Stanton
from the office of Secretary of War, and his appointment of Gen.
Lorenzo Thomas as Secretary ad interim, nothwithstanding the assumed
interdiction of the Tenure-of-Office Act.

Immediately on receipt of this notification, the Senate went into
executive session, and the following proceeding was had:

IN EXECUTIVE SESSION Senate of the United States February 21st, 1868

Whereas, The Senate have read and considered the communication of the
President, stating that he had removed Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary
of War, and had designated the Adjutant General of the Army to act as
Secretary of War ad interim. interim... Therefore,

Resolved, by the Senate of the United States, That under the
Constitution and laws of the United States, the President has no power
to remove the Secretary of War and designate any other officer to
perform the duties of that office ad interim.

The journal of the Senate shows that this Resolution was adopted by the
following vote:

Yeas--Messrs. Cameron, Cattell, Cole, Conkling, Cragin, Drake, Ferry,
Harlan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross, Sprague, Stewart. Sumner. Thayer,
Tipton, Trumbull. Van Winkle, Wade, Willey Williams. Wilson. Yates--23.

Nays--Messrs. Buckalew, Davis, Doolittle, Edmunds, Hendricks, Patterson
of Tennessee--6.

Absent or not voting--20. Note. (Note--It is due to myself to say here,
that the entry of my name in the above vote, was incorrect. My distinct
recollection is, that though present, I declined to vote, and from the
consideration mentioned. I was totally unaware of my name being recorded
as voting on the proposition until long after I left the Senate, when of
course there was no opportunity to secure a correction of the journal.)

This was an extraordinary proceeding. A proposition to impeach the
President had till recently been pending in the House for nearly a year,
and the ingenuity of the majority had been taxed to the utmost to find
some basis for an indictment upon which a successful impeachment might
be possible. There is ground for the suggestion that much was hoped for
in that direction from the Tenure-of-Office Bill, at least so far as the
House was concerned. That hoped for opportunity had now come--nor is
it an unreasonable surmise, that this very extraordinary action of
the Senate was forced by outside as well as inside influences for the
purpose of testing the Senate, and committing it in advance and in
anticipation of the preferment of another impeachment by the House.

As to the question of the guilt or innocence of the President of the
commission of an impeachable offense, this vote of the Senate was in
the nature of a vote of "guilty." It was therefore to a degree an
impeachment and conviction combined by the Senate, prior to the bringing
of an accusation by the House of Representatives, the constitutional
body for the preferment of an impeachment of the President--and was an
improper, and not far removed from an indecent proceeding on the part of
the Senate. In effect, the President was thereby condemned by the
Senate without trial, and his later arraignment was simply to receive
sentence-it being solely upon the removal of Mr. Stanton that the
impeachment was brought by the House.

It is noticeable, and possibly indicative, that the names of twenty out
of fifty-four members of the Senate do not appear in this list--a very
unusual occurrence in divisions of that body; especially in the exciting
conditions that then prevailed. The absentees, or at least abstentions
from voting, were fifteen Republicans and five Democrats, more than
one-third of the body. That very unusual absence or abstention from
voting may well be attributed to the very proper hesitancy of Senators
to commit themselves in advance, either way, on a proposition that was
reasonably certain to lead to an impeachment of the President, then
virtually pending and imminent in the House, and upon which the Senate
was equally certain to be called upon to act.

The action of the President was also communicated to the House of
Representatives by Mr. Stanton, at the same hour of the same day,
February 21st, 1868, in the following communication, enclosing a copy of
the President's notification of his dismissal.

War Department, Washington City, Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--Gen. Thomas has just delivered to me a copy of the enclosed order,
which you will please communicate to the House of Representatives.

(Signed) E. M. Stanton, Secretary of War. Hon. Schuyler Colfax, Speaker
House of Representatives.


This gave new life to the impeachment cause, which had a few weeks
before been defeated in the House and since then had, for lack of
material, been laming, to the discouragement of many of its advocates:
and the gleeful ejaculations, on the floor of the House, in the lobbies,
and on the streets, on receipt of this news, and more especially after
the action of the Senate became known, which was not long in reaching
the public, with a common greeting slid clasping of hands: "Well, we've
got him now!"

The communication of Mr. Stanton to the House of Representatives was
immediately, after reading, referred to the Committee on Reconstruction.

In the evening of the same day, Mr. Covode, of Pennsylvania, offered a
resolution to impeach the President, which was also referred to the same
Committee.

On the next day, Feb. 22d, 1868, Mr. Stevens, Chairman of that
Committee, made the following report:

The Committee on Reconstruction, to whom was referred, on the 27th day
of January last, the following resolution:

"Resolved, That the Committee on Reconstruction be authorized to inquire
what combinations have been made or attempted to be made to obstruct the
due execution of the laws; and to that end the committee have power
to send for persons and papers and to examine witnesses oil oath, and
report to this House what action, if any, they may deem necessary; and
that said committee bade leave to report at any time."

And to whom was also referred, on the 21st day of February, instant,
a communication from Hon. Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary of War, dated on
said 21st day of February, together with a copy of a letter from Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States, to the said Edwin M. Stanton,
as follows:

Executive Mansion, Washington. D. C., Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:-By virtue of the power and authority vested in me, as President, by
the Constitution and laws of the United States, you are hereby removed
from office as Secretary for the Department of War, and your functions
as such will terminate upon the receipt of this communication.

You will transfer to Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant
General of the Army, who has this day been authorized and empowered
to act as Secretary of War ad interim, all records, books, papers, and
other public property now in your custody and charge.

Respectfully yours. Andrew Johnson. Hon. Edwin M. Stanton, Washington,
D. C.


And to whom was also referred by the House of Representatives the
following resolution, namely:

"Resolved, That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be
impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors."

Have considered the several subjects referred to them, and submit the
following report:

That in addition to the papers referred to the committee, the committee
find that the President, on the 21st day of February, 1868, signed
and issued a commission or letter of authority to one Lorenzo Thomas,
directing and authorizing said Thomas to act as Secretary of War ad
interim, and to take possession of the books, records, and papers, and
other public property in the War Department, of which the following is a
copy:

Executive Mansion, Washington, Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--Hon. Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from office
as Secretary for the Department of War, you are hereby authorized and
empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim, and will immediately
enter upon the discharge of the duties pertaining to that office. Mr.
Stanton has been instructed to transfer to you all the records, books,
papers, and other public property now in his custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson.

To Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant General of the United
States Army. Washington, District of Columbia.

Official copy respectfully furnished to Hon. Edwin M. Stanton.

L. Thomas. Secretary of War ad interim.


Upon the evidence collected by the committee, which is herewith
presented, and in virtue of the powers with which they have been
invested by the House, they are of the opinion that Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States, be impeached of high crimes and
misdemeanors. They therefore recommend to the House the adoption of the
accompanying resolution. Thaddeus Stevens, George S. Boutwell, John A.
Bingham, C. T. Hulburd, John F. Farnsworth, F. C. Beaman, H. E. Paine.


Resolution providing for the impeachment of Andrew Johnson, President of
the United States.

Resolved, That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be
impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors in office.

The following is a brief synopsis of the debate which ensued: Mr.
Stevens, of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention in the
first instance to discuss this question; and if there be no desire on
the other side to discuss it we are willing that the question should be
taken upon the knowledge which the House already has. Indeed, the fact
of removing a man from office while the Senate was in session without
the consent of the Senate, if there were nothing else, is of itself, and
always has been considered, a high crime and misdemeanor, and was never
before practiced. But I will not discuss this question unless gentlemen
on the other side desire to discuss it. It they do, I shall for the
present give way to them and say what I have to say in conclusion.

Mr. Brooke, (Dem. of N. Y.) Mr. Speaker, I had hoped to have an
opportunity, at least, to submit a minority report before we entered
upon this august proceeding of impeaching the chief executive officer of
this Government. But after a session of the Committee on Reconstruction,
hardly an hour in length, violating an express rule of this House by
sitting during the session--for Rule 72, provides that no committee shall
sit during the session of the House without special leave--we have
been summoned upon a very partial submission of facts, without any
comprehension, in reality, of the charges which are made against the
President of they United States, upon a new indictment, in a new form
once more, and in a more alarming manner than ever, in this but a
partial Congress, representing but a section of a portion of the
people--in my judgment not representing the people of the United States
at all--to act as a grand jury, with a large portion of that grand jury
excluded from the jury-room here; and suddenly, impromptu perhaps, a vote
is to be forced this very day--to impeach the President of the United
States!

I am utterly inadequate to discharge the duty which has devolved upon me
on this august day, the anniversary of the birthday of the Father of his
country. I am utterly unable upon this occasion either to do my duty to
the people or to express myself with that deep solemnity which I feel
in rising to resist this untoward, this unholy, this unconstitutional
proceeding. Indeed, I know not why the ghost of impeachment has appeared
here in a new form. We have attempted to lay it hitherto, and we have
successfully laid it upon the floor of this House. But a minority of
the party on the other side, forcing its influence and its power upon
a majority of a committee of this House, has at last succeeded in
compelling its party to approach the House itself in a united, and
therefore in a more solemn form, and to demand the impeachment of the
President of the United States.

Sir, we have long been in the midst of a revolution. Long, long has our
country been agitated by the throes of that revolution. But we are now
approaching the last and the final stage of that revolution in which,
like many revolutions that have preceded it, a legislative power not
representing the people attempts to depose the executive power, and thus
to overthrow that constitutional branch of the Government.

There is nothing new in all this. There is nothing new in what we are
doing, for men of the present but repeat the history of the past. We are
traversing over and over again the days of Cromwell and Charles I and
Charles II, and we are traversing over and over again the scenes of the
French revolution, baptized in blood in our introductory part, but I
trust in God never again to be baptized by any revolutionary proceeding
on the part of this House.

I have not and never have been a defender of all the opinions of
General Jackson, but those on the other side who pretend to hold him
as authority and those on this side who have ever held him as authority
will find that in uttering the opinions which I have I but reutter the
opinions which he advanced in his veto of July 10, 1832, when he said:

"The Congress, the Executive, and the court must each for itself be
guided by its own opinion of the Constitution. Each public officer who
takes the oath to support the Constitution swears that he will support
it as he understands it, and not as it is understood by others."

The President of the United States has given his opinion upon the
official tenure-of-office act and upon the Constitution of the United
States by the appointment of Adjutant General Thomas as Secretary of War
ad interim. and because of the exercise of that Constitutional right we
are called upon here at once to pronounce him guilty of high crimes and
misdemeanors and to demand his deposition and degradation therefor. * *
* * *

Mr. Spalding, (Rep. of Ohio). Mr. Speaker, I feel myself to be in no
proper frame of mind or heart to attempt rhetorical display on this
occasion. I can appreciate the sentiments of the gentleman from New
York [Mr. Brooks] when he says the question before us is filled with
solemnity; but when he attempts by gasconade to deter members on this
side of the House from the conscientious discharge of their duty I say
to my friend that he has mistaken his calling. Sir, no more important
duty could be devolved upon this House of Representatives than that
of considering the question whether articles of impeachment shall be
preferred against the Chief Magistrate of the United States; and for
long months, ay, for more than a year, sir. I have resisted, with all my
efforts and all my personal influence, the approach of that crisis which
is now upon us and before us. The President has done many, very many,
censurable acts: but I could not, on my conscience, say that he should
be holden to answer upon a charge of "high crimes and misdemeanors"
until something could be made tangible whereby he had brought himself in
open conflict with the Constitution and laws of the Union.

It has seemed to me, sir, for weeks, that this high officer of our
government was inviting the very ordeal which, I am sorry to say, is now
upon us, and the dread consequences of which will speedily be upon
him. He has thrown himself violently in contact with an Act of Congress
passed on the 2d day of March last by the votes of the constitutional
two-thirds of the Senate and two-thirds of the House of Representatives
over his veto assigning his reasons for withholding his assent. Now, it
matters not how many acts can be found upon the statute books in years
gone by that would sanction the removal of a cabinet officer by the
President; the gentleman from New York numbers three. He may reckon
up thirty or three hundred and still if, within the last six or nine
months, Congress has, in a constitutional manner, made an enactment
that prohibits such removal, and the executive wantonly disregards such
enactment and attempts to remove the officer, he incurs the penalty as
clearly and as certainly as if there never had been any legislation
to the contrary. That subsequent enactment, if it be constitutional,
repeals, by its own force, all other prior enactments with which it
may conflict; and in nothing is that enactment more significant than
in this, that the President shall not remove any civil officer, who has
been appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, without
the concurrence of that body, when it is itself in session.

Mr. Bingham, (Rep.) of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, all right-minded men must
concede that the question under consideration is one of supreme moment
to till the people of the Republic. I protest for myself, sir, that I am
utterly incapable of approaching the discussion of this question in the
spirit of a partisan. I repel, sir, the intimation of the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Brooks, that I am careless of the obligation of my oath or
unconcerned about the supremacy of the Constitution and the laws. I look
upon the Constitution of the country as the very breath of the nation's
life. I invoke this day upon the consideration of this great question
the matchless name of Washington, as did the gentleman, and ask him,
in the consideration of the matter now before us, to ponder upon those
deathless words of the Father of our Country, wherein he declares that
"the Constitution which at any time exists, till changed by an explicit
and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon
all"--upon all sir, from the President to the humblest citizen--standing
within the jurisdiction of the Republic. Washington but echoed the
words that himself and his associates had imbedded in the text of the
Constitution, that "this Constitution and the laws passed in pursuance
thereof shall be the supreme law of the land." It shall be supreme over
every officer; it shall be supreme over every State; it shall be supreme
over every territory; it shall be supreme upon every deck covered
by your flag in every zone all round the globe. Every man within its
jurisdiction, official and unofficial, must bow to the supremacy of the
Constitution.

The gentleman says that the issue involved is an issue about an
office. I beg the gentleman's pardon. The issue involved is whether
the supremacy of the Constitution shall be maintained by the people's
Representatives. The President of the United States has assumed, sir, to
set himself above the Constitution and the laws. He has assumed to defy
the law, he has assumed to challenge the people's Representatives to sit
in judgment upon his malfeasance in office. Every man who has considered
it worth while to observe my conduct touching this question that has so
long agitated this House and agitated this country may have discovered
that I have kept myself back and have endeavored to keep others
back from making any unnecessary issue between the President and
Representatives of the people touching the manner in which he discharged
the duties of his great office. I had no desire, sir, to have resort
unnecessarily to this highest power reposed by the people in their
Representatives and their Senators for the vindication of their own
violated Constitution and violated laws. Notwithstanding there was much
in the conduct of the President to endanger the peace and repose of the
country, yet, so long as there was any doubt upon the question of his
liability to impeachment within the text and spirit of the Constitution,
I was unwilling to utter one syllable to favor such a proposition or to
record a vote to advance it. * * *

Mr. Beck, (Dem. of Ky.) The single question upon which the decision of
this House is now to be made is that the President has attempted to test
the constitutionality of a law which he believes to be unconstitutional.
All the testimony heretofore presented upon which to base an impeachment
of the President was decided by even a majority of the Republican
members of this House to be insufficient to justify impeachment. All
questions growing out of the combinations and conspiracies lately
charged upon the President were ruled by the Reconstruction Committee
to be insufficient, and were not brought before this House. And the sole
question now before us is, is there anything in this last act of the
President removing Mr. Stanton and appointing Adjutant General Thomas
Secretary of War ad interim to justify his impeachment by this House?

I maintain that the President of the United States is in duty bound
to test the legality of every law which he thinks interferes with his
rights and powers as the Chief Magistrate of this nation. Whenever he
has powers conferred upon him by the Constitution of the United States,
and an act of Congress undertakes to deprive him of those powers, or any
of them, he would be false to his trust as the Chief Executive of this
nation, false to the interests of the people whom he represents, if he
did not by every means in his power seek to test the constitutionality
of that law, and to take whatever steps were necessary and proper to
have it tested by the highest tribunal in the land, and to ascertain
whether he has a right under the Constitution to do what he claims the
right to do, or whether Congress has the right to deprive him of the
powers which he claims have been vested in him by the Constitution of
the United States, and that is all that he proposes to do in this case.
* * *

Mr. Logan, (Rep. of Ills.) Now, Mr. Speaker, let us examine this
question for a moment. It seems to me very plain and easy of solution.
It is not necessary, in order to decide whether this action of the
President of the United States comes within the purview and meaning of
this statute, for us to talk about revolutions or what this man or that
man has said or decided. What has been the act of the President is the
question. The law is plain. If the President shall appoint or shall give
a letter of authority or issue a commission to any person, without the
consent of the Senate, he is guilty of--what? The law says of a high
misdemeanor. And, under and by virtue of the Constitution, the President
can be impeached--for what? For high crimes or misdemeanors. This law
declares the issuing a commission to, or giving a letter of authority
to, or appointing to or removing from office, any person, without the
advice and consent of the Senate of the United States, shall be a high
misdemeanor, which is within the meaning and within the pale of the
Constitution of the United States.

Now, what is the evidence presented to this body by one of its
committees? It is of this character: The Secretary of War, Edwin M.
Stanton, has been declared by a solemn vote of the Senate to be the
Secretary of War, by virtue of--what? By virtue of an appointment to
that office; by reason of the fact that Andrew Johnson did not relieve
him from office when he had the right to present the name of somebody
else--soon after his taking the presidential chair--not the right to
turn him out, but the right to nominate some one else to the senate and
ask them to confirm him to that office. That the President failed to
do. Then, acting under the provisions of this statute, the President
suspended Mr. Stanton as Secretary of War, but the Senate passed upon
that act, and decided that the reasons given by the President for
suspending Mr. Stanton were not satisfactory; and accordingly, by virtue
of this law, Mr. Stanton was confirmed and reinstated in his position as
Secretary of War.

Now, all this having been done, it cannot certainly be claimed that
the President, in his recent course in regard to Mr. Stanton, has acted
without any intention of violating the law. Nor can it be claimed that
the President is ignorant of the law. * * *

Mr. Holman (Dem., Ind.) We have listened to much excited eloquence upon
this question. It is too manifest that Congress, moving on with that
impetus which is ever the result of excessive political power seeks to
usurp those powers which are by the Constitution vested in the other
Departments of the Government. I do not propose to discuss this subject
or answer the speech of the gentleman from Illinois [Mr. Logan] with any
words of my own. I have before me a paper which is full of mature wisdom
and patriotic counsel, a speech that comes from the solemn past, yet
speaks to every heart that beats for the Union of these States, and the
prosperity of the American people; a voice that is answered back from
every battlefield of the Revolution, and from the grave of every soldier
who has fallen in defense of American liberty. I ask that this speech
may be read to the House, as appropriate to this day, the 22nd of
February, a day once so venerated. I ask that this immortal address to
the American people, a speech that needs no revision: a speech in which
there can be no interruptions made in this moment of passion, be read
to the American Congress, for I can well afford to be silent while
that great voice speaks to the Representatives of the people of this
Republic.

The Clerk commenced the reading of Washington's Farewell Address.

Mr. Peters: I rise to a question of order. I insist that that address is
not germane to the question before the House.

Mr. Holman: I insist that it is exceedingly germane.

Mr. Lawrence, of Ohio: Allow me to suggest that it is germane, for the
reason that it relates to retirement from office. [Laughter.]

Mr. Peters: That is too remote.

The Speaker pro tempore, (Mr. Blaine, in the chair.) The Chair sustains
the point of order.

Mr. Holman: I hope no gentleman will object to the completion of the
reading: it will only occupy the time I am entitled to.

Mr. Peters: It is doubtless very instructive, and so would a chapter
of the Bible be, but it has nothing to do with the question before the
House, and I insist upon the point of order.

The Speaker pro tempore. Up to this point the discussion has been
pertinent and germane to the question--very closely so--and the Chair is
compelled to rule, the question of order being raised, that this is not
germane or in order. The gentleman from Indiana will proceed in order.

Mr. Holman: I suppose, Mr. Speaker, the Constitution of the United
States would scarcely be in order. I will not ask to have it read.

The debate continued in the vein illustrated in the foregoing extracts,
from the morning of February 22, notwithstanding it was a National
Holiday, such was the haste of the impeachers, to the evening of the
24th, almost without interruption. It was at times illustrated by marked
ability, and on the Republican side by intense bitterness and partisan
malignity. A large number of the members of the House participated in
the debate.

Mr. Thaddeus Stevens then closed the debate in the following arraignment
of the President:

Now in defiance of this law, (the Office-Tenure Act) Andrew Johnson,
on the 21st day of February, 1868, issued his commission or letter of
authority to one Lorenzo Thomas, appointing him Secretary of War ad
interim. and commanded him to take possession of the Department of War
and to eject the incumbent. E M. Stanton, then in lawful possession
of said office. Here, if this act stood alone, would be an undeniable
official misdemeanor--not only a misdemeanor per se, but declared to be
so by the act itself, and the party made indictable and punishable in
a criminal proceeding. If Andrew Johnson escapes with bare removal
from office, if he be not FINED AND INCARCERATED IN THE PENITENTIARY
AFTERWARD UNDER CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS, he may thank the weakness or the
clemency of Congress and not his own innocence.

We shall propose to prove on the trial that Andrew Johnson was guilty
of misprision of bribery by offering to General Grant, if he would unite
with him in his lawless violence, to assume in his stead the penalties
and to endure the imprisonment denounced by the law Bribery is one of
the offenses specifically enumerated for which the President may be
impeached and removed from office. By the Constitution, article two,
section two, the President has power to nominate and, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint all officers of the United
States whose appointments are not therein otherwise provided for and
which shall be established by law, and to fill up all vacancies that may
happen during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which
shall expire at the end of their nest session. Nowhere, either in the
Constitution or by statute, has the President power to create a vacancy
during the session of the Senate and fill it without the advice and
consent of the Senate, and yet, on the 21st day of February, 1868, while
the Senate was in session, he notified the head of the War Department
that he was removed from office and his successor ad interim appointed.
Here is a plain, recorded violation of the Constitution and laws, which,
if it stood alone, would make every honest and intelligent man give his
vote for impeachment. The President had persevered in his lawless
course through along series of unjustifiable acts. When the so called
Confederate States of America were conquered and had laid down their
arms and surrendered their territory to the victorious Union the
government and final disposition of the conquered country BELONGED TO
CONGRESS ALONE, according to every principle of the law of nations.

Neither the Executive nor the judiciary had any right to interfere with
it except so far as was necessary to control it by military rule
until the SOVEREIGN POWER OF THE NATION had provided for its civil
administration. No power but Congress had any right to say WHETHER EVER
OR WHEN they should be admitted to the Union as States and entitled to
the privileges of the Constitution of the United States. And yet Andrew
Johnson, with unblushing hardihood, undertook to rule them by his own
power alone; to lead them into full communion with the Union: direct
them what governments to erect and what constitutions to adopt, and
to send Representatives and Senators to Congress according to his
instructions. When admonished by express act of Congress, more than
once repeated, he disregarded the warning and continued his lawless
usurpation. He is since known to have obstructed the re-establishment
of those governments by the authority of Congress, and has advised the
inhabitants to resist the legislation of Congress. In my judgment his
conduct with regard to that transaction was a high-handed usurpation of
power which ought long ago to have brought him to impeachment and trial
and to have removed him from his position of great mischief.

I trust that when we come to vote upon this question we shall remember
that although it is the duty of the President to see that the laws be
executed, THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF THE NATION RESTS IN CONGRESS, who have
been placed around the executive as muniments to defend his rights, and
as watchmen to enforce his obedience to the law and the Constitution.
His oath to obey the Constitution and our duty to compel him to do it
are a tremendous obligation, heavier than was ever assumed by mortal
rulers. We are to protect or to destroy the liberty and happiness of a
mighty people, and to take care that they progress in civilization and
defend themselves against every kind of tyranny. As we deal with the
first great political malefactor so will be the result of our efforts to
perpetuate the happiness and good government of the human race. The God
of our fathers, who inspired them with the thought of universal freedom,
will hold us responsible for the noble institutions which they projected
and expected us to carry out.

The Clerk then read the Resolution and the House proceeded to vote, as
follows:

Resolution providing for the impeachment of Andrew Johnson, President of
the United States:

Resolved, That Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, be
impeached of high crimes and misdemeanors in office.

Yeas--Messrs. Allison, Ames, Anderson, Arnell, Delos R. Ashley, James M.
Ashley, Bailey, Baker, Baldwin, Banks, Beaman, Beatty, Benton, Bingham,
Blaine, Blair, Boutwell, Bromwell, Broomall. Buckland, Butler, Cake,
Churchill, Reader W. Clarke, Sidney Clarke, Cobb, Coburn, Cook,
Cornell, Covode, Cullom, Dawes, Dodge, Driggs, Eckley, Eggleston, Eliot,
Farnsworth, Ferries. Ferry, Fields, Gravely, Griswold, Halsy, Harding,
Higby, Hill, Hooper, Hopkins, Asahel W. Hubbard, Chester D. Hubbard,
Hulburd, Hunter, Ingersoll, Jenckes, Judd, Julian, Kelley, Kelsey,
Ketcham, Kitchen Laflin, George V. Lawrence, William Lawrence, Lincoln,
Loan, Logan, Loughridge, Lynch, Mallory, Marvin, McCarthy, McClurg,
Mercur, Miller, Moore, Moorhead, Morrell, Mullins, Myers, Newcomb,
Nunn, O'Neill, Orth, Paine, Perham, Peters, Pike, Pile, Plants, Poland,
Polsley, Price, Raum, Robertson, Sawyer, Schenck, Scofield, Selye,
Shanks, Smith, Spalding, Starkweather, Aaron F. Stevens, Thaddeus
Stevens, Stokes, Taffe, Taylor, Trowbridge, Twitchell, Upson, Van
Aernam. Burt Van Horn, Van Wyck, Ward, Cadwalader C. Washburn, Elihu B.
Washburn, Williams, Washburn, Welker, Thomas Williams, James F.
Wilson, John T. Wilson, Stephen F. Wilson, Windom, Woodbridge and the
Speaker--126.

Nays--Messrs. Adams, Archer, Axtell, Barnes, Barnum, Beck, Boyer,
Brooks, Burr, Cary, Chanler, Eldridge, Fox, Getz, Glossbrenner,
Galladay, Grover, Haight, Holman, Hotchkiss, Richard D. Hubbard,
Morrissey, Mungen, Niblack, Nicholson, Phelps, Pruyn, Randall, Ross,
Sitgreaves, Stewart, Stone, Taber, Lawrence S. Trimble, Van Auken, Van
Trump, Wood and Woodward--47.

On motion of Mr. Stevens the following resolutions were adopted:

Resolved, That a committee of two be appointed to go to the Senate and,
at the bar thereof, in the name of the House of Representatives and
of all the people of the United States, to impeach Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors in
office, and acquaint the Senate that the House of Representatives will,
in due time, exhibit particular articles of impeachment against him and
make good the same; and that the committee do demand that the Senate
take order for the appearance of said Andrew Johnson to answer to said
impeachment.

Resolved, That a committee of seven be appointed to prepare and report
articles of impeachment against Andrew Johnson, President of the United
States, with power to send for persons, papers and records, and to take
testimony under oath.

The Speaker announced the following committee under these resolutions:

Committee to Communicate to the Senate to the Senate the action of the
House ordering AN IMPEACHMENT of the of the President of the United
States.---Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania, and John A. Bingham, of
Ohio.

Committee to declare articles of Articles of Impeachment against the
President of the United States.--George S. Boutwell of Massachusetts;
Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania; John A. Bingham, of Ohio; James
F. Wilson, of Iowa; John A. Logan, of Illinois; George W. Julian, of
Indiana, and Hamilton Ward, of New York.



CHAPTER VII. --  IMPEACHMENT REPORTED TO THE SENATE.

THE PRESIDENT'S ANSWER.

On February 25th, 1868, Messrs. Stevens and Bingham, a committee of the
House, appeared at the bar of the Senate, and Mr. Stevens said:

Mr. President, in obedience to the order of the House of
Representatives, we appear before you, and in the name of the House
of Representatives and of all the people of the United States, we do
impeach Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, of high crimes
and misdemeanors in office; and we further inform the Senate that the
House of Representatives will in due time exhibit particular articles
of impeachment against hint and make good the same; and in their name
we demand that the Senate take order for the appearance of said Andrew
Johnson to answer said impeachment.

The committee retired, and after debate the following resolution was
adopted by the Senate:

Resolved, That the Message of the House of Representatives relating to
the impeachment of Andrew Johnson. President of the United States, be
referred to a select committee of seven, to consider and report thereon.

On the 26th, Mr. Howard, from the select committee appointed to consider
and report upon the Message of the House of Representatives in relation
to the impeachment of Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
reported the following resolution:

Whereas, the House of Representatives on the 25th day of the present
month, by two of their members, Messrs. Thaddeus Stevens and John A.
Bingham, at the bar of the Senate, impeached Andrew Johnson, President
of the United States, of high crimes and misdemeanors in office, and
informed the Senate that the House of Representatives will in due time
exhibit particular articles of impeachment against him and make good
the same; and likewise demanded that the Senate take order for the
appearance of said Andrew Johnson, to answer to the said impeachment:
Therefore,

Resolved, That the Senate will take proper order thereon, of which due
notice shall be given to the House of Representatives.

On the 28th, Mr. Howard, of the Select Committee appointed to prepare
rules for the government of trials of impeachment, reported a series of
rules, which were adopted by the Senate on March 2nd, after a three days
debate.

On the same day, the following gentlemen were elected by the House
of Representatives as Managers to conduct the prosecution of the
impeachment of the President before the Senate: Hons. Jno. A. Bingham,
of Ohio; George S. Boutwell, of Massachusetts; James F. Wilson, of Iowa;
Benj. F. Butler, of Massachusetts; John A. Logan, of Illinois; Thomas
Wilson, of Pennsylvania, and Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania.

On March 3rd it was ordered by the Senate:

That the Secretary of the Senate inform the House of Representatives
that the Senate is ready to receive the managers appointed by the
House of Representatives to carry to the Senate articles of impeachment
against Andrew Johnson, President of the United States.

In the Senate, on the 4th, the following formal proceedings were had:

The managers of the impeachment on the part of the House of
Representatives appeared at the bar, and their presence was announced by
the Sergeant-at-Arms.

The President pro tempore: The managers of the impeachment will advance
within the bar and take the seats provided for them.

The managers came within the bar and took the seats assigned to them in
the area in front of the Vice President's Chair.

The Speaker of the House of Representatives advanced and took a seat on
the right of the President pro tempore of the Senate.

Mr. Manager Bingham:

Mr. President, the managers on the part of the House of Representatives,
by order of the House, are ready at the bar of the Senate, whenever it
may please the Senate to hear them, to present articles of impeachment
and in maintenance of the impeachment preferred against Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States, by the House of Representatives.

The President pro tempore:

The Sergeant-at-arms will make proclamation.

The Sergeant-at-arms:

Hear ye! Hear ye! All persons are commanded to keep silence, on pain of
imprisonment, while the House of Representatives is exhibiting to the
Senate of the United States, articles of impeachment against Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States.

The managers then rose and remained standing, with the exception of Mr.
Stevens, who was too feeble to do so, while Mr. Manager Bingham read the
articles of impeachment, as follows:

Articles exhibited by the House of Representatives of the United
States, in the name of themselves and all the people of the United
States, against Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, in
maintenance and support of their impeachment against him for high crimes
and misdemeanors in ofce.

ARTICLE I.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, on the
21st day of February, in the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and
sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia, unmindful
of the high duties of his office, of his oath of office, and of the
requirement of the Constitution that he should take care that the
laws be faithfully executed, did unlawfully, and in violation of the
Constitution and laws of the United States issue an order in writing
for the removal of Edwin M. Stanton from the office of Secretary for the
Department of War, said Edwin M. Stanton having been theretofore duly
appointed and commissioned by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate of the United States, as such secretary, and said Andrew Johnson,
President of the United States, on the twelfth day of August in the year
of our Lord eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, and during the recess of
said Senate, having suspended by his order Edwin M. Stanton from said
office, and within twenty days after the first day of the next meeting
of said Senate, that is to say, on the twelfth day of December in the
year last aforesaid having reported to said Senate such suspension with
the evidence and reasons for his action in the case and the name of the
person designated to perform the duties of such office temporarily until
the next meeting of the Senate, and said Senate thereafterwards, on the
thirteenth day of January, in the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and
sixty-eight, having duly considered the evidence and reasons reported by
said Andrew Johnson for said suspension, and having refused to concur
in said suspension, whereby and by force of the provisions of an act
entitled "An Act regulating the tenure of certain civil offices," passed
March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, said Edwin M. Stanton
did forthwith resume the functions of his office, whereof the said
Andrew Johnson had then and there due notice, and said Edwin M. Stanton,
by reason of the premises, on said 21st day of February, being lawfully
entitled to hold said office of Secretary for the Department of
War, which said order for the removal of said Edwin M. Stanton is in
substance as follows, that is to say:

Executive Mansion, Washington, D. C., Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--By virtue of the power and authority vested in me as President by
the Constitution and laws of the United States you are hereby removed
from office as Secretary for the Department of War, and your functions
as such will terminate upon the receipt of this communication.

You will transfer to Brevet Major General Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant
General of the army, who has this day been authorized and empowered
to act as Secretary of War ad interim. all records, books, papers, and
other public property now in your custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson. To the Hon. Edwin M. Stanton,
Washington, D. C.

Which order was unlawfully issued with intent then and there to
violate the act entitled "An Act regulating the tenure of certain civil
offices," passed March 2d, 1867, and with the further intent contrary
to the provisions of said act, in violation thereof, and contrary to
the provisions of the Constitution of the United States, and without the
advice and consent of the Senate of the United States, the said Senate
then and there being in session, to remove said Edwin M. Stanton from
the office of Secretary for the Department of War, the said. Edwin M.
Stanton being then and there Secretary for the Department of War, and
being then and there in the due and lawful execution and discharge of
the duties of said office, whereby said Andrew Johnson. President of
the United States, did then and there commit and was guilty of a high
misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE II.

That on the said twenty-first of February, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District
of Columbia, said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
unmindful of the high duties of his office, of his oath of office, and
in violation of the Constitution of the United States, and contrary
to the provisions of an act entitled "An act regulating the tenure
of certain civil offices," passed March second, eighteen hundred and
sixty-seven, without the advice and consent of the Senate of the
United States, said Senate then and there being in session, and without
authority of law, did, with intent to violate the Constitution of the
United States, and the act aforesaid, issue and deliver to one Lorenzo
Thomas a letter of authority in substance as follows, that is to say:

Executive Mansion. Washington, D. C., February 21, 1868.

Sir:--The Hon. Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from office
as Secretary for the Department of War, you are hereby authorized and
empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim, and will immediately
enter upon the discharge of the duties pertaining to that office.

Mr. Stanton has been instructed to transfer to you all the records,
books, papers, and other public property now in his custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson. To Brevet Major General Lorenzo
Thomas. Adjutant General U. S. Army, Washington, D. C.

Then and there being no vacancy in said offce of Secretary for the
Department of War, whereby said Andrew Johnson. President of the United
States, did then and there commit and was guilty of a high misdemeanor
in office.

ARTICLE III.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, on the
twenty-first day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia,
did commit and was guilty of a high misdemeanor in office in this, that,
without authority of law, while the Senate of the United States was then
and there in session, he did appoint one Lorenzo Thomas to be Secretary
for the Department of War ad interim, without the advice and consent of
the Senate, and with intent to violate the Constitution of the United
States, and no vacancy having happened in said office of Secretary for
the Department of War during the recess of the Senate, and no vacancy
existing in said office at the time, and which said appointment, so
made by said Andrew Johnson, of said Lorenzo Thomas, is in substance as
follows, that is to say:

Executive Mansion, Washington, D. C., Feb. 21, 1868. Sir:--The Hon.
Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from office as Secretary
for the Department of War, you are hereby authorized and empowered to
act as Secretary of War ad interim, and will immediately enter upon the
discharge of the duties pertaining to that office.

Mr. Stanton, has been instructed to transfer to you all the records,
books, papers, and other public property now in his custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson. To Brevet Major General Lorenzo
Thomas, Adjutant General, U. S. Army, Washington, D. C

ARTICLE IV.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, unmindful of
the high duties of his office and of his oath of office, in violation of
the Constitution and laws of the United States, on the twenty-first
day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia, did unlawfully
conspire with one Lorenzo Thomas, and with other persons to the House
of Representatives unknown, with intent, by intimidation and threats,
unlawfully to hinder and prevent Edwin M. Stanton, then and there the
Secretary for the Department of War, duly appointed under the laws
of the United Stales, from holding said office of Secretary for the
Department of War, contrary to and in violation of the Constitution of
the United States, and of the provisions of an act entitled "An act to
define and punish certain conspiracies," approved July thirty-first,
eighteen hundred and sixty-one, whereby said Andrew Johnson, President
of the United States, did then and there commit and was guilty of a high
crime in office.

ARTICLE V.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, unmindful
of the high duties of his office and of his oath of office, on the
twenty-first day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-eight, and on divers other days and times in said
year, before the second day of March, in the year, of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District
of Columbia, did unlawfully conspire with one Lorenzo Thomas, and with
other persons to the House of Representatives unknown, to prevent and
hinder the execution of an act entitled "An act regulating the tenure
of certain civil offices," passed March second, eighteen hundred and
sixty-seven, and in pursuance of said conspiracy, did unlawfully attempt
to prevent Edwin M. Stanton, then and there being Secretary for the
Department of War, duly appointed and commissioned under the laws of
the United States, from holding said office, whereby the said Andrew
Johnson, President of the Unite States, did then and there commit and
was guilty of a high misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE VI.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, unmindful
of the high duties of his office and of his oath of office, on the
twenty-first day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia, did
unlawfully conspire with one Lorenzo Thomas by force to seize, take and
possess the property of the United States in the Department of War, and
then and there in the custody and charge of Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary
for said Department, contrary to the provisions of an act entitled
"An act to define and punish certain conspiracies," approved July
thirty-one, eighteen hundred and sixty one, and with intent to violate
and disregard an act entitled "An act regulating the tenure of certain
civil offices," passed March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven,
whereby said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, did then
and there commit a high crime in office.

ARTICLE VII.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, unmindful
of the high duties of his office and of his oath of office, on the
twenty-first day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia, did
unlawfully conspire with one Lorenzo Thomas with intent unlawfully
to seize, take, and possess the property of the United States in
the Department of War, in the custody and charge of Edwin M. Stanton
Secretary for said Department, with intent to violate and disregard the
act entitled "An act regulating the tenure of certain civil offices"
passed March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, whereby said
Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, did then and there
commit a high misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE VIII.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, unmindful of
the high duties of his office and of his oath of office, with intent
unlawfully to control the disbursements of the moneys appropriated for
the military service and for the Department of War, on the twenty-first
day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of Columbia, did unlawfully
and contrary to the provisions of an act entitled "An act regulating the
tenure of certain civil offices," passed March second, eighteen hundred
and sixty-seven, and in violation of the Constitution of the United
States, and without the advice and consent of the Senate of the United
States, and while the Senate was then and there in session, there being
no vacancy in the office of Secretary for the Department of War, and
with intent to violate and disregard the act aforesaid, then and
there issue and deliver to one Lorenzo Thomas a letter of authority in
writing, in substance as follows, that is to say:

Executive Mansion, Washington, D. C., Feb. 21, 1868.

Sir:--The Hon. Edwin M. Stanton having been this day removed from office
as Secretary for the Department of War, you are hereby authorized and
empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim, and will immediately
enter upon the discharge of the duties pertaining to that office.

Mr. Stanton has been instructed to transfer to you all the records,
books, papers, and other public property now in his custody and charge.

Respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson. To Brevet Major General Lorenzo
Thomas, Adjutant General, United States Army, Washington, D. C.

Whereby said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, did then
and there commit and was guilty of a high misdemeanor in office.

ARTICLE IX.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, on the
twenty-second day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and sixty-eight, at Washington, in the District of
Columbia, in disregard of the Constitution, and the laws of the United
States duly enacted, as commander-in-chief of the army of the United
States, dial bring before himself then and there William H. Emory, a
major-general by brevet in the army of the United States, actually in
command of the department of Washington and the military forces thereof,
and did then and there, as such commander-in-chief, declare to and
instruct said Emory that part of a law of the United states, passed
March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven entitled "An act making
appropriations for the support of the army for the year ending June
thirtieth, eighteen hundred and sixty-eight and for other purposes,"
especially the second section thereof, which provides, among other
things, that "all orders and instructions relating to military
operations, issued by the President or Secretary of War, shall be issued
through the General of the Army, and, in case of his inability, through
the next in rank," was unconstitutional, and in contravention of the
commission of said Emory, and which said provision of law had been
theretofore duly and legally promulgated by General Orders for the
government and direction of the army of the United States, as the said
Andrew Johnson then and there well knew, with intent thereby to induce
said Emory, in his official capacity as commander of the department
of Washington, to violate the provisions of said act, and to take and
receive, act upon, and obey such orders as he, the said Andrew Johnson,
might make and give, and which should not be issued through the General
of the army of the United States, according to the provisions of said
act, and with the further intent thereby to enable him, the said Andrew
Johnson, to prevent the execution of the act entitled "An act regulating
the tenure of certain civil offices," passed March second eighteen
hundred and sixty-seven and to unlawfully prevent Edwin M. Stanton then
being Secretary for the Department of War, from holding said office and
discharging the duties thereof, whereby said Andrew Johnson, President
of the United States, did then and there commit and was guilty of a high
misdemeanor in office.

And the House of Representatives by protestation saving to themselves
the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter any further articles,
or other accusation or impeachment against the said Andrew Johnson,
President or the United States, and also of replying to his answers
which he shall wake unto the articles herein preferred against him, and
of offering proof to the same, and every part thereof, and to all and
every other article, accusation, or impeachment which shall be exhibited
by them, as the case shall require, do demand that the said Andrew
Johnson may be put to answer the high crimes and misdemeanors in office
herein charged against him, and that such proceedings, examinations,
trials, and judgments may be thereupon had and given as may be agreeable
to law and justice.

ARTICLE X.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, unmindful of
the high duties of his office, and the dignity and proprieties thereof,
and of the harmony and courtesies which ought to exist and be maintained
between the executive and legislative branches of the government of
the United States, designing and intending to set aside the rightful
authority and powers of Congress, did attempt to bring into disgrace,
ridicule, hatred, contempt and reproach, the Congress of the United
States, and the several branches thereof, to impair and destroy the
regard and respect of all the good people of the United States for the
Congress and legislative powers thereof, (which all officers of the
government ought inviolably to preserve and maintain.) and to excite the
odium and resentment of all the good people of the United States against
Congress and the laws by it duly and constitutionally enacted; and in
pursuance of his said design and intent, openly and publicly, and before
divers assemblages of the citizens of the United States, convened in
divers parts thereof to meet and receive said Andrew Johnson as the
Chief Magistrate of the United States, did, on the eighteenth day
of August, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-six, and on divers other days and times, as well before as
afterward, make and deliver, with a loud voice, certain intemperate,
inflammatory, and scandalous harangues, and did therein utter loud
threats and bitter menaces, as well against Congress as the laws of the
United States duly enacted thereby, amid the cries, jeer, and laughter
of the multitudes then assembled and in hearing.

ARTICLE XI.

That said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, unmindful
of the high duties of his office, and of his oath of offce, and in
disregard of the Constitution and laws of the United States, did,
heretofore, to wit, on the eighteenth day of August, A. D. eighteen
hundred and sixty-six, at the City of Washington, and the District of
Columbia, by public speech, declare and affirm, in substance, that the
thirty-ninth Congress of the United States was not a Congress of the
United States authorized by the Constitution to exercise legislative
power under the same, but, on the contrary, was a Congress of only
part of the States, thereby denying, and intending to deny, that the
legislation of said Congress was valid or obligatory upon him, the said
Andrew Johnson, except in so far as he saw fit to approve the same,
and also thereby denying, and intending to deny, the power of the said
thirty-ninth Congress to propose amendments to the Constitution of the
United States; and, in pursuance of said declaration, the said Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States, afterwards, to-wit, on the
twenty first day of February, A. D. eighteen hundred and sixty-eight,
at the city of Washington, in the District of Columbia, did, unlawfully,
and in disregard of the requirements of the Constitution that he should
take care that the laws be faithfully executed, attempt to prevent the
execution of an act entitled "An act regulating the tenure of certain
civil offices," passed March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven,
by unlawfully devising and contriving, and attempting to devise
and contrive means by which he should prevent Edwin M. Stanton from
forthwith resuming the functions of the office of Secretary for the
Department of War, notwithstanding the refusal of the Senate to concur
in the suspension theretofore made by said Andrew Johnson of said Edwin
M. Stanton from said office of Secretary for the Department of War; and,
also, by further unlawfully devising and contriving, and attempting to
devise and contrive means, then and there, to prevent the execution of
an act entitled "An act making appropriations for the support of the
army for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and
sixty-eight, and for other purposes," approved March second, eighteen
hundred and sixty-seven; and also, to prevent the execution of an act
entitled "An act to provide for the more efficient government of the
rebel States," passed March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven,
whereby the said Andrew Johnson, President of the United States, did
then, to wit, on the twenty-first day of February, A. D. eighteen hundred
and sixty-eight, at the city of Washington, commit, and was guilty of, a
high misdemeanor in office.

Schuyler Colfax, Speaker of the House of Representatives. Attest: Edward
McPherson, Clerk of the House of Representatives.


At the conclusion of the reading of the Articles of Impeachment, the
President of the Senate responded that "the Senate will take order upon
the subject of impeachment, of which proper notice will be given to the
House of Representatives."

In addition to the Speaker and Managers, a large number of the
members of the House of Representatives were present to witness the
extraordinary and impressive proceedings, and at its close all withdrew
and the Senate resumed the routine business of the day's session.

On Monday, March 23rd, 1868, the President, by his attorneys, appeared
at the bar of the Senate and made answer to the several Articles of
Impeachment, as follows:

(Answer to only the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 11th Articles, are here given,
as the 2nd, 3rd and 11th were the only Articles put to vote--all others
being abandoned, and as the 1st Article, though never put to vote,
contained practically all there was of the impeachment.)

ANSWER TO ARTICLE I.

For answer to the first article he said: That Edwin M. Stanton was
appointed Secretary for the Department of War on the 15th day of
January, A. D. 1862, by Abraham Lincoln, then President of the United
States, during the first term of his presidency, and was commissioned,
according to the Constitution and laws of the United States, to hold
the said office during the pleasure of the President; that the office of
Secretary for the Department of War was created by an act of the first
Congress in its first session, passed on the 7th day of August, A.D.
1789, and in and by that act it was provided and enacted that the said
Secretary for the Department of War shall perform and execute such
duties as shall from time to time be enjoined on and intrusted to him
by the President of the United States, agreeably to the Constitution,
relative to the subjects within the scope of said department; and
furthermore, that the Secretary shall conduct the business of the said
department in such a manner as the President of the United States shall,
from time to time, order and instruct.

And this respondent further answering, says that by force of the act
aforesaid and by reason of his appointment aforesaid the said Stanton
became the principal officer in one of the executive departments of the
government within the true, intent and meaning of the second section
of the second article of the Constitution of the United States, and
according to the true intent and meaning of that provision of the
Constitution of the United States: and, in accordance with the settled
and uniform practice of each and every President of the United States,
the said Stanton then became, and so long as he should continue to hold
the said office of Secretary for the Department of War must continue to
be, one of the advisers of the President of the United States, as
well as the person intrusted to act for and represent the President in
matters enjoined upon him or entrusted to him by the President touching
the department aforesaid, and for whose conduct in such capacity,
subordinate to the President, the President is, by the Constitution and
laws of the United States, made responsible.

And this respondent, further answering, says he succeeded to the office
of President of the United States upon, and by reason of, the death of
Abraham Lincoln, then President of the United States, on the 13th day
of April, 1865, and the said Stanton was then holding the said office
of Secretary for the Department of War under and by reason of the
appointment and commission aforesaid; and, not having been removed from
the said office by this respondent, the said Stanton continued to hold
the same under the appointment and commission aforesaid, at the pleasure
of the President, until the time hereinafter particularly mentioned:
and at no time received any appointment or commission save as above
detailed.

And this respondent, further answering, says that on and prior to the 5th
day of August, A. D. 1867, this respondent, the President of the United
States, responsible for the conduct of the Secretary for the Department
of War, and having the constitutional right to resort to and rely upon
the person holding that office for advice concerning the great and
difficult public duties enjoined on the President by the Constitution
and laws of the United States, became satisfied that he could not allow
the said Stanton to continue to hold the office of Secretary for the
Department of War without hazard of the public interest; that the
relations between the said Stanton and the President no longer permitted
the President to resort to him for advice, or to be, in the judgment of
the President, safely responsible for his conduct of the affairs of the
Department of War, as by law required, in accordance with the orders
and instructions of the President; and thereupon, by force of the
Constitution and laws of the United States, which devolve on the
President the power and the duty to control the conduct of the business
of that executive department of the government, and by reason of the
constitutional duty of the President to take care that the laws be
faithfully executed, this respondent did necessarily consider and did
determine that the said Stanton ought no longer to hold the said office
of Secretary for the Department of War. And this respondent, by virtue
of the power and authority vested in him as President of the United
States by the Constitution and laws of the United States, to give effect
to such his decision and determination, did, on the 5th day of August,
A. D. 1867, address to the said Stanton a note, of which the following
is a true copy:

Sir:--Public considerations of a high character constrain me to say that
your resignation as Secretary of War will be accepted.

To which note the said Stanton made the following reply:

War Department, Washington, August 5, 1867.

Sir:-Your note of this day has been received, stating that public
considerations of a high character constrain you "to say that my
resignation its Secretary of War will be accepted."

In reply I have the honor to say that public considerations of a high
character, which alone have induced me to continue at the head of this
department, constrain me not to resign the office of Secretary of War
before the next meeting of Congress.

Very respectfully yours. Edwin M. Stanton.


This respondent, as President of the United States, was thereon of
opinion that, having regard to the necessary official relations and
duties of the Secretary for the Department of War to the President of
the United States according to the Constitution and laws of the United
States, and having regard to the responsibility of the President for
the conduct of the said Secretary, and having regard to the permanent
executive authority of the office which the respondent holds under
the Constitution and laws of the United States, it was impossible,
consistently with the public interests, to allow the said Stanton to
continue to hold the said office of Secretary for the Department of War;
and it then became the official duty of the respondent, as President of
the United States, to consider and decide what act or acts should and
might lawfully be done by him, as President of the United States, to
cause the said Stanton to surrender the said office.

This respondent was informed and verily believed that it was practically
settled by the first Congress of the United States, and had been so
considered and uniformly and in great numbers of instances acted on by
each Congress and President of the United States, in succession, from
President Washington to, and including President Lincoln, and from the
first Congress to the thirty-ninth Congress, that the Constitution of
the United States conferred on the President, as part of the executive
power and as one of the necessary means and instruments of performing
the executive duty expressly imposed on him by the Constitution of
taking care that the laws be faithfully executed, the power at any and
all times of removing from office all executive officers for cause to be
judged of by the President alone. This respondent had, in pursuance of
the Constitution, required the opinion of each principal officer of the
executive departments, upon this question of constitutional executive
power and duty, and had been advised by each of them, including the
said Stanton, Secretary for the Department of War, that under the
Constitution of the United States this power was lodged by the
Constitution in the President of the United States, and that
consequently, it could be lawfully exercised by him, and the Congress
could not deprive him thereof; and this respondent, in his capacity of
President of the United States, and because in that capacity he was both
enabled and bound to use his best judgment upon this question, did, in
good faith and with an earnest desire to arrive at the truth, come to
the conclusion and opinion, and did make the same known to the honorable
the Senate of the United States by a message dated on the 2nd day of
March, 1867, that the power last mentioned was conferred and the duty
of exercising it, in fit cases, was imposed on the President by the
Constitution of the United States, and that the President could not be
deprived of this, power or relieved of this duty, nor could the same be
vested by law in the President and the Senate jointly, either in part or
whole.

This respondent was also then aware that by the first section of "An act
regulating the tenure of certain civil offices," passed March 2, 1867,
by a constitutional majority of both houses of Congress, it was enacted
as follows:

"That every person holding any civil office to which he has been
appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and every
person who shall hereafter be appointed to any such office, and shall
become duly qualified to act therein, is and shall be entitled to hold
such office until a successor shall have been in like manner appointed
and duly qualified, except as herein otherwise provided: Provided, That
the Secretaries of State, of the Treasury, of War, of the Navy, and of
the Interior, the Postmaster General, and the Attorney General shall
hold their offices respectively for and during the term of the President
by whom they may have been appointed, and one month thereafter, subject
to removal by and with the advice and consent of the Senate."

This respondent was also aware that this act was understood and intended
to be an expression of the opinion of the Congress by which that act was
passed, that the power to remove executive officers for cause might,
by law, be taken from the President and vested in him and the Senate
jointly; and although this respondent had arrived at and still retained
the opinion above expressed, and verily believed, as he still believes,
that the said first section of the last mentioned act was and is wholly
inoperative and void by reason of its conflict with the Constitution
of the United States, yet, inasmuch as the same had been enacted by the
constitutional majority in each of the two houses of that Congress, this
respondent considered it to be proper to examine and decide whether the
particular case of the said Stanton, on which it was this respondent's
duty to act, was within or without the terms of that first section of
the act; or, if within it, whether the President had not the power,
according to the terms of the act, to remove the said Stanton from
the office of Secretary for the Department of War, and having, in his
capacity of President of the United States, so examined and considered,
did form the opinion that the case of the said Stanton and his tenure of
office were not affected by the first section of the last-named act.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that although a case thus
existed which, in his judgment as President of the United States, called
for the exercise of the executive power to remove the said Stanton from
the office of Secretary for the Department of War, and although this
respondent was of the opinion, as is above shown, that under the
Constitution of the United States the power to remove the said Stanton
from the said office was vested in the President of the United States;
and also this respondent was also of the opinion, as is above shown,
that the case of the said Stanton was not affected by the first section
of the last named act, and although each of the said opinions had been
formed by this respondent upon an actual case, requiring him, in his
capacity of President of the United States to come to some judgment and
determination thereon, yet this respondent, as President of the United
States, desired and determined to avoid, if possible, any question of
the construction and effect of the said first section of the last named
act, and also the broader question of the executive power conferred on
the President of the United States, by the Constitution of the United
States, to remove one of the principal officers of one of the executive
departments for cause seeming to him sufficient; and this respondent
also desired and determined that if, from causes over which he could
exert no control, it should become absolutely necessary to raise and
have, in some way, determined either or both of the said last named
questions, it was in accordance with the Constitution of the United
States, and was required of the President thereby, that questions of so
much gravity and importance, upon which the legislative and executive
departments of the government had disagreed, which involved powers
considered by all branches of the government, during its entire history
down to the year 1867, to have been confided by the Constitution of the
United States to the President, and to be necessary for the complete and
proper execution of his constitutional duties, should be in some proper
way submitted to that judicial department of the government instrusted
by the Constitution with the power, and subjected by it to the duty, not
only of determining finally the construction of and effect of all acts
of Congress, but of comparing them with the Constitution of the United
States and pronouncing them inoperative when found in conflict with that
fundamental law which the people have enacted for the government of all
their servants. And to these ends, first, that, through the action of
the Senate of the United States, the absolute duty of the President
to substitute some fit person in place of Mr. Stanton as one of his
advisers, and as a principal subordinate officer whose official conduct
he was responsible for and had lawful right to control, might, if,
possible, be accomplished without the necessity of raising any one
of the questions aforesaid; and, second, if this duty could not be
so performed then that these questions, or such of them as might
necessarily arise, should be judicially determined in manner aforesaid,
and for no other end or purpose, this respondent, as President of the
United States, on the 12th day of August, 1867, seven days after the
reception of the letter of the said Stanton of the 5th of August,
hereinbefore stated, did issue to the said Stanton the order following
namely:

Executive Mansion, Washington, August 12, 1867.

Sir:--By virtue of the power and authority vested in me as President by
the Constitution and laws of the United States, you are hereby suspended
from office as Secretary of War, and will cease to exercise any and all
functions pertaining to the same.

You will at once transfer to General Ulysses S. Grant, who has this day
been authorized and empowered to act as Secretary of War ad interim, all
records, books, papers, and other public property now in your custody
and charge. To Hon. Edwin M. Stanton, Secretary of War.

To which said order the said Stanton made the following reply:

War Department, Washington City, August 12, 1867.

Sir:--Your note of this date has been received, informing me that, by
virtue of the powers vested in you as President by the Constitution and
laws of the United States, I am suspended from office as Secretary of
War, and will cease to exercise any and all functions pertaining to the
same, and also directing me at once to transfer to General Ulysses
S. Grant, who has this day been authorized and empowered to act as
Secretary of War ad interim, all records, books, papers, and other
public property now in my custody and charge. Under a sense of public
duty I am compelled to deny your right, under the Constitution and laws
of the United States, without the advice and consent of the senate, and
without legal cause, to suspend me from office as Secretary of War, or
the exercise of any or all functions pertaining to the same, or without
such advice and consent to compel me to transfer to any person the
records, books, papers, and public property in my custody as Secretary,
But inasmuch as the General commanding the Armies of the United has
been appointed ad interim and has notified me that he has accepted the
appointment, I have no alternative but to submit, under protest, to
superior force.

To the President.


And this respondent, further answering, says, that it is provided in and
by the second section of "An act to regulate the tenure of certain civil
offices," that the President may suspend an officer from the performance
of the duties of the office held by him, for certain causes therein
designated, until the next meeting of the Senate, and until the case
shall be acted on by the senate; that this respondent, as President
of the United States, was advised, and he verily believed and still
believes, that the executive power of removal from office confided to
him by the Constitution as aforesaid includes the power of suspension
from office at the pleasure of the President, and this respondent, by
the order aforesaid, did suspend the said Stanton from office, not until
the next meeting of the Senate, or until the Senate should have acted
upon the case, but by force of the power and authority vested in him by
the Constitution and laws of the United States, indefinitely and at the
pleasure of the President, and the order, in form aforesaid, was made
known to the Senate of the United States on the 12th day of December, A.
D. 1867, as will be more fully hereinafter stated.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that in and by the act
of February 13, 1795, it was, among other things, provided and enacted
that, in case of vacancy in the office of Secretary for the Department
of War, it shall be lawful for the President, in case he shall think it
necessary, to authorize any person to perform the duties of that office
until a successor be appointed or such vacancy filled, but not exceeding
the term of six months; and this respondent, being advised and believing
that such law was in full force and not repealed, by an order dated
August 12, 1867, did authorize and empower Ulysses S. Grant, General of
the armies of the United States, to act as Secretary for the Department
of War ad interim, in the form in which similar authority had
theretofore been given, not until the next meeting of the Senate and
until the Senate should act on the case, but at the pleasure of the
President, subject only to the limitation of six months in the said
last-mentioned act contained; and a copy of the last-named order
was made known to the Senate of the United States on the 12th day
of December, 1867, as will be hereinafter more fully stated: and in
pursuance of the design and intention aforesaid, if it should become
necessary to submit the said question to a judicial determination, this
respondent, at or near the date of the last-mentioned order, did
make known such his purpose to obtain a judicial decision of the said
question, or such of them as might be necessary.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that in further pursuance
of his intention and design, if possible, to perform what he judged to
be his imperative duty, to prevent the said Stanton from longer holding
the office of Secretary for the Department of War, and at the same time
avoiding, if possible, any question respecting the extent of the power
of removal from executive office confided to the President by the
Constitution of the United States, and any question respecting the
construction and effect of the first section of the said "act regulating
the tenure of certain civil offices," while he should not, by any act
of his, abandon and relinquish, either a power which he believed the
Constitution had conferred on the President of the United States, to
enable him to perform the duties of his office, or, a power designedly
left to him by the first section of the act of Congress last aforesaid,
this respondent did, on the 12th day of December, 1867, transmit to the
senate of the United States a message a copy whereof is hereunto annexed
and marked B, wherein he made known the orders aforesaid and the reasons
which had induced the same, so far as this respondent then considered it
material and necessary that the same should be set forth, and reiterated
his views concerning the constitutional power of removal vested in the
President, and also expressed his views concerning the construction of
the said first section of the last mentioned act, as respected the power
of the President to remove the said Stanton from the said office of
Secretary for the Department of War, well hoping that this respondent
could thus perform what he then believed, and still believes, to be his
imperative duty in reference to the said Stanton, without derogating
from the powers which this respondent believed were confided to the
President, by the Constitution and laws, and without the necessity of
raising, judicially, any questions respecting the same.

And this respondent, further answering, says, that this hope not having
been realized, the President was compelled either to allow the said
Stanton to resume the said office and remain therein contrary to the
settled convictions of the President, formed as aforesaid respecting
the powers confided to him and the duties required of him by the
Constitution of the United States, and contrary to the opinion formed
as aforesaid, that the first section of the last mentioned act did not
affect the case of the said Stanton, and contrary to the fixed belief
of the President that he could no longer advise with or trust or be
responsible for the said Stanton, for the said office of Secretary for
the Department of War, or else he was compelled to take such steps as
might, in the judgment of the President, be lawful and necessary to
raise, for a judicial decision, the questions affecting the lawful right
of the said Stanton to resume the said office, or the power of the said
Stanton to persist in refusing to quit the said office if he should
persist in actually refusing to quit the same; and to this end, and to
this end only, this respondent did, on the 21st day of February, 1868
issue the order for the removal of the said Stanton, in the said first
article mentioned and set forth, and the order authorizing the said
Lorenzo F. Thomas to act as Secretary of War ad interim, in the said
second article set forth.

And this respondent, proceeding to answer specifically each substantial
allegation in the said first article, says: He denies that the said
Stanton, on the 21st day of February, 1868, was lawfully in possession
of the said ofce of Secretary for the Department of War. He denies that
the said Stanton, on the day last mentioned, was lawfully entitled to
hold the said office against the will of the President of the United
States. He denies that the said order for the removal of the said
Stanton was unlawfully issued. He denies that the said order was issued
with intent to violate the act entitled "An act to regulate the tenure
of certain civil offices." He denies that the said order was a violation
of the last mentioned act. He denies that the said order was a violation
of the Constitution of the United States, or of any law thereof, or of
his oath of office. He denies that the said order was issued with an
intent to violate the Constitution of the United States or any law
thereof, or this respondent's oath of office; and he respectfully, but
earnestly insists that not only was it issued by him in the performance
of what he believed to be an imperative official duty, but in the
performance of what this honorable court will consider was, in point
of fact, an imperative official duty. And he denies that any and all
substantive matters, in the said first article contained, in manner
and form as the same are therein stated and set forth, do, by law,
constitute a high misdemeanor in office, within the true intent and
meaning of the Constitution of the United States.

ANSWER TO ARTICLE II.

And for answer to the second article, this respondent says that he
admits he did issue and deliver to said Lorenzo Thomas the said writing
set forth in said second article, bearing date at Washington, District
of Columbia, February 21, 1868, addressed to Brevet Major General
Lorenzo Thomas, Adjutant General United States army, Washington,
District of Columbia, and he further admits that the same was so issued
without the advice and consent of the Senate of the United States, then
in session; but he denies that he thereby violated the Constitution of
the United States, or any law thereof, or that he did thereby intend to
violate the Constitution of the United States or the provisions of any
act of Congress; and this respondent refers to his answer to said first
articles for a full statement of the purposes and intentions with which
said order was issued, and adopts the same as part of his answer to this
article; and he further denies that there was then and there no vacancy
in the said office of Secretary for the Department of War, or that he
did then and there commit or was guilty of a high misdemeanor in office;
and this respondent maintains and will insist:

1. That at the date and delivery of said writing there was a vacancy
existing in the office of Secretary for the Department of War.

2. That notwithstanding the Senate of the United States was then in
session, it was lawful and according to long and well established usage
to empower and authorize the said Thomas to act as Secretary of War ad
interim.

3. That if the said act regulating the tenure of civil offices be held
to be a valid law, no provision of the same was violated by the issuing
of said order or by the designation of said Thomas to act as Secretary
of War ad interim.

ANSWER TO ARTICLE III.

And for answer to said third article, this respondent says that he
abides by his answer to said first and second articles in so far as
the same are responsive to the allegations contained in the said third
article, and, without here again repeating the same answer, prays the
same be taken as an answer to this third article as fully as if here
again set out at length; and as to the new allegation contained in said
third article, that this respondent did appoint the said Thomas to be
Secretary for the Department of War ad interim, this respondent denies
that he gave any other authority to said Thomas than such as appears in
said written authority set out in said article, by which he authorized
and empowered said Thomas to act as Secretary for the Department of War
ad interim; and he denies that the same amounts to an appointment, and
insists that it is only a designation of an officer of that department
to act temporarily as Secretary for the Department of War ad interim,
until an appointment should be made. But whether the said written
authority amounts to an appointment or to a temporary authority or
designation, this respondent denies that in any sense he did thereby
intend to violate the Constitution of the United States, or that he
thereby intended to give the said order the character or effect of
an appointment in the constitutional or legal sense of that term. He
further denies that there was no vacancy in said office of Secretary for
the Department of War existing at the date of said written authority.

ANSWER TO ARTICLE XI.

And in answer to the eleventh article, this respondent denies that on
the 18th day of August, in the year 1866, at the City of Washington, in
the District of Columbia, he did, by public speech or otherwise, declare
or affirm, in substance or at all, that the thirty-ninth Congress of the
United States was not a Congress of the United States authorized by the
constitution to exercise legislative power under the same, or that he
did then and there declare or affirm that the said thirty-ninth Congress
was a Congress of only part of the States in any sense or meaning other
than that ten States of the Union were denied representation therein;
or that he made any or either of the declarations or affirmations in this
behalf, in the said article alleged, as denying or intending to
deny that the legislation of said thirty-ninth Congress was valid or
obligatory upon this respondent, except so far as this respondent saw
fit to approve the same; and as to the allegation in said article, that
he did thereby intend or mean to be understood that the said Congress
had not power to propose amendments to the Constitution, this respondent
says that in said address he said nothing in reference to the subject of
amendments of the Constitution, nor was the question of the competency
of the said Congress to propose such amendments, without the
participation of said excluded States at the time of said address in any
way mentioned or considered or referred to by this respondent, nor in
what he did say had he any intent regarding the same, and he denies
the allegation so made to the contrary thereof. But this respondent, in
further answer to, and in respect of, the said allegations of the said
eleventh article hereinbefore traversed and denied, claims and insists
upon his personal and official right of freedom of opinion and freedom
of speech, and his duty in his political relations as President of the
United States to the people of the United States in the exercise of such
freedom of opinion and freedom of speech, in the same manner, form and
effect as he has in this behalf stated the same in his answer to the
said tenth article, and with the same effect as if he here repeated the
same; and he further claims and insists, as in said answer to said tenth
article he has claimed and insisted, that he is not subject to question,
inquisition, impeachment, or inculpation, in any form or manner, of or
concerning such rights of freedom of opinion or freedom of speech or his
alleged exercise thereof.

And this respondent further denies that on the 21st day of February, in
the year 1868, or at any other time, at the City of Washington, in the
District of Columbia, in pursuance of any such declaration as is in
that behalf in said eleventh article alleged, or otherwise, he did
unlawfully, and in disregard of the requirement of the Constitution that
he should take care that the laws should be faithfully executed, attempt
to prevent the execution of an act entitled "An act regulating the
tenure of certain civil offices," passed March 2, 1867, by unlawfully
devising or contriving, or attempting to devise or contrive, means by
which he should prevent Edwin M. Stanton from forthwith resuming
the functions of Secretary for the Department of War, or by lawfully
devising or contriving, or attempting to devise or contrive, means to
prevent the execution of an act entitled "An act making appropriations
for the support of the army for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1868,
and for other purposes," approved March 2, 1867, or to prevent the
execution of an act entitled "An act to provide for the more efficient
government of the rebel States," passed March 2, 1867.

And this respondent, further answering the said eleventh article, says
that he has, in his answer to the first article, set forth in detail the
acts, steps, and proceedings done and taken by this respondent to and
toward or in the matter of the suspension or removal of the said Edwin
M. Stanton in or from the office of Secretary for the Department of
War, with the times, modes, circumstances, intents, views, purposes, and
opinions of official obligation and duty under and with which such acts,
steps, and proceedings were done and taken; and he makes answer to this
eleventh article of the matters in his answer to the first article,
pertaining to the suspension or removal of said Edwin M. Stanton, to the
same intent and effect as if they were here repeated and set forth.

And this deponent, further answering the said eleventh article, denies
that by means or reason of anything in said article alleged, this
respondent, as President of the United States, did, on the 21st day
of February, 1868, or at any other day or time, commit, or that he was
guilty of, a high misdemeanor in office.

And this respondent, further answering the said eleventh article, says
that the same and the matters therein contained do not charge or allege
the commission of any act whatever by this respondent, in his office of
President of the United States, nor the omission by this respondent of
any act of official obligation or duty in his office of President of
the United States; nor does the said article nor the matters therein
contained name designate, describe, or define any act or mode or form
of attempt, device, contrivance, or means, or of attempt at device,
contrivance or means, whereby this respondent can know or understand
what act or mode or form of attempt, device, contrivance or means, or
of attempt at device, contrivance, or means are imputed to or charged
against this respondent, in his office of President of the United
States, or intended so to be, or whereby this respondent can more fully
or definitely make answer unto the said article than he hereby does.

And this respondent, in submitting to this honorable court this
his answer to the articles of impeachment exhibited against him,
respectfully reserves leave to amend and add to the same from time to
time, as may become necessary or proper, and when and as such necessity
and propriety shall appear. Andrew Johnson Henry Stanbery, B. R. Curtis,
Thomas A. R. Nelson, William M. Evarts. W. S. Groesbeck. Of Counsel.



CHAPTER VIII. --  ORGANIZATION OF THE COURT ARGUMENT OF COUNSEL

On Thursday, March 5th, 1868, the Senate of the United States was
organized for the trial of the charges brought against Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States, by the House of
Representatives--Honorable Salmon P. Chase, Chief Justice of the United
States, presiding.

The following gentlemen appeared as managers of the prosecution on the
part of the House:

Hon. John A. Bingham, of Ohio; Hon. George S. Boutwell, of
Massachusetts; Hon. James F. Wilson, of Iowa; Hon. John A. Logan, of
Illinois; Hon. Thomas F. Williams, of Pennsylvania; Hon. Benjamin F.
Butler, of Massachusetts; and Hon. Thaddeus Stevens, of Pennsylvania.

The following gentlemen appeared as counsel for the President:

Messrs. Henry Stanbery, of Kentucky; Benjamin R. Curtis, of
Massachusetts; Thomas A. R. Nelson, of Tennessee; William M. Evarts, of
New York, and William S. Groesbeck, of Ohio.

The following gentlemen comprised the United States Senate, sitting for
the trial of the President:

California-Cornelius Cole, (R)-John Conness, (R). Connecticut-James
Dixon, (D)-Orris S. Ferry, (R). Delaware-Willard Saulsbury, (D)-James
A. Bayard, (D). Illinois-Lyman Trumbull, (R)-Richard Yates, (R).
Indiana-Oliver P. Morton, (R)-Thomas A. Hendricks, (D). Iowa-James W.
Grimes, (R)-James Harlan, (R). Kansas-Samuel C. Pomeroy, (R)-Edmund
G. Ross, (R). Kentucky-Thomas C. McCreary, (D)-Garrett Davis, (D).
Massachusetts-Charles Sumner, (R)-Henry Wilson, (R). Maine-William Pitt
Fessenden, (R)-Lot M. Morrill, (R). Maryland-Reverdy Johnson, (D)-George
Vickers, (D). Michigan-Zachariah Chandler, (R)-Jacob M. Howard,
(R). Missouri-John B. Henderson, (R)-Charles D. Drake, (R).
Minnesota-Alexander Ramsay, (R)-Daniel S. Norton, (D). New York-Roscoe
Conkling, (R)-Edwin D. Morgan, (R). Nevada-James W. Nye, (R)-William M.
Stewart, (R). Nebraska-Thomas W. Tipton, (R)-John M. Thayer, (R).
New Jersey-Alexander G. Cattell, (R)-F. T. Frelinghuysen, (R). New
Hampshire-Alexander H. Craigin, (R)-Jas. W. Patterson, (R). Ohio-John
Sherman, (R)-Benjamin F. Wade, (R). Oregon-Henry W. Corbett, (R)-Geo. H.
Williams, (R). Pennsylvania-Simon Cameron, (R)-Charles R. Buckalew,
(D). Rhode Island-Henry B. Anthony, (R)-William Sprague, (R).
Tennessee--David T. Patterson, (D)-Joseph S. Fowler, (R). Vermont-George
F. Edmunds, (R)-Justin S. Morrill, (R). West Virginia-W. T.
Willey,(R)-Peter (3. Van Winkle, (R). Wisconsin-James R. Doolittle,
(D)-Timothy O. Howe, (R). [Forty-two Republicans and twelve Democrats.]

The House bringing the Impeachment was three-fourths Republican--the
Senate that tried it was more than three-fourths Republican--the managers
on the part of the House were all Republicans--the counsel for the
President were three Democrats and one Republican--the President on
trial was a Democrat--the interrogatories propounded to witnesses were
generally received or rejected, according as their probable answers
would make for or against the President--the people of the country at
large were, as a rule, rigidly divided on party lines relative to
the case, Republicans demanding the conviction of the President and
Democrats urging his acquittal. The Chief Justice presiding in the trial
was the only strictly nonpartisan factor in the case.

The answer of the President to the Articles of Impeachment having been
presented on the 23rd of March, 1868--the replication of the House duly
made, and all the preliminary steps completed, the proceedings in the
actual trial commenced on the 30th day of March, 1868. Gen. Butler, one
of the managers on the part of the House, made the opening argument for
the prosecution, from which the following extracts are taken:

The first eight articles set out in several distinct forms the acts
of the respondent removing Mr. Stanton from office, and appointing Mr.
Thomas, ad interim, differing in legal effect in the purposes for which
and the intent with which, either or both of the acts were done, and the
legal duties and rights infringed, and the acts of Congress violated in
so doing.

All the articles allege these acts to be in contravention of his oath of
office, and in disregard of the duties thereof.

If they are so, however, the President might have the POWER to do
them under the law; still, being so done, they are acts of official
misconduct, and as we have seen, impeachable.

The President has the legal power to do many acts which, if done in
disregard of his duty, or for improper purposes, then the exercise of
that power is an official misdemeanor.

Ex. gr: he has the power of pardon; if exercised in a given case for a
corrupt motive, as for the payment of money, or wantonly pardoning
all criminals, it would be a misdemeanor. Examples might be multiplied
indefinitely.

Article first, stripped of legal verbiage, alleges that, having
suspended Mr. Stanton and reported the same to the Senate, which refused
to concur in the suspension, and Stanton having rightfully resumed
the duties of his office, the respondent, with knowledge of the facts,
issued an order which is recited for Stanton's removal, with intent
to violate the act of March 2, 1867, to regulate the tenure of certain
civil offices, and with the further intent to remove Stanton from the
office of Secretary of War, then in the lawful discharge of its duties,
in contravention of said act without the advice and consent of the
Senate, and against the Constitution of the United States.

Article 2 charges that the President, without authority of law, on the
21st of February, 1868, issued letter of authority to Lorenzo Thomas
to act as Secretary of War ad interim, the Senate being in session, in
violation of the tenure-of-office act, and with intent to violate it and
the Constitution, there being no vacancy in the office of Secretary of
War.

Article 3 alleges the same act as done without authority of law, and
alleges an intent to violate the Constitution.

Article 4 charges that the President conspired with Lorenzo Thomas
and divers other persons, with intent, by INTIMIDATION AND THREATS,
to prevent Mr. Stanton from holding the office of Secretary of War, in
violation of the Constitution and of the act of July 31, 1861.

Article 5 charges the same conspiracy with Thomas to prevent Mr.
Stanton's holding his office, and thereby to prevent the execution of
the civil tenure act.

Article 6 charges that the President conspired with Thomas to seize and
possess the property under the control of the War Department by FORCE,
in contravention of the act of July 31, 1861, and with intent to
disregard the civil tenure-of-office act.

Article 7 charges the same conspiracy, with intent only to violate the
civil tenure-of-office act.

Articles 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th may all be considered together, as to
to the proof to support them.

It will be shown that having removed Stanton and appointed Thomas,
the President sent Thomas to the War Office to obtain possession; that
having been met by Stanton with a denial of his rights, Thomas retired,
and after consultation with the President, Thomas asserted his purpose
to take possession of the War Office by force, making his boast in
several public places of his intentions so to do, but was prevented by
being promptly arrested by process from the court.

This will be shown by the evidence of Hon. Mr. Van Horn, a member of the
House, who was present when the demand for possession of the War office
was made by General Thomas, already made public.

By the testimony of the Hon. Mr. Burleigh, who, after that, in the
evening of the twenty-first of February, was told by Thomas that he
intended to take possession of the War Office by force the following
morning, and invited him up to see the performance. Mr. Burleigh
attended, but the act did not come off, for Thomas had been arrested and
held to bail.

By Thomas boasting at Willard's hotel on the same evening that he should
call on General Grant for military force to put him in possession of the
office, and he did not see how Grant could refuse it. Article 8 charges
that the appointment of Thomas was made for the purpose of getting
control of the disbursement of the moneys appropriated for the military
service and Department of War.

In addition to the proof already adduced, it will be shown that, after
the appointment of Thomas, which must have been known to the members of
his cabinet, the President caused a formal notice to be served on the
Secretary of the Treasury, to the end that the Secretary might answer
the requisitions for money of Thomas, and this was only prevented by the
firmness with which Stanton retained possession of the books and papers
of the War office. It will be seen that every fact charged in Article 1
is admitted by the answer of the respondent; the intent also admitted
as charged; that is to say, to set aside the civil tenure-of-office
act, and to remove Mr. Stanton from the office of the Secretary for the
Department of War without the advice and consent of the Senate, and, if
not justified, contrary to the provisions of the Constitution itself.

The only question remaining is, does the respondent justify himself by
the Constitution and laws?

On this he avers, that by the Constitution, there is "conferred on the
President as a part of the executive power, the power at any and all
times of removing from office all executive officers for cause, to be
judged of by the President alone, and that he verily believes that
the executive power of removal from office, confided to him by the
Constitution, as aforesaid, includes the power of suspension from office
indefinitely."

Now, these offices, so vacated, must be filled, temporarily at least,
by his appointment, because government must go on; there can be no
interregnum in the execution of the laws in an organized government;
he claims, therefore, of necessity, the right to fill their places with
appointments of his choice, and that this power can not be restrained or
limited in any degree by any law of Congress, because, he avers, "that
the power was conferred, and the duty of exercising it in fit cases was
imposed on the President by the Constitution of the United States, and
that the President could not be deprived of this power, or relieved of
this duty, nor could the same be vested by law in the President and the
Senate jointly, either in part or whole."

This, then, is the plain and inevitable issue before the Senate and the
American people:

Has the President, under the Constitution, the more than kingly
prerogative at will to remove from office and suspend from office
indefinitely, all executive officers of the United States, either civil,
military or naval, at any and all times, and fill the vacancies with
creatures of his own appointment, for his own purposes, without any
restraint whatever, or possibility of restraint by the Senate or by
Congress through laws duly enacted?

The House of Representatives, in behalf of the people join this issue
by affirming that the exercise of such powers is a high misdemeanor in
office.

If the affirmative is maintained by the respondent, then, so far as the
first eight articles are concerned--unless such corrupt purposes
are shown as will of themselves make the exercise of a legal power a
crime--the respondent must go, and ought to go quit and free.

Therefore, by these articles and the answers thereto, the momentous
question, here and now, is raised whether the PRESIDENTIAL OFFICE ITSELF
(IF IT HAS THE PREROGATIVES AND POWER CLAIMED FOR IT) OUGHT, IN FACT, TO
EXIST AS APART OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT OF A FREE PEOPLE, while
by the last three articles the simpler and less important inquiry is to
be determined, whether Andrew Johnson has so conducted himself that
he ought longer to held any constitutional office whatever. The latter
sinks to merited insignificance compared with the grandeur of the
former.

If that is sustained, then a right and power hitherto unclaimed and
unknown to the people of the country is engrafted on the Constitution
most alarming in its extent, most corrupting in its influence, most
dangerous in its tendencies, and most tyrannical in its exercise.

Whoever, therefore, votes "not guilty" on these articles votes to
enchain our free institutions, and to prostrate them at the feet of any
man who, being President, may choose to control them.

A few days after this, Judge Curtis, of the President's counsel, spoke
on behalf of the President. The first and principal Government of
the Articles of Impeachment against Mr. Johnson was violation of
the Office-Tenure Act, which had been passed the year before for the
undisguised purpose of restricting the President's power to remove his
Cabinet officers, particularly, his War Minister, Mr. Stanton. It was
apparent that Mr. Butler had been embarassed in his plea by the proviso
of that Act, that members of the Cabinet should hold "during the term
of the President by WHOM THEY MAY HAVE BEEN APPOINTED and for one month
longer."

Mr. Butler had asked--By whom was Mr. Stanton appointed? By Mr. Lincoln.
Whose presidential term was he holding tinder when the bullet of Booth
became a proximate cause of this trial? Was not this appointment in full
force at that hour. Had any act of the respondent up to the 12th day
of August last vitiated or interfered with that appointment? Whose
Presidential term is the respondent now serving out? His own, or
Mr. Lincoln's. If his own, he is entitled to four years up to the
anniversary of the murder, because each presidential term is four years
by the Constitution, and the regular recurrence of those terms is fixed
by the Act of May 8, 1792. If he is serving out the remainder of Mr.
Lincoln's term, then his term of office expires on the 4th of March,
1869, if it does not before.

Judge Curtis struck his first blow at the weak point of General Butler's
speech. He said:

There is a question involved which enters deeply into the first eight
Articles of Impeachment and materially touches two of the others; and to
that question I desire in the first place to invite the attention of
the court, namely--whether MR. STANTON'S CASE COMES UNDER THE
TENURE-OF-OFFICE ACTS? * * * I must ask your attention therefore to
the construction and application of the first section of that act, as
follows: "that every person holding an official position to which he
has been appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
and every person who shall hereafter be appointed to any such office and
shall become duly qualified to act therein, is and shall be entitled
to hold such office until a successor shall have been in like manner
appointed and duly qualified, except as herein OTHERWISE PROVIDED."
Then comes what is otherwise provided. "PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That the
Secretaries of State, Treasury, War, Navy, and Interior Departments,
the Postmaster General and Attorney General, shall hold their offices
respectively for AND DURING THE TERM OF THE PRESIDENT BY WHOM THEY MAY
HAVE BEEN APPOINTED."

The first inquiry which arises on this language, is as to the meaning
of the words "for and during the term of the President." Mr. Stanton,
as appears by the commission which has been put in the case by the
Honorable Managers, was appointed in January, 1862, during the first
term of President Lincoln. Are the words "during the term of the
President," applicable to Mr. Stanton's case? That depends upon whether
an expounder of this law, judicially, who finds set down in it as a part
of the descriptive words, "DURING THE TERMS OF THE PRESIDENT," HAS ANY
RIGHT TO ADD, "AND DURING ANY OTHER TERM FOR WHICH HE MAY BE AFTERWARDS
ELECTED."

I respectfully submit no such judicial interpretation can be put on the
words. Then, if you please, take the next step: "During the term of the
President by whom he was appointed." At the time when this order was
issued for the removal of Mr. Stanton, was he holding the term of the
President by whom he was appointed? The Honorable Managers say yes;
because, as they, say, Mr. Johnson is merely serving out the residue
of Mr. Lincoln's term. But is that so under the provisions of the
Constitution of the United States? * * Although the President, like the
Vice President, is elected for a term of four years, and each is elected
for the same term, the President is not to hold the office absolutely
during four years. The limit of four years is not an absolute limit.
Death is a limit. "A conditional limitation," as the lawyers call it, is
imposed on his tenure of office. And when the President dies his term
of four years, for which he was elected and during which he was to hold
provided he should so long live, terminates, and the office devolves
upon the Vice President. For what period of time? FOR THE REMAINDER OF
THE TERM FOR WHICH THE VICE PRESIDENT WAS ELECTED. And there is no
more propriety, under the provisions of the Constitution of the United
dictates, in calling the term during which Mr. Johnson holds the office
of President, after it was devolved upon him, a part of Mr. Lincoln's
term, then there would be propriety in saying that one sovereign who
succeeded another sovereign by death, holds his predecessor's term.**
They (the Cabinet officers) were to be the advisers of the President;
they were to be the immediate confidential assistants of the President,
for whom he was to be responsible, but in whom he was expected to repose
a great amount of trust and confidence; and therefore it was that this
Act has connected the tenure-of-office of these Secretaries to which it
applies with the President by whom they were appointed. It says, in
the description which the Act gives of the future tenure-of-office of
Secretaries, that a controlling regard is to be had to the fact that
the Secretary whose tenure is to be regulated was appointed by some
particular President; and during the term of that President he shall
continue to hold his office; but as for Secretaries who are in office,
not appointed by the President, we have nothing to say; we leave them
as they heretofore have been. I submit to Senators that this is the
natural, and, having regard to the character of these officers, the
necessary conclusion, that the tenure-of-office of a Secretary here
described is a tenure during the term of service of the President by
whom he was appointed; that it was not the intention of Congress
to compel a President of the United States to continue in office a
Secretary not appointed by himself. * * *

Shortly after this, occurred one of the most amusing and interesting
incidents of the trial. Mr. Boutwell, who was altogether a
matter-of-fact man, though at times indulging in the heroics, ventured,
in the course of his argument, upon a flight of imagination in depicting
the punishment that should be meted out to Mr. Johnson for venturing to
differ with Congress upon the constitutionality of an act of that body.
He said:

Travelers and astronomers inform us that in the Southern heavens, near
the Southern cross, there is a vast space which the uneducated call the
"hole in the sky," where the eye of man, with the aid of the powers
of the telescope, has been unable to discover nebulae, or asteroid, or
comet, or planet, or star, or sun. In that dreary, cold, dark region
of space, which is only known to be less infinite by the evidences of
creation elsewhere, the great author of celestial mechanism has left
the chaos which was in the beginning. If this earth were capable of
the sentiments and emotions of justice and virtue which in human mortal
beings are the evidences and pledge of our divine origin and immortal
destiny, it would heave and throb with the energy of the elemental
forces of nature, and project this enemy (referring to President
Johnson) of two races of men into that vast region, there forever
to exist in a solitude eternal as life or as the absence of life,
emblematical of, if not really, that outer darkness of which the Savior
of mankind spoke in warning to those who are enemies to themselves and
of their race and of God.

Mr. Evarts followed Mr. Boutwell, and in the course of his argument
referred to this paragraph in Mr. Boutwell's speech in the following
humorously sarcastic vein, during the delivery of which, the Senate was
repeatedly convulsed with laughter. Mr. Evarts said:

I may as conveniently at this point of the argument as at any other
pay some attention to the astronomical punishment which the learned and
honorable manager Mr. Boutwell, thinks should be applied to this novel
case of impeachment of the President. Cicero, I think it is, who says
that a lawyer should know everything, for sooner or later, there is no
fact in history, science or human knowledge that will not come into play
in his arguments. Painfully sensitive of my ignorance, being devoted to
a profession which "sharpens and does not enlarge the mind," I yet can
admire without envy the superior knowledge evinced by the honorable
manager. Indeed, upon my soul, I believe he is aware of an astronomical
fact which many professors of the science are wholly ignorant of; but
nevertheless, while some of his colleagues were paying attention to an
unoccupied and unappropriated island on the surface of the seas, Mr.
Manager Boutwell, more ambitious, had discovered an untenanted and
unappropriated region in the skies, reserved, he would have us think,
in the final councils of the Almighty as the place of punishment for
deposed and convicted American Presidents.

At first, I thought that his mind had become so enlarged that it was
not sharp enough to observe that the Constitution has limited the
punishment, but on reflection I saw that he was as legal and logical as
he was ambitious and astronomical; for the Constitution has said "remove
from office," and has put no limit to the distance of removal so that it
may be without the shedding of a drop of his blood or taking a penny of
his property, or confining his limbs. Instant removal from office and
transportation to the skies. Truly this is a great undertaking, and
if the learned manager can only get over the obstacle of the laws of
nature, the Constitution will, not stand in his way.

He can contrive no method but that of a convulsion of the earth that
shall project the deposed President to this indefinitely distant space;
but a shock of nature of so vast an energy and for so great a result on
him might unsettle even the footing of the firm members of Congress. We
certainly need not resort to so perilous a method as that. How shall we
accomplish it? Why, in the first place, nobody knows where that space
is but the learned manager himself, and he is the necessary deputy to
execute the judgment of the court. Let it then be provided that, in case
of your sentence of deposition and removal from office, the honorable
and astronomical manager shall take into his own hands the execution
of the sentence. With the President made fast to his broad and strong
shoulders, and having already assayed the flight by imagination, better
prepared than anybody else to execute it in form, taking the advantage
of ladders as far as ladders will go to the top of this great capitol,
and spurning there with his foot the crest of Liberty, let him set out
upon his flight while the two houses of Congress and all the people
of the United States shall shout--"Sic itur ad astra!" But here a
distressing doubt strikes me. How will the manager get back. He will
have got far beyond the reach of gravitation to restore him, and so
ambitious a wing as his should never stoop to a downward flight. Indeed,
as he passes through the constellations, the famous question of Carlyle
(by which he derides the littleness of human affairs upon the scale
of the measure of the heavens,) "What thinks Bootes as he drives his
hunting dogs up the zenith in their leash of sidereal fire?" will
force itself on his notice. What, indeed, will Bootes think of this new
constellation? Besides, reaching this space beyond the power of Congress
ever to send for persons and papers, how shall he return, and how decide
in the contest there become personal and perpetual--the struggle of
strength between him and the President? In this new revolution thus
established forever, who shall decide which is the sun and which is the
moon? Who determine the only scientific test, which reflects hardest
upon the other?


Gen. Logan, one of the managers, appeared for the prosecution, upon the
close of the examination of witnesses. The following is a brief
extract from his very long and labored argument, and relates to the
Tenure-of-Office Act:

It is a new method of ascertaining the meaning of a law, plain upon its
face, by resorting to legislative discussions, and giving in evidence
opinions affected by the law. As a matter of fact; it is well known the
act was intended to prevent the very thing Mr. Johnson attempted in the
matter of Mr. Stanton's removal. I think this manner of defense will not
avail before the Senate. The law must govern in its natural and plain
intendment, and will not be frittered away by extraneous interpretation.
The President in his veto message admits substantially this
construction.

The proviso does not change the general provisions of the Act, except
by giving a more definite limit to the tenure-of-office, but the last
paragraph of the Act puts the whole question back into the hands of the
Senate according to the general intention of the Act, and provides that
even the Secretaries are subject to removal by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate.

The Act first provides that all persons holding civil offices at the
date of its passage appointed by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, shall only be removed in the same manner. This applies to the
Secretary of War. This proviso merely gives a tenure running with the
term of the President and one month thereafter, subject to removal by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate. The law clearly gives
Mr. Stanton a right to the office from the 4th of March, 1865, till one
month after the 4th of March, 1869, and he can only be disturbed in
that tenure by the President by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate.

Yet, although Mr. Stanton was appointed by Mr. Lincoln in his first
term, when there was no tenure-of-office fixed by law, and continued by
Mr. Lincoln in his second term, it is argued that his term expired one
month after the passage of the Tenure-of-Office Act, March 2nd, 1867,
for the reason that Mr. Lincoln's term expired at his death. This is
false reasoning; the Constitution fixed the term of the President at
four years, and by law the commencement of his term is the 4th of March.
Will it be said that when Mr. Johnson is deposed by a verdict of the
Senate, that the officer who will succeed him will serve for four years?
Certainly not. Why? Because he will have no Presidential term, and will
be merely serving out a part of the unexpired term of Mr. Lincoln, and
will go out of office on the 4th of March, 1869, at the time Mr. Lincoln
would have retired by expiration of his term, had he lived. * * *

The only question, then, which remains, is simply this: Has the accused
violated that (Tenure-of-Office) Act? No one knows better than this
accused the history of, and the purpose to be secured by, that Act. It
was ably and exhaustively discussed on both sides, in all aspects.
In the debates of Congress it was subsequently reviewed and closely
analyzed in a Veto Message of the respondent. No portion of that Act
escaped his remark, and no practical application which has been made
of it since did he fail to anticipate. He knew before he attempted its
violation that more than three-fourths of the Representatives of the
people in Congress assembled had set their seal of disapprobation upon
the reasons given in the Veto Message and had enacted the law by more
than the constitutional number of votes required. Nay, more; he was
repeatedly warned, by investigations made looking toward just such a
proceeding as now being witnessed in this court, that the people had
instructed their Representatives to tolerate no violation of the laws
constitutionally enacted.

Mr. Groesbeck, in behalf of the defense, said in closing his argument:

What is to be your judgment, Senators, in this case? Removal from office
and perpetual disqualification? If the President has committed that for
which he should be ejected from office it were judicial mockery to stop
short of the largest disqualifications you can impose. It will be a
heavy judgment. What is his crime in its moral aspects, to merit such a
judgment? Let us look to it.

He tried to pluck a thorn out of his very heart, for the condition of
things in the War Department, and consequently in his Cabinet, did pain
him as a thorn in his heart. You fastened it there, and you are now
asked to punish him for attempting to extract it. What more? He made
an ad interim appointment to last for a single day. You could have
terminated it whenever you saw fit. You had only to take up the
nomination which he had sent to you, which was a good nomination, and
act upon it and the ad interim vanished like smoke. He had no idea of
fastening it upon the department. He had no intention of doing
anything of that kind. He merely proposed that for the purpose, if the
opportunity should occur, of subjecting this law to a constitutional
test. That was all the purpose it was to answer. It is all for which it
was intended. The thing was in your hands from the beginning to the end.
You had only to act upon the nomination, and the matter was settled.
Surely that was no crime.

I point you to the cases that have occurred--of ad interim appointment
after ad interim appointment; but I point especially to the case of Mr.
Holt, where the Senate in its legislative capacity examined it, weighed
it, decided upon it, heard the report of the President and received it
as satisfactory. That is, for the purpose of this trial, before the same
tribunal, res adjudicate, I think, and it will be so regarded.

What else did he do? He talked with an officer about the law. That is
the Emory Article. He made intemperate speeches, though full of honest,
patriotic sentiments; when reviled, he should not revile again; when
smitten upon one cheek he should turn the other.

"But," the gentleman who spoke last on the part of the managers, "he
tried to defeat pacification and restoration." I deny it in the sense
in which he presented it--that is, as a criminal act. Here, too, he
followed precedent and trod the path in which were the footsteps of
Lincoln, and which was bright with the radiance of his divine utterance,
"charity for all, malice toward none." He was eager for pacification. He
thought that the war was ended. The drums were all silent--the
arsenals were all shut; the roar of the canon had died away to the last
reverberation; the armies were disbanded; not a single army confronted
us in the field. Ah, he was too eager, too forgiving, too kind. The hand
of conciliation was stretched out to him and he took it? It may be
he should have put it away; but was it a crime to take it? Kindness,
forgiveness a crime! Kindness a crime! Kindness is omnipotent for
good, more powerful than gunpowder or canon. Kindness is statesmanship.
Kindness is the highest statesmanship of heaven itself. The thunders of
Sinai do but terrify and distract; alone they accomplish little; it is
the kindness of Calvary that subdues and pacifies.

What shall I say of this man? He is no theorist; he is no reformer; I
have looked over his life. He has ever walked in beaten paths, and by
the light of, the Constitution. The mariner, tempest-tossed in mid-sea,
does not more certainly turn to his star for guidance than does this man
in trial and difficulty to the star of the Constitution. He loves the
Constitution. It has been the study of his life. He is not learned and
scholarly like many of you; he is not a man of many ideas or of much
speculation but by a law of the mind he is only the truer to that he
does know. He is a patriot, second to no one of you in the measure of
his patriotism. He loves his country; he may be full of error; I will
not canvass now his views; but he loves his country; he has the courage
to defend it, and I believe to die for it if need be. His courage and
patriotism are not without illustration. My colleague (Mr. Nelson)
referred the other day to the scenes which occurred in this Chamber when
he alone of twenty-two Senators remained; even his State seceded, but he
remained. That was a trial of his patriotism, of which many of you,
by reason of your locality and of your life-long associations, know
nothing. How his voice rang out in this hall in the hour of alarm for
the good cause, and in denunciation of the rebellion! But he did not
remain here; it was a pleasant, honorable, safe, and easy position; but
he was wanted for a more difficult and arduous and perilous service. He
faltered not, but entered upon it. That was a trial of his courage and
patriotism of which some of you who now sit in judgment on more than his
life, know nothing. I have, often thought that those who, dwelt at the
North, safely distant from the collisions and strifes of the war, knew
little of its actual, trying dangers. We who lived on the border know
more. Our horizon was always red with flame; and it sometimes burned so
near us that we could feel its heat upon the outstretched hand. But he
was wanted for a greater peril, and went into the very furnace of the
war, and there served his country long and well. Who of you have done
more? Not one. * * * It seems cruel, Senators, that he should be dragged
here as a criminal, or that any one who served his country and bore
himself well and bravely through that trying ordeal, should be condemned
upon miserable technicalities.

If he has committed any gross crime, shocking alike and indiscriminately
the entire public mind, then condemn him; but he has rendered services
to the country that entitle him to kind and respectful consideration.
He has precedents for everything he has done, and what excellent
precedents! The voices of the great dead come to us from the grave
sanctioning his course. All our past history approves it. How can you
single out this man, now in this condition of things, and brand him
before the world, put your brand of infamy upon him because he made an
ad interim appointment for a day, and possible may have made a mistake
in attempting to remove Stanton? I can at a glance put my eye on
Senators here who would not endure the position he occupied. You do not
think it is right yourselves. You framed this civil tenure law to give
each President his own Cabinet, and yet his whole crime is that he wants
harmony and peace in his.

Senators, I will not go on. There is a great deal that is crowding on my
tongue for utterance, but it is not from my head; it is rather from my
heart; and it would be but a repetition of the vain things 1 have been
saying the past half hour But I do hope you will not drive the President
out and take possession of his office. I hope this, not merely as
counsel for Andrew Johnson, for Andrew Johnson's administration is to me
but as a moment, and himself as nothing in comparison with the possible
consequences of such an act. No good can come of it, Senators, and how
much will the heart of the nation be refreshed if at last the Senate
of the United States can, in its judgment upon this case, maintain its
ancient dignity and high character in the midst of storms, and passion,
and strife.


A somewhat startling incident, which for the moment threatened
unpleasant results, occurred in the course of the trial. In his opening
speech for the prosecution, Mr. Manager Boutwell used this language,
speaking of the President:

The President is a man of strong will, of violent passions, of
unlimited ambition, with capacity to employ and use timid men, adhesive,
subservient men, and corrupt men, as the instruments of his designs. It
is the truth of history that he has injured every person with whom
he has had confidential relations, and many have escaped ruin only by
withdrawing from his society altogether. He has one rule of his life:
he attempts to use every man of power, capacity, or influence within his
reach. Succeeding in his attempts, they are in time, and usually in a
short time, utterly ruined. If the considerate flee from him, if the
brave and patriotic resist his schemes or expose his plans, he attacks
them with all the energy and patronage of his office, and pursues them
with all the violence of his personal hatred. He attacks to destroy all
who will not become his instruments, and all who become his instruments
are destroyed in the use. He spares no one. * * * Already this purpose
of his life is illustrated in the treatment of a gentleman who was of
counsel for the respondent, but who has never appeared in his behalf.


The last paragraph of the above quotation manifestly referred to a
disagreement between the President and Judge Black, which led to the
retirement of that gentleman from the Management of the Defense of the
President, a few days prior to the beginning of the trial.

To this criticism of the President, Judge Nelson, of Counsel for
Defense, responded a few days later, with the following statement:

It is to me, Senators, a source of much embarrassment how to speak
in reply to the accusation which has thus been preferred against the
President of the United States. * * *

In order that you may understand what I have to say about it I desire to
refer the Senate to a brief statement which I have prepared on account
of the delicacy of the subject; and, although I have not had time to
write it out as I would have desired to do, it will be sufficient to
enable you to comprehend the facts which I am about to state. You will
understand, Senators, that I do not purport to give a full history of
what I may call the Alta Vela case, as to which a report was made to the
Senate by the Secretary of State upon your call. A mere outline of the
case will be sufficient to explain what I have to say in reference to
Judge Black:

Under the guano act of 1856, William T. Kendal on the one side, and
Patterson and Marguiendo on the other, filed claims in the Secretary of
State's office to the island which is claimed by the government of St.
Domingo.

On the 17th of June, 1867, the examiner of claims submitted a report
adverse to the claim for damages against the Dominican government. On
the 22d of July, 1867, Mr. Black addressed a letter to the President,
(page 10) and another on the 7th of August, 1867. On page 13 it is said
that Patterson and Marguiendo acquiesce in the decision. On page 13 it
is shown that other parties are in averse possession. On page 15 it is
asserted that the contest is between citizens of the United States, and
can be settled in the courts of the United States. The contest now seems
to be between Patterson and Marguiendo and Thomas B. Webster & Co.

On the 14th of December, 1859, Judge Black, as Attorney General,
rejected the claim of W. J. Kendall to an island in the Carribean Sea,
called Cayo Verde, and Mr. Seward seems to regard the two cases as
resting on the same principle in his report of 17th of January, 1867.

On the 22d of July, 1867, Judge Black addressed a letter to the
President enclosing a brief. On the 7th of August, 1867, he addressed
another communication to the President. On the 7th of February, 1868, an
elaborate an able communication was sent to the President, signed by W.
J. Shaffer, attorney for Patterson and Marguiendo, and Black, Lamon &,
Co., counsel, in which they criticised with severity the report of Mr.
Seward and asked the President to review his decision.

According to the best information I can obtain, I state that ON THE 9TH
OF MARCH, 1868, General Benjamin F. Butler addressed a letter to J. W.
Shaffer, in which he stated that he was "clearly of the opinion that,
under the claim of the United States its citizens have the exclusive
right to take guano there," and that he had never been able to
understand why the executive did not long since assert the rights of
the government, and sustain the rightful claims of its citizens to the
possession of the island IN THE MOST FORCIBLE MANNER consistent with the
dignity and honor of the Nation.

The letter was concurred in and approved of by John A. Logan, J. A.
Garfield, W. H. Koontz, J. K. Moorhead and John A. Bingham, on the same
day, 9th of March, 1868.

This letter expressing the opinion of Generals Butler, Logan and
Garfield was placed in the hands of the President by Chauncey F. Black,
who, on the 16th of March, 1868, addressed a letter to him in which he
enclosed a copy of the same with the concurrence of Thaddeus Stevens,
John A. Bingham, J. G. Blaine, J. K. Moorhead and William H. Koontz.

After the date of this letter, and while Judge Black was the counsel of
the respondent in this cause, he had an interview with the President,
in which he urged immediate action on his part and the sending an armed
vessel to take possession of the island; and because the President
refused to do so, Judge Black, on the 19th of March, 1868, declined to
appear further as his counsel in this case.

Such are the facts in regard to the withdrawal of Judge Black, according
to the best information I can obtain.

The island of Alta Vela, or the claim for damages, is said to amount
in value to more than a million dollars, and it is quite likely that an
extensive speculation is on foot. I have no reason to charge that any
of the managers are engaged in it, and presume that the letters were
signed, as such communications are often signed, by members of Congress,
through the importunity of friends.

Judge Black no doubt thought it was his duty to other clients to press
this claims but how did the President view it?

Senators, I ask you for a moment to put yourself in the place of the
President of the United States, and as this is made a matter of railing
accusation against him, to consider how the President of the United
States felt it.

There are two or three facts to which I desire to call the attention
of the Senate and the country in connection with these recommendations.
They are, first, that they were all gotten up after this impeachment
proceeding was commenced against the President of the United States.

Another strong and powerful fact to be noticed in vindication of the
President of the United States, in reference to this case which has been
so strongly preferred against him, is that these recommendations
were signed by four of the honorable, gentlemen to whom the House
of Representatives have intrusted the duty of managing this great
impeachment against him.

Of course exception was taken to this statement, and to the revisal
inferences therefrom, and the authenticity of the signatures mentioned
at first denied, and then an effort made to explain them away, but it is
unsuccessful.

The incident left a fixed impression, at least in the minds of many of
the Senators, that an effort had been made to coerce the President, in
fear of successful impeachment, into the perpetration of a cowardly and
disgraceful international act, not only by his then Chief of Counsel,
but also by a number of his active prosecutors on the part of the House.

It would be difficult to fittingly characterize this scandalous
effort to pervert a great State trial into an instrumentality for the
successful exploitation of a commercial venture which was by no means
free from the elements of international robbery.

Yet to Mr. Johnson's lasting credit, he proved that he possessed the
honesty and courage to dare his enemies to do their worst--he would not
smirch his own name and disgrace his country and his great office, by
using its power for the-promotion of an enterprise not far removed from
a scheme of personal plunder, let it cost him what it might. It was a
heroic act, and bravely, unselfishly, modestly performed.



CHAPTER IX. --  EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES AND THEIR TESTIMONY.

The initial proceedings to the taking of testimony, while to a degree
foreshadowing a partisan division in the trial, also demonstrated the
presence of a Republican minority which could not at all times, be
depended upon to register the decrees of the more radical portion of
the body. The first development of this fact came in the defeat of a
proposition to amend the rules in the interest of the prosecution,
and again on the examination of Mr. Burleigh, a delegate from Dakota
Territory in the House of Representatives and a witness brought by the
prosecution on March 31st. Mr. Butler, examining the witness, asked the
question:

Had you on the evening before seen General Thomas? * * * Had you a
communication with him?

Answer. Yes sir.

Mr. Stanbery objected, and the Chief Justice ruled that the testimony
was competent and would be heard "unless the Senate think otherwise."

To this ruling Mr. Drake objected and appealed from the decision of the
Chair to the Senate. It appeared to be not to the ruling per se, that
Mr. Drake objected, but to the right of the Chair to rule at all upon
the admissibility of testimony. Mr. Drake representing the extremists of
the dominant side of the Chamber. There seemed to be apprehension of the
effect upon the Senate of the absolute judicial fairness of the rulings
of the Chief Justice, and the great weight they would naturally have,
coming from so just and eminent a jurist. After discussion, Mr. Wilson
moved that the Senate retire for consultation.

The vote on this motion was a tie, being twenty-five for and twenty-five
against retiring, whereupon the Chief Justice announced the fact of a
tie and voted "yea;" and the Senate retired to its consultation room,
where, after discussion and repeated suggestions of amendment to the
rules, the following resolution was offered by Mr. Henderson:

Resolved, That rule 7 be amended by substituting therefor the following:

The presiding officer of the Senate shall direct all necessary
preparations in the Senate Chamber, and the presiding officer in the
trial shall direct all the forms of proceeding while the Senate are
sitting for the purpose of trying an impeachment, and all forms during
the trial not otherwise provided for. And the presiding officer on the
trial may rule all questions of of evidence and incidental questions,
which ruling shall stand as the judgment of the Senate, unless some
member of the Senate shall ask that a formal vote be taken thereon, in
which case it shall be submitted to the Senate for decision; or he may,
at his option, in the first instance, submit any such question to a vote
of the members of the Senate.

Mr. Morrill, of Maine, moved to amend the proposed rule by striking
out the words "which ruling shall stand as the judgment of the Senate,"
which was rejected without a division.

Mr. Sumner then moved to substitute the following:

That the chief justice of the United States, presiding in the Senate on
the trial of the President of the United States, is not a member of
the Senate, and has no authority under the Constitution to vote on any
question during the trial, and he can pronounce decision only as the
organ of the Senate, with its assent.

It is not insisted here that there was any sinister purpose in this
proposition, yet the possibilities, in case of its adoption, were
very grave. Like the wasp, the sting was in the tail--"he (the chief
justice;) can pronounce decision only as the organ of the Senate, WITH
ITS ASSENT!" Had that rule been adopted, suppose the Senate, with, its
vote of forty-two Republicans and twelve Democrats, upon failure of
conviction by a two-thirds vote had refused or refrained on a party vote
from giving "its assent" to a judgment of acquittal?

The vote upon this proposed amendment was as follows:

For its adoption--Messrs. Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Howard, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morton, Nye,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull, Williams,
Wilson--22--all Republicans.

Against its adoption--Messrs. Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis, Dixon,
Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Henderson,
Hendricks, Howe, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Vermont, Norton,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sherman,
Sprague, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey--26--15 Republicans and 11
Democrats.

So the resolution was rejected--every aye vote a Republican, and all
but one, Mr. Trumbull, afterwards voting to impeach the President at tHe
close of the trial--eleven Democrats and fifteen Republicans voting nay.

Mr. Drake then offered the following:

It is the judgment of the Senate that under the Constitution the Chief
Justice presiding over the Senate in the pending trial has no privilege
of ruling questions of law arising thereon, but that all such questions
shall be submitted to a decision by the Senate alone.

It would be difficult to formulate a proposition better calculated to
taint the proceedings with a partisan bias than this one by Mr. Drake.
The impeachment movement was in a very large sense, if not entirely, a
partisan enterprise. It had its origin in partisan differences, and was
based mainly on differences as to public policies at issue between the
two great parties of the country--and while it was expected that every
political friend of the President would vote against the impeachment,
it was DEMANDED, and made a test of party fealty, that every Republican
Senator should vote for his conviction. Therefore, and perhaps it
was not illogical from these premises, party leaders of Mr. Drake's
inclination should not relish the influence the legal, unbiased and
non-partisan rulings of the Chief Justice might have upon his more
conservatively inclined fellow partisans of the body.

Mr. Drake called for the yeas and nays, which were ordered, and the vote
was yeas 20, nays 30. The personality of this vote was very much the
same as on the previous proposition.

The rule proposed by Mr. Henderson was then adopted. The conference
closed shortly after, and the session of the Senate was resumed.

The next day, April 1st, Mr. Sumner renewed in the Senate his
proposition submitted at the Conference the day before but not acted
upon, to change the rules of the Senate in the following form:

It appearing from the reading of the Journal yesterday that on a
question where the Senate were equally divided, the Chief Justice,
presiding on the trial of the President, gave a casting vote; it is
hereby ordered that, in the judgment of the Senate, such vote was
without authority under the Constitution of the United States.

The proposition was put to vote with the following result:

Yeas--Messrs. Cameron, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Cragin, Drake,
Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morton, Norton, Ramsay, Stewart,
Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull, Williams, Wilson--21--10 Republicans
and 1 Democrat.

Nays--Messrs. Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Corbett, Davis, Dixon,
Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes,
Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Vermont,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Van Winkle, Vickers,
Willey--26--16 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

So the proposed order was rejected. The trial then proceeded. The
answers to a very large proportion of the interrogatories propounded
to the witnesses, on both sides, were unimportant, having very
little bearing, either way, upon the case. Twenty-eight of those
interrogatories, however, were more or less important, and were
challenged, seven by the defense, and twenty-one by the prosecution. For
convenience of reference, these interrogatories are numbered from one to
twenty-eight, inclusive, with the answers thereto, when permitted to be
answered, as follows:

Question submitted by Mr. Butler, of the prosecution, April 1st,
1868, to Mr. Walter A. Burleigh, witness on the stand, called for the
prosecution:

No. 1.

You said yesterday, in answer to my question, that you had a
conversation with General Lorenzo Thomason the evening of the 21st of
February last. State if he said anything as to the means by which he
intended to obtain or was directed by the President to obtain possession
of the War Department. If so, state all he said, as nearly as you can?

Mr. Stanbery objected.

Mr. Drake called for the yeas and nays, which were ordered, and the vote
was as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling,
Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler,
Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of
Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer,
Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey, Williams, Wilson--39--all
Republicans.

Nays-Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Vickers--11--all Democrats.

So, the Senate decided that the question should be answered.

General Butler repeated the interrogatory, and Mr. Burleigh's answer was
as follows:

On the evening of February 21st last, I learned that General Thomas
had been appointed Secretary of War ad interim, I think while at the
Metropolitan Hotel. I invited Mr. Leonard Smith, of Leavenworth, Kas.,
to go with me up to his house and see him. We took a carriage and went
up. I found the General there ready to go out with his daughters to
spend the evening at some place of amusement. I told him I would not
detain him if he was going out; but he insisted on my sitting down and
I sat down for a few moments. I told him I had learned he had been
appointed Secretary of War. He said he had; that he had been appointed
that day, I think; that after receiving his appointment from the
President he went to the War Office to show his authority, or his
appointment, to Secretary Stanton, and also his order to take possession
of the office; that the Secretary remarked to him that he supposed
he would give him time to remove his personal effects, or his private
papers, or something to that effect; and the answer was "certainly." He
said that in a short time the Secretary asked him if he would give him
a copy of his order, and he replied "certainly," and gave it to him.
He said that it was no more than right to give him time to take out his
personal effects. I asked him when he was going to assume the duties of
the office. He remarked that he should take possession the next morning
at ten o'clock, which would be the 22nd; and I think in that connection
he stated that he had issued some order in regard to the observance of
the day; but of that I am not sure. I remarked to him that I should be
up at that end of the avenue the next day, and he asked me to come
in and see him. I asked him where I could find him and he said in the
Secretary's room up stairs. I told him I would be there. Said he,
"be there punctually at 10 o'clock." Said I, "you are going to take
possession to-morrow?" "Yes." Said he, "suppose Stanton objects to
it--resists?" "Well," said he, "I expect to meet force by force. Or use
force."

Mr. Conkling: "Repeat that."

The witness. I asked him what he would do if Stanton objected, or
resisted. He said he would use force, or resort to force. Said I,
"Suppose he bars the doors?" His reply was. "I will break them down."
I think that was about all the conversation that we had there in that
connection.

No. 2.

The next disputed interrogatory put by General Butler to the witness
was:

Shortly after this conversation about which you have testified, and
after the President restored Major General Thomas to the office of
Adjutant General, if you know the fact that he was so restored, were
you present in the War Department, and did you hear Thomas make any
statements to the officers and clerks, or either of them, belonging to
the War Office, as to the rules and orders of Mr. Stanton or of the War
Office which he, Thomas, would make, revoke, relax, or rescind, in favor
of such officers or employes when he had control of the affairs therein?
If so, state as near as you can when it was such conversation occurred,
and state all he said, as near as you can.

Mr. Howard demanded the yeas and nays and they were ordered and were as
follows:

Yeas--Anthony Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Henderson Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of
Vermont, Morton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsey, Ross,
Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull, Wilson--28--all
Republicans.

Nays--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery,
Morrill of Maine, Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Sherman, Van Winkle,
Vickers, Willey, Wilson--22--11 Republicans, 11 Democrats.

So the Senate decided that the question should be answered.

Mr. Butler: With the leave of the President, I will put this question by
portions.

Did you hear Thomas make any statement to the officers or clerks, or
either of them, belonging to the War Office, as to the rules and orders
of Mr. Stanton, or of the office, which he, Thomas, would revoke, relax,
or rescind, in favor of such officers and employes when he had control
therein?

Answer: The General remarked to me that he had made an arrangement to
have all the heads, or officers in charge of the different departments
of the office come in with their clerks that morning, as he wanted to
address them. He stated that the rules which had been adopted for the
government of the clerks by his predecessor were of a very arbitrary
character, and he proposed to relax them. I suggested to him that
perhaps I had better go. He said, "no, not at all--remain," and I sat
down and he had some three or four officers--four or five, perhaps--come
in, and each one brought in a roomful of clerks, and he made an address
to each company as they came in, stating to them that he did not propose
to hold them strictly to the letter of the instructions; but when they
wanted to go out they could go out, and when they wanted to come in they
could come in; that he regarded them all as gentlemen, and supposed they
would do their duty, and he should require them to do their duty; but so
far as their little indulgences were concerned--I suppose such as going
out across the street or something of that kind--he did not intend to
interfere with them; all he expected was that they would do their duty.
I waited until he concluded, and we took a walk, and I came away.

Mr. Samuel Wilkinson testified in response to an interrogatory by Mr.
Butler:

I asked him (Thomas) to tell me what had occurred that morning between
him and the Secretary of War in his endeavor to take possession of the
War Department. He hesitated to do so till I told him that the town was
filled with rumors of the change that had been made, of the removal of
Mr. Stanton and the appointment of himself. He then said that since the
affair had become public he felt relieved to speak to me with freedom
about it. He drew from his pocket a copy, or rather the original, of
the order of the President of the United States, directing him to take
possession of the War Department immediately. He told me that he had
taken as a witness of his action General Williams, and had gone up into
the War Department and had shown to Edwin M. Stanton the order of the
President, and had demanded by virtue of that order the possession of
the War Department and its books and papers. He told me that Edwin M.
Stanton, after reading the order, had asked him if he would allow him
sufficient time for him to get together his books, papers, and other
personal property and take away with him; that he told him that he would
allow to him all necessary time to do so, and had then withdrawn from
Mr. Stanton's room. He further told me, that day being Friday, that the
next day would be what he called a dies non, being the holiday of the
anniversary of Washington's birthday, when he had directed that the War
Department should be closed, that the day thereafter would be Sunday,
and that on Monday morning he should demand possession of the War
Department and of its property, and if that demand was refused or
resisted he should apply to the General-in-Chief of the Army for a force
sufficient to enable him to take possession of the War Department; and
he added that he did not see how the General of the Army could refuse to
obey his demand for that force. He then added that under the order that
the President had given to him he had no election to pursue any other
course than the one that he indicated; that he was a subordinate officer
directed by an order from a superior officer, and that he must pursue
that course.

Hon. T. W. Ferry, called by the Prosecution, testified from memoranda
taken down at the time of the demand of General Thomas for possession of
the War Office (Mr. Ferry being present), as follows:

War Department Washington, Feb. 22, 1867.

In the presence of Secretary Stanton, Judge Kelley, Morehead, Dodge, Van
Wyck, Van Horn, Delano, and Freeman Clarke, at 25 minutes past 12 m.,
General Thomas, Adjutant-General, came into the Secretary of War Office,
saying, "Good morning," the Secretary replying "Good morning, sir." Thomas
looked around and said, "I do not wish to disturb you gentlemen, and
will wait." Stanton said, "Nothing private here; what do you want?"
Thomas demanded of Secretary Stanton the surrender of the Secretary of
War Office. Stanton denied it to him, and ordered him back to his own
office as Adjutant-General. Thomas refused to go. "I claim the office of
Secretary of War, and demand it by order of the President."

Stanton: "I deny your authority to act, and order you back to your own
office."

Thomas: "I will stand here. I want no unpleasantness in the presence of
these gentlemen."

Stanton: "You can stand there if you please, but you can not act as
Secretary of War. I am Secretary of War. I order you out of this office
and to your own." Thomas: "I refuse to go, and will stand here."

Stanton: "How are you to get possession? Do you intend to use force?"

Thomas: "I do not care to use force, but my mind is made up as to what I
shall do. I want no unpleasantness, though. I shall stay here and act as
Secretary of War."

Stanton: "You shall not, and I order you, as your superior, back to your
own office."

Thomas: "I will not obey you, but will stand here and remain here."

Stanton: "You call stand there if you please. I order you out of this
office to your own. I am Secretary of War, and your superior."

Thomas then went into opposite room across hall (General Schriver's)
and commenced ordering General Schriver and General Townsend. Stanton
entered, followed by Moorhead and Ferry, and ordered those generals not
to obey or pay any attention to General Thomas' orders; that he denied
his assumed authority as Secretary of War ad interim, and forbade their
obedience of his directions. "I am Secretary of War, and I now order
you, General Thomas out of this place to your own quarters."

Thomas: "I will not go, I shall discharge the functions of Secretary of
War."

Stanton: "You will not."

Thomas: "I shall require the mails of the War Department to be delivered
to me and shall transact the business of the office."

Stanton: "You shall not have them, and I order you to your room."

No. 3.

On Tuesday, April 2nd, the prosecution put in evidence a letter from
the President to Gen. Grant, dated Feb. 10, 1868, in answer to a prior
letter front the General. The President's letter, as introduced in
evidence, purported to contain certain enclosures relating to the
subject matter of the President's letter. The following is that portion
of the President's letter which speaks of the enclosures accompanying
and included therein:

GENERAL: The extraordinary character of your letter of the 3rd instant
would seem to preclude any reply on my part; but the manner in which
publicity has been given to the correspondence of which that letter
forms a part, and the grave questions which are involved, induce me to
take this mode of giving, as a proper sequel to the communications
which have passed between us, the statements of the five members of the
cabinet who were present on the occasion of our conversation on the 14th
ultimo. Copies of the letters which they have addressed to me upon the
subject are accordingly herewith enclosed.

Counsel for the President objected that the letter introduced by the
prosecution was not evidence in the case unless the managers should also
produce the enclosures therein referred to and made a part of the same.
The following was the vote on sustaining the objection:

Yeas--Bayard, Conkling, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fowler, Grimes,
Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Vermont Norton,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sprague, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers and
Willey--20--10 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

Nays--Anthony, Buckalew, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Frelinghuysen,
Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, and
Wilson--29--28 Republicans and 1 Democrat.

So the evidence offered by the prosecution was admitted as offered,
without the enclosures referred to, the objection by the defense not
being sustained. (For these rejected enclosures see appendix.)

No. 4.

The prosecution offered to prove (Mr. Geo. A. Wallace, of the Treasury
Department, on the stand):

That after the President had determined on the removal of Mr. Stanton,
Secretary of War, in spite of the action of the Senate, there being
no vacancy in the office of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, the
President unlawfully appointed his friend and theretofore private
secretary, Edmund Cooper, to that position, as one of the means by which
he intended to defeat the tenure of civil office act and other laws of
Congress.

After debate and Mr. Wallace's answer in explanation of the usages of
the department in the disbursement of moneys, during which it was shown
that no moneys could be drawn out of the treasury on the order of the
assistant secretary except when authorized by the Secretary of the
Treasury to draw warrants therefor, a vote was taken, and resulted as
follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Vermont, Nye, Pomeroy,
Ramsey, Ross, Sprague, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton and Wilson---22--all
Republicans.

Nays--Bayard, Buckalew, Conness, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds,
Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks,
Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Patterson of Tennessee, Sherman, Stewart, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers,
Willey and Williams--27--16 Republicans, 11 Democrats.

So the testimony was not received, as it was shown in the debate thereon
that it would prove nothing against the President which the prosecution
had expected to prove.

No. 5.

Friday April 3rd, the Prosecution offered two telegraphic messages, one
from Lewis E. Parsons to Andrew Johnson, and the other Mr. Johnson's
answer, as follows:

Montgomery, Ala., Jan. 17, 1867.

Legislature in session. Efforts making to reconsider vote on
Constitutional Amendment. Report from Washington says it is probable an
enabling act will pass. We do not know what to believe. I find nothing
here.

(The State Legislature had previously rejected the Constitutional
Amendment.)

The response is:

U. S. Military Telegraph. Executive Office, Washington D. C., Jan. 17,
1867.

What possible good can be obtained by reconsidering the Constitutional
Amendment? I know of none in the present posture of affairs; and I do
not believe that the people of the whole country will sustain any set of
individuals in attempts to change the whole character of our Government
by enabling acts or otherwise. I believe, on the contrary, that they
will eventually uphold all who have patriotism and courage to stand by
the Constitution, and who place their confidence in the people. There
should be no faltering on the part of those who are honest in their
determination to sustain the several co-ordinate Departments of the
Government in accordance with its original design. Andrew Johnson. Hon.
L. E. Parsons, Montgomery, Alabama.


The yeas and nays were demanded by Mr. Drake, and were as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron. Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Henderson, Howard, Morgan, Morrill of Vermont,
Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross, Sherman,
Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Willey, Wilson--27--all
Republicans.

Nays--Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden,
Fowler, Frelinghuysen, McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Norton, Patterson of
Tennessee, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Williams--17--8 Democrats and
9 Republicans.

So the testimony was decided admissible, and was claimed by Mr. Manager
Boutwell to be in substantiation of the charges contained in the
eleventh article.

No. 6.

The prosecution offered in evidence a copy of the Cleveland Leader, a
newspaper purporting to contain a speech delivered by Mr. Johnson at the
City of Cleveland, Ohio, on September 30th, 1866, as evidence against
the President. It was objected to by the defense, and on the call by Mr.
Conness and Mr. Sumner the yeas and nays were ordered, and the vote was
as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell. Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Frelinghuysen,
Henderson, Howard, Johnson, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of
Vermont, Norton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross,
Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer, Tipton, Van Winkle, Willey,
Williams--35--33 Republicans and 2 Democrats.

Nays--Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fowler, Hendricks, Howe,
McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, Trumbull, Vickers--11--8 Democrats and
3 Republicans.

So the evidence was received. It related to the tenth article, and was
based on a certain speech delivered by Mr. Johnson at Cleveland, Ohio.

No. 7.

Saturday, April 10th, 1868, General Lorenzo Thomas on the stand, called
by the Defense. Mr. Stanbery asked him, with reference to certain
interviews with the President: What occurred between the President and
yourself at that second interview on the 21st (February)?

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, and they were ordered and were as
follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cattell, Cole, Conkling, Corbett,
Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler,
Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Howe, Johnson, McCreery,
Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Norton, Patterson
of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee, Pomeroy, Ross, Sherman,
Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey,
Williams, Wilson, Yates--42-31 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Chandler, Conness, Cragin, Drake, Harlan, Howard, Nye,
Ramsay, Thayer--10--all Republicans.

So the testimony was received, and General Thomas' answer was:

I stated to the President that I had delivered the communication, and
that Mr. Stanton gave this answer: "Do you wish me to vacate at once,
or will you give me time to take away my private property?" and that I
replied, "At your pleasure." I then said that after delivering the copy
of the letter to him, he said: "I do not know whether I will obey your
instructions or resist them." This I mentioned to the President and his
answer was: "Very well, go and take charge of the office and perform the
duties." * * *

Question by Mr. Stanbery: What first happened to you the next morning?

Answer: The first thing that happened to me the next morning was the
appearance at my house of the marshal of the district, with an assistant
marshal and a constable, and he arrested me.

Question: What time in the morning was that?

Answer: About 8 o'clock, before I had my breakfast. The command was to
appear forthwith. I asked if he would permit me to see the President. *
* * He went with me to the President's and went into the room where the
President was. I stated that I had been arrested, at whose suit I
did not know. He said, "very well, that is the place I want it in the
courts." * * * I was required to give bail in $5,000. I asked the judge
what it meant. He said it was simply to present myself there at half
past ten the following Wednesday. I asked him if it suspended me from
any of my functions. He said, "no, it has nothing to do with them." * *
* I went immediately from there, first stopping at the President's on my
way, and stating that I had given bail. He made the same answer, "very
well, we want it in the courts."

Question: Did the President at any time prior to or including the 9th of
March, authorize or direct you to use force, intimidation or threats, to
get possession of the War Office?

Answer: He did not.

No. 8.

April 11, Gen. Sherman was called by the defense. In the course of his
examination Mr. Stanbery asked him the following question:

In that interview, (referring to a previously mentioned interview
between the General and the President in the presence of Gen. Grant)
what conversation took place between the President and you in regard to
the removal of Mr. Stanton?

Mr. Butler objected and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morgan, Norton,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers, and Willey--23--22 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett, Cragin,
Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Henderson, Howard, Morrill
of Maine, Morrill of Vermont. Morton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson and
Yates--28--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 9.

Counsel for defense put the following question to Gen. Sherman:

At the first interview at which the tender of the duties of the
Secretary of War ad interim was made to you by the President, did
anything further pass between you and the President in reference to the
tender or your acceptance of it?

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, and they were as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morgan, Norton,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers, and Willey--23--12 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett, Cragin,
Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinhuysen, Harlan, Henderson, Howard, Howe,
Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Nye, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams,
Wilson and Yates--29--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 10.

The next question put to Gen. Sherman by the Defense was:

In either of these conversations did the President say to you that his
object in appointing you was that he might thus get the question of Mr.
Stanton's right to the office before the Supreme Court?

Objected to by Prosecution, and yeas and nays were taken:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Fowler, McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross,
and Vickers--7--4 Democrats, 3 Republicans.

Nays--Buckalew, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry,
Fessenden, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Harlan, Henderson, Hendricks, Howard,
Howe, Johnson, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton,
Norton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsey, Sherman,
Sprague, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey,
Williams, Wilson, and Yates--44--37 Republicans and 7 Democrats.

So this proffered testimony was refused.

No. 11.

Mr. Stanbery, for Defense, suggested that the question had undoubtedly
been overruled upon matter of form, at least, and put it again in this
form.

Was anything said at either of those interviews by the President, as to
any purpose of getting the question of Mr. Stanton's right to the office
before the courts?

This was put and determined in the negative without a division, when Mr.
Henderson offered it again in this form: Did the President, in tendering
you the appointment of Secretary of War ad interim. express the object
or purpose of so doing?

Prosecution again objected, and the yeas and nays were taken:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of
Maine, Morton, Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sherman, Sprague,
Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, and Willey-25--14 Republicans and
11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe,
Morgan, Morrill of Vermont, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy,
Ramsey, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, and Yates--27--all
Republicans.

So the proffered evidence was refused.

No. 12.

April 13, 1868--General Sherman's examination continued:

Question: After the restoration of Mr. Stanton to office, did you form
an opinion whether the good of the service required a Secretary of War
other than Mr. Stanton; and if so, did you communicate that opinion to
the President?

Mr. Conness called for the yeas and nays and they were ordered, and
resulted:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Dixon, Doolittle. Fowler, Grimes,
Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery Patterson, of Tennessee, Ross, Trumbull,
Van Winkle and Vickers--15--6 Republicans and 9 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Davis, Drake, Edmunds, Fessenden, Frelinghuysen, Harlan,
Henderson, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont,
Morton, Norton, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Sherman, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Willey, Williams, Wilson and
Yates--35--33 Republicans and 2 Democrats.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 13.

The next question asked of Gen. Sherman was by Senator Johnson:

Question: Did you at any time, and when, before the President gave the
order for the removal of Mr. Stanton as Secretary of War, advise the
President to appoint some other person than Mr. Stanton?

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, which were as following:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Dixon, Doolittle, Edmunds, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Patterson of
Tennessee, Ross, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers--18-9--Republicans and 9
Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Dixon, Drake, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe,
Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Norton, Nye,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Stewart, Thayer,
Tipton, Willey Williams, Wilson, Yates--33--30 Republicans and 2
Democrats.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

No. 14.

Counsel for defense offered:

A warrant of arrest of Gen. Thomas, dated February 22, 1868, and the
affidavit on which the warrant issued.

(This warrant had been issued on the affidavit of Mr. Stanton.)

The yeas and nays were as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cattell, Cole, Corbett, Cragin, Davis,
Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson,
Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont,
Morton, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee,
Pomeroy, Ross, Sherman, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey,
Williams, Yates--34--24 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Conkling, Chandler, Conness, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry,
Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Nye, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton,
Wilson--17--all Republicans.

So the warrant was received in evidence.

That warrant was issued by Judge Carter, Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of the District of Columbia, upon the complaint of Edwin M.
Stanton, and charged Thomas with attempting forcibly to seize and take
possession of the War Office, in violation of the fifth section of the
Tenure-of-Office Act. The warrant was as follows:

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

To David S. Gooding, United States Marshal for the District of Columbia:

I, David K. Carter, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for the District
of Columbia, hereby command you to arrest Lorenzo Thomas, of said
District, forthwith, and that you have the said Lorenzo before me at the
chambers of the said Supreme Court in the City of Washington, forthwith,
to answer to the charge of a high misdemeanor in this, that on the 21st
day of February, 1868, in the District of Columbia, he did unlawfully
accept the appointment of the office of Secretary of War ad interim, and
did then and there unlawfully hold and exercise and attempt to hold and
exercise the said office contrary to the provisions of the act entitled
"An Act regulating the tenure of certain civil offices, passed March 2,
1867, and hereof fail not, but make due return.

Given under my hand and seal of said court this 22nd day of February,
1868,

D. K. Carter. Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the District of
Columbia.

Attest: R. J. Meigs, Clerk. (Marshal's Return). Washington, D. C.,
February 22, 1868.

The within writ came to hand at 7 o'clock a.m. and was served by me on
the said Lorenzo Thomas at 8 o'clock a.m, and I now return this writ and
bring him before Chief Justice Carter at 9 o'clock a. m. of to-day.

David S. Gooding, U. S. Marshal, D. C.

No. 15.

Mr. Johnson, (of the Court,) asked this question of General Sherman,
witness on the stand: When the President tendered to you the office of
Secretary of War, ad interim, on the 27th of January, 1868, and on the
31st of the same month and year, did he, at the very time of making such
tender, state to you what his purpose in so doing was?

Counsel for Prosecution objected, and Mr. Drake called for the yeas and
nays, which were taken, as follows:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Johnson, McCreery,
Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Norton, Patterson of
Tennessee, Ross, Sherman, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers,
Willey--16--16 Republicans and 10 Democrats.

Nays-Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett, Cragin, Drake,
Edmunds, Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, Yates--22--all Republicans.

The question was decided to be admissible, and the answer was "yes."

No. 16.

The next question, in immediate connection with the last, was:

If he did, state what he said his purpose was?

The yeas and nays were ordered and the vote was:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Cobertt, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson,
McCreery, Morton, Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Sherman,
Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey--26--15 Republicans and 11
Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Cragin, Drake,
Edmunds, Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill
of Vermont, Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart,
Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, Yates--25--all Republicans.

So the question was permitted to be answered, and General Sherman said:

The President told me that the relations between himself and Mr.
Stanton, and between Mr. Stanton and the other members of the Cabinet,
were such that he could not execute the office which he filled as
President of the United States without making provision ad interim for
that office; that he had the right under the law; he claimed to have
the right, and his purpose was to have the office administered in the
interest of the Army and of the Country; and he offered me the office in
that view. He did not state to me then that his purpose was to bring
it to the Courts directly; but for the purpose of having the office
administered properly in the interest of the Army and the whole Country.
I asked him why lawyers could not make a case, and not bring me, or
any officer of the Army, into the controversy. His answer was that it was
found impossible, or a case could not be made up; but, said he "if we
can bring the case to the Courts, it would not stand half an hour."

Mr. Butler, of the Prosecution, objected, and after debate, General
Sherman continued:

The question first asked me seemed to restrict me so close to the
purpose that I endeavored to confine myself to that point alone. On the
first day, or first interview, in which the President offered me the
appointment ad interim, he confined himself to very general terms, and
I gave him no definite answer. The second interview, which was on the
afternoon of the 30th, was the interview during which he made the
points which I have testified to. In speaking he referred to the
constitutionality of the bill known as the civil tenure-of-office
bill, I think, or the tenure of civil office bill; and it was the
constitutionality of that bill which he seemed desirous of having
tested, and which, he said, if it could be brought before the Supreme
Court properly, would not stand half an hour. We also spoke of force.
I first stated that if Mr. Stanton would simply retire, although it was
against my interest, against my desire, against my personal wishes,
and against my official wishes, I might be willing to undertake to
administer the office ad interim. Then he supposed the point was
yielded; and I made this point? "Suppose Mr. Stanton do not yield?" he
answered, "Oh! he will make no objection; you present the order and he
will retire." I expressed my doubt, and he remarked. "I know him better
than you do: he is cowardly." I then begged to be excused from giving
him an answer to give the subject more reflection, and I gave him my
final answer in writing. I think that letter, if you insist on knowing
my views, should come into evidence, and not parol testimony taken up;
but my reasons for declining the office were mostly personal in their
nature.

Mr. Henderson (of the Court) asked this question:

Did the President, on either of the occasions alluded to, express to you
a fixed purpose or determination to remove Mr. Stanton from his office?

General Sherman answered:

If by removal is meant a removal by force, he never conveyed to my mind
such an impression; but he did most unmistakably say that he could have
no more intercourse with him in the relation of President and Secretary
of War.

Mr. Howard (of the Court) asked the General:

You say the President spoke of force. What did he say about force?

General Sherman answered:

I enquired, "Suppose Mr. Stanton do not yield? What then shall be done?"
"Oh," said he, "there is no necessity of considering that question. Upon
the presentation of an order he will simply go away, or retire."

Mr. Henderson (of the Court) asked the question:

Did you give any opinion, or advice to the President on either of
those occasions in regard to the legality or propriety of an ad interim
appointment; and if so, what advice did you give, or what opinion did
you express to him?

Mr. Bingham of the prosecution, objected, and the Chair put the question
to the Senate whether it should be answered. The Senate, without a
division, refused answer to the question, and the examination of Gen.
Sherman closed for that day.

No. 17.

Wednesday, April 15th. The defense offered several extracts from records
of the Navy Department, to prove the practice of the Government in cases
of removal from office by different Presidents prior to Mr. Johnson, of
which the following are samples:

NAVY AGENCY AT NEW YORK.

1861. June 20. Isaac Henderson was, by direction of the President,
removed from the office of Navy agent at New York, and instructed to
transfer to Paymaster John D. Gibson, of United States Navy, all
the public funds and other property in his charge. Navy Agency at
Philadelphia.

Dec. 26, 1851. James S. Chambers was removed from the office of Navy
Agent at Philadelphia and instructed to transfer to Paymaster A. E.
Watson, U. S. Navy, all the public funds and other property in his
charge.

The prosecution objected and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Conkling, Corbett, Davis, Dixon,
Doolittle, Edmunds, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes,
Henderson, Hendricks, Howe, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morrill
of Vermont, Morton, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee,
Ross, Saulsbery, Sherman, Stewart, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers, Willey, Wilson, Yates--36--25 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conness, Cragin, Drake, Harlan,
Howard, Morgan, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Thayer, Tipton, Williams--15--all
Republicans.

So the evidence was admitted.

No. 18.

Thursday, April 16, Mr. Walter S. Cox on the stand. The defense offered
to prove:

That Mr. Cox was employed professionally by the President, in the
presence of General Thomas, to take such legal proceedings in the case
that had been commenced against General Thomas as would be effectual to
raise judicially the question of Mr. Stanton's legal right to continue
to hold the office of Secretary for the Department of War against the
authority of the President, and also in reference to obtaining a writ of
quo warranto for the same purpose; and we shall expect to follow up this
proof by evidence of what was done by the witness in pursuance of the
above employment.

Mr. Drake demanded the yeas and nays, and they were ordered:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Corbett, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle,
Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Hendricks, Howe, Johnson,
McCreery, Morrill of Maine, Morton, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Sherman, Sprague, Sumner,
Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey--29--17 Republicans and 12
Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds,
Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Morgan, Morrill of Vermont, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, Yates--21--all Republicans.

So the testimony was received, and the witness proceeded to detail the
steps he had taken by direction of the President to procure a judicial
determination of General Thomas' right to the office of Secretary of War
and to put him in possession, till the following question was asked.

No. 19.

What did you do toward getting out a writ of habeas corpus under the
employment of the President.

Prosecution objected, and the yeas and nays were ordered:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill
of Maine, Morgan, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of
Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Sherman, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van
Winkle, Vickers, Willey--27--15 Republicans and 12 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Cragin, Drake,
Edmunds, Ferry, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Vermont,
Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson,
Yates--23--all Republicans.

The Senate having decided the evidence to be admissible,

Mr. Cox proceeded:

When the Chief Justice announced that he would proceed as an examining
Judge to investigate the case of General Thomas, and not as holding
Court, our first application to him was to adjourn the investigation
into the Criminal Court then in session, in order to have the action of
that Court. After some little discussion this request was refused. Our
next effort was to have General Thomas committed to prison, in order
that we might apply to that Court for a habeas corpus, and upon his
being remanded by that Court; if that should be done, we might follow up
the application by one to the Supreme Court of the United States. * *
* The Chief Justice having indicated an intention to postpone the
examination, we directed General Thomas to decline giving any bail for
further appearance, and to surrender himself into custody, and announce
to the Judge that he was in custody, and then present to the Criminal
Court an application for a writ of habeas corpus. The Counsel on the
other side objected that General Thomas could not put himself into
custody, and they did not desire that he should be detained in custody.
The Chief Judge also declared that he would not restrain General Thomas
of his liberty, and would not hold him or allow him to be held
in custody. Supposing that he must be either committed or finally
discharged, we then claimed that he be discharged, not supposing that
the Counsel on the other side would consent to it, and supposing that
would bring about his commitment, and that we should then have an
opportunity of getting a habeas corpus. They made no objection, however,
to his final discharge, and accordingly the Chief Justice did discharge
him.

No. 20.

The witness, Mr. Cox, was asked by counsel for defense:

After you had reported to the President the result of your efforts to
obtain a writ of habeas corpus, did you do any other act in pursuance
of the original instructions you had received from the President on
Saturday to test the right of Mr. Stanton to continue in the office; and
if so, state what the acts were?

The yeas and nays were ordered on the demand of Mr. Howard.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Howe, Johnson, McCreery, Morrill of Maine,
Morton, Norton, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of Tennessee,
Ross, Saulsbery, Sherman, Sprague, Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers, Willey--27--15 Republicans and 12 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Cragin, Drake,
Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Morgan, Morrill of
Vermont, Nye, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams,
Wilson, Yates--23--all Republicans.

So the evidence was admitted, and Mr. Cox continued.

On the same day or the next, I prepared an information in the nature
of a quo warranto. I think a delay of one day occurred in the effort to
procure certified copies of Gen. Thomas' commission as Secretary of
War ad interim, and of the order to Mr. Stanton. I then applied to
the District Attorney to sign the information in the nature of a quo
warranto, and he declined to do so without instructions or a request
from the President or the Attorney General. This fact was communicated
to the Attorney General and the papers were sent to him. Nothing was
done after this time by me.

No. 21.

The defense offered to prove:

That the President then stated that he had issued an order for the
removal of Mr. Stanton and the employment of Mr. Thomas to perform
the duties ad interim; that thereupon Mr. Perrin said, "Supposing Mr.
Stanton should oppose the order." The President replied: "There is no
danger of that, for General Thomas is already in the office." He then
added: "It is only a temporary arrangement; I shall send in to the
Senate at once a good name for the office."

Mr. Butler, for prosecution, objected, and the vote was:

Yeas--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Hendricks, McCreery,
Patterson of Tennessee, and Vickers--9--all Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett, Cragin,
Drake, Ferry, Fessenden, Fowler, Frelinghuysen, Grimes, Harlan, Howard,
Howe, Johnson, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton,
Nye, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Ross, Sherman,
Sprague, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey,
Williams, Wilson, and Yates---37--36 Republicans and 1 Democrat.

So this testimony was rejected.

No. 22.

Friday, April 17. The defense offered to prove:

That on this occasion (a Cabinet meeting previously mentioned), the
President communicated to Mr. Welles, and the other members of his
Cabinet, before the meeting broke up, that he had removed Mr. Stanton
and appointed General Thomas Secretary of War ad interim; and that, upon
the inquiry by Mr. Welles whether General Thomas was in possession of
the office, the President replied that he was, and on further question
of Welles, whether Mr. Stanton acquiesced, the President replied that he
did; all that he required was time to remove his papers.

Mr. Butler objected and the yeas and nays were ordered.

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Cole, Conkling, Corbett, Davis, Dixon,
Doolittle, Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery,
Morton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbery, Sherman, Sprague,
Sumner, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, Willey--26--15 Republicans and 11
Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Conness, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry,
Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill
of Vermont, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart,
Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, Yates--2-3-all Republicans.

So the testimony was received, and the following proceeding was had Mr.
Evarts, of Counsel for the President. Mr. Welles on the stand:

Please state, Mr. Welles, what communication was made by the President
to the Cabinet on the subject of the removal of Mr. Stanton and the
appointment of General Thomas, and what passed at the time?

Mr. Welles: As I remarked, after the Departmental business had been
disposed of, the President remarked, as usual when he had anything to
communicate himself, that before they separated it would be proper for
him to say that he had removed Mr. Stanton and appointed the Adjutant
General Lorenzo Thomas, Secretary ad interim. I asked whether General
Thomas was in possession. The President said he was; that Mr. Stanton
required some little time to remove his writings, his papers; I said,
perhaps, or I asked, "Mr. Stanton, then, acquiesces?" He said he did, as
he considered it. * * *

Question: Now, sir, one moment to a matter which you spoke of
incidentally. You were there the next morning about noon?

Answer: I was.

 Question: Did you then see the appointment of Mr. Ewing?

Answer: I did.

Question: Was it made out before you came there, or after, or while you
were there?

Answer: While I was there.

Question: And you then saw it?

Answer: I saw it.

Question by Mr. Johnson (of the Court): What time of the day was that?

Answer: It was about twelve.

* * * Question by Mr. Evarts: Did you become aware of the
Tenure-of-office bill, as it is called, at or about the time that it
passed Congress?

Answer: I was aware of it.

Question: Were you present at any Cabinet meeting at which, after the
passage of that Act, it became the subject of consideration?

Answer: Yes, on two occasions. The first occasion when it was brought
before the Cabinet was on the 26th of February, 1867.

Question: Who were present?

Answer: All the Cabinet were present.

Question: Was Mr. Stanton there?

Answer: Mr. Stanton was there, I think, on that occasion.

Question: This civil tenure act was the subject of consideration there?

Answer: It was submitted.

Question: As a matter of consideration in the Cabinet?

Answer: For consultation for the advice and opinion of members.

Question: How did he submit the matter to your consideration?

Mr. Butler objected and demanded that the offer be put in writing.

No. 23.

That the President at a meeting of the Cabinet, while the bill was
before the President for his approval, laid before the Cabinet the
tenure-of-civil-office bill for their consideration and advice to the
President respecting his approval of the bill: and thereupon the members
of the Cabinet then present gave their advice to the President that the
bill was unconstitutional and should be returned to Congress with his
objections, and that the duty of preparing a message, setting forth the
objections to the constitutionality of the bill, was devolved on Mr.
Seward and Mr. Stanton; to be followed by proof as to what was done by
the President and Cabinet up to the time of sending in the message.

After argument the yeas and nays were taken:

Yeas--Anthony Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Patterson
of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, and
Willey--20--9 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe,
Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton,
Williams, Wilson, and Yates--29--all Republicans.

So this testimony was rejected.

No. 21.

Counsel for Defense offered to prove:

That at the meetings of the Cabinet at which Mr. Stanton was present,
held while the tenure-of-civil-office bill was before the President for
approval, the advice of the Cabinet in regard to the same was asked
by the President and given by the Cabinet, and thereupon the question
whether Mr. Stanton and the other Secretaries who had received their
appointment from Mr. Lincoln were within the restrictions upon the
President's power of removal from office created by said act was
considered, and the opinion expressed that the Secretaries appointed by
Mr. Lincoln were not within such restrictions.

The yeas and nays were ordered, and the vote was:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Patterson of
Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Sherman, Sprague, Trumbull, Van Winkle,
Vickers, and Willey--22--11 Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole. Conness. Corbett, Cragin, Drake,
Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghusen, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of
Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy,
Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, and Yates--26--all
Republicans.

So this testimony was rejected.

No. 25.

Counsel for defense offered to prove:

That at the Cabinet meetings between the passage of the tenure-of-civil
office bill and the order of the 21st of February, 1868, for the removal
of Mr. Stanton upon occasions when the condition of the public service,
as affected by the operation of that bill, came up for the consideration
and advice of the Cabinet, it was considered by the President and
Cabinet that a proper regard to the public service made it
desirable that upon some proper case a judicial determination of the
constitutionality of the law should be obtained.

The question being taken by yeas and nays, resulted:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Patterson of
Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury Trumbull, Van Winkle, and Vickers--19--8
Republicans and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe,
Morgan, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton,
Willey, Williams, Wilson and Yates--30--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was rejected.

No. 26.

Counsel for defense put this question to witness, (Mr. Welles, then
Secretary of the Navy.)

Was there, within the period embraced in the inquiry in the last
question, and at any discussions or deliberations of the Cabinet
concerning the operation of the tenure-of-civil-office act and the
requirements of the public service in regard to the service, any
suggestion or intimation whatever touching or looking to the vacation of
any office by force or getting possession of the same by force?

Counsel for prosecution objected, and the vote was:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Edmunds, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee,
Ross, Saulsbury, Trumbull, Van Winkle, and Vickers--18--8 Republicans
and 10 Democrats.

Nays-Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett, Cragin,
Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan, Morrill of Maine,
Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay,
Sherman, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Willey, Williams, Wilson, and
Yates--26--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was rejected.

No. 27.

Defense offered to prove:

That at the meetings of the Cabinet at which Stanton was present, held
while the tenure-of-civil-office bill was before the President for
approval, the advice of the Cabinet in regard to the same was asked by
the President, and given the Cabinet, and thereupon the question
whether Mr. Stanton and the other Secretaries who had received their
appointments from Mr. Lincoln were within the restrictions upon the
President's power of removal from office created by said act, was
considered and the opinion expressed that the Secretaries appointed by
Mr. Lincoln were not within such restrictions.

Mr. Johnson: I ask that the question propounded by the Senator from Ohio
(Mr. Sherman) shall now be read.

The Secretary read the question as follows:

State if, after the 2d of March, 1867, the date of the passage of the
tenure-of-office act, the question whether the Secretaries appointed by
President Lincoln were included within the provisions of that act came
before the Cabinet for discussion; and if so, what opinion was given on
this question by members of the Cabinet to the President.

The yeas and nays were ordered; and being taken resulted:

Yeas--Anthony, Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Patterson of Tennessee,
Ross, Saulsbury, Sherman, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers, and
Willey--20--9 Republican and 11 Democrats.

Nays--Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Howe, Morgan,
Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New Hampshire,
Pomeroy, Ramsay, Stewart, Thayer, Tipton, Williams, Wilson, and
Yates--26--all Republicans.

So the proffered testimony was rejected.

No. 28.

The Prosecution proposed to put in evidence the nomination of Lieutenant
General Sherman, to be General by brevet, sent to the Senate on the 13th
of February, 1868, also the nomination of Major General George H. Thomas
to be Lieutenant General by brevet, and to be General by brevet, sent to
the Senate on the 21st of February, 1868.

The question being taken by yeas and nays, resulted: Yeas--Anthony,
Cole, Fessenden, Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Morton, Ross, Sumner,
Tipton, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Willey, and Yates--14--all Republicans.

Nays--Buckalew, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Conkling, Conness, Corbett,
Cragin, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen,
Harlan, Hendricks, Howard, Howe, Johnson, McCreery, Morgan, Morrill
of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Patterson of New Hampshire, Patterson of
Tennessee, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Thayer, Vickers,
Williams, and Wilson--35--26 Republicans and 9 Democrats.

So the proffered testimony was refused.

GENERAL EMORY'S TESTIMONY.

The Ninth Article of the Impeachment was based upon alleged military
changes in the City of Washington whereby the number of troops on duty
there was rumored to have been largely increased, with a view to their
use in the controversy between the President and Congress, and more
especially for the expulsion of Mr. Stanton from the War Office in case
of his resistance to the order of the President for his retirement. The
wildest rumors of that character prevailed--that Mr. Johnson proposed
to throw off all disguise and assume direct military control and the
establishment of practically a military dictatorship. Congress had some
months previously enacted that all military orders from the President
should be issued through the General of the Army--the Congress thereby
assuming to practically abrogate a constitutional function of the Chief
Executive.

There was considerable confidence among the supporters of the
impeachment that they would be able to prove these allegations by
General Emory, then in local command of the troops and Department
of Washington. General Emory was called by the prosecution, and the
following was his testimony.

Examined by Mr. Butler:

Question: Will you have the kindness to state, as nearly as you can what
took place then? (Referring to an interview with the President at the
Executive Mansion.)

Answer: I will try and state the substance of it, but the words I can
not undertake to state exactly. The President asked me if I recollected
a conversation he had had with me when I first took command of the
department. I told him that I recollected the facts of the conversation
distinctly. He then asked me what changes had been made. I told him no
material changes, but such as had been made I could state at once. I
went on to state that in the fall six companies of the 29th infantry
had been brought to this City to winter; but as an offset to that, four
companies of the 12th infantry had been detached to South Carolina on
the request of the Commander of that District; that two companies of
artillery had been detached by my predecessor, one of them for the
purpose of siding in putting down the Fenian difficulties, had been
returned to the command, that although the number of companies head been
increased, the numerical strength of the command was very much the same,
growing out of an order reducing the artillery and infantry companies
from the maximum of the war establishment to the minimum of the peace
establishment. The President said: "I do not refer to those changes." I
replied that if he would state what changes he referred to, or who made
the report of the changes, perhaps I could be more, explicit. He said,
"I refer to recent changes within a day or two," or something to that
effect. I told him I thought I could assure him that no changes had been
made; that under a recent order issued for the government of the armies
of the United States, founded upon a law of Congress, all orders had to
be transmitted through General Grant to the army, and in like manner all
orders coming from General Grant to any of his subordinate officers must
necessarily come, if in my department, through me; that if by chance an
order had been given to any junior officer of mine it was his duty at
once to report that fact. The President asked me. "What order do you
refer to?" I replied, "To order number 17 of the series of 1867." He
said, "I would like to see the order," and a messenger was dispatched
for it. At this time a gentleman came in who I supposed had business in
no way connected with the business I had in hand, and I withdrew to the
farther end of the room, and while there, the messenger came in with
the book of orders and handed it to me. As soon as the gentleman had
withdrawn, I returned to the President with the book in my hand, and
said I would take it as a favor if he would permit me to call his
attention to that order; that it had been passed in an appropriation
bill, and I thought it not unlikely that it had escaped his attention.
He took the order and read it, and observed, "This is not in
conformity with the Constitution of the United States, that makes me
Commander-in-Chief, or with the terns of your commission." I replied,
"That is the order which you approved and issued to the army for our
government," or something to that effect. I can not recollect the exact
words, nor do I intend to quote the exact words of the President. He
said, "Am I to understand that the President of the United States can
not give an order except through the General of the Army? Or General
Grant?" I said in reply, that that was my impression--that that was the
opinion that the Army entertain, and I thought upon that subject they
were a unit. I also said, "I think it is fair, Mr. President, to say to
you that when this order came out, there was considerable discussion
on the subject as to what were the obligations of an officer under
that order, and some eminent lawyers were consulted. I myself consulted
one--and the opinion was given to me decidedly and unequivocally that
we were bound by the order, Constitutional or not Constitutional." The
President observed that "the object of the law was evident."

The following is that portion of the act referred to:

"Section 2. Be it further enacted: That the headquarters of the General
of the Army of the United States shall be at the City of Washington, and
all orders and instructions relating to military operations issued by
the President and Secretary of War shall be issued through the General
of the Army, and in case of his inability, through the next in rank. The
General of the Army shall not be removed, suspended, or relieved from
command or assigned to duty elsewhere than at said headquarters except
at his own request WITHOUT THE PREVIOUS APPROVAL OF THE SENATE; and any
orders or instructions relating to Military operations issued contrary
to the requirements of this section, shall be null and void. And
any officer who shall issue orders or instructions, contrary to the
provisions of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor in
office; and any officer of the Army who shall transmit, convey or obey
any orders or instructions so issued contrary to the provisions of this
section, knowing that such orders were so issued shall be liable to
imprisonment for not less than two nor more than twenty years upon
conviction thereof in any Court of competent jurisdiction."

By turning to the Congressional Record of that day, it will be found
that Mr. Johnson was perfectly aware of the existence of the foregoing
provision of the Act of Congress in the bill referred to, at the time
he returned the bill to the House with his signature. His reasons for
so signing it are set out in the following communication to the House
accompanying the bill.

The act entitled "An act making appropriations for the support of
the Army for the year ending June 30, 1868, and for other purposes,"
contains provisions to which I must call attention. There are
propositions contained in the second section which in certain cases
deprives the President of his Constitutional functions of Commander in
Chief of the Army, and in the sixth section, which denies to ten States
of the Union their Constitutional right to protect themselves in any
emergency, by means of their own militia. These provisions are out
of place in an appropriation act, but I am compelled to defeat these
necessary appropriations if I withhold my signature from the act.
Pressed by these considerations, I feel constrained to return the bill
with my signature, but to accompany it with my earnest protest against
the section which I have indicated.

Andrew Johnson. Washington, D. C., March 2, 1868.


That Congress was to expire by limitation at 12 o'clock on the 4th,
thirty-six hours later. If Mr. Johnson had vetoed the bill, as under
ordinary conditions it would have been his duty to the Constitution and
to himself to do, its re-passage through the two Houses in that limited
time would have been impossible, and the appropriations carried by the
bill for the support of the Army would have been lost. To save them Mr.
Johnson submitted to the indignity put upon him by Congress in denying
him a guaranteed and manifest Constitutional right and power. In that
act Mr. Johnson illustrated a magnanimity and a consciousness of public
responsibility that was most creditable to himself, and in marked
contrast to the action of Congress toward him.



CHAPTER X. --  A CONFERENCE HELD AND THE FIRST VOTE TAKEN.

A few days prior to the day set for taking the vote on the several
Articles of Impeachment, and after the conclusion of testimony, it was
proposed that there be a private session for conference of the Senate
on a day named, May 11th, to give Senators an opportunity to declare
themselves on the pending impeachment.

Neither the precise object or the utility of a conference were then
apparent, but the result was somewhat of a surprise to those who had, up
to that time, been undoubtingly confident of the President's conviction.
Comparatively few Senators had previously declared their position. Very
few, if any of the Republican Senators had indicated a disposition to
vote against any of the articles, but the silence of a number of them,
and their refusal to commit themselves even to their associates, was a
source of uneasiness in Senatorial Impeachment circles. Hence, possibly,
the suggestion of a "conference."

It was taken for granted that every Democratic Senator would vote
against the impeachment. But the idea was not to be entertained that the
"no" votes would extend beyond the Democratic coterie of twelve.
There were, however, anxious misgivings as to that. There was too much
silence--too much of saying nothing when so little that might be said
would go so far to relieve an oppressive anxiety.

So a session for "conference" was ordered and held, much to the surprise
of gentlemen whose silence had become somewhat oppressive, and was
becoming equally painful to those who wanted a conference. It savored
of an attempt to "poll the Senate" in advance of judgment. It was
resolved at the session of May 7th, to hold a session for deliberation
on the following Monday, May 11th. The most surprising development of
that session was the weakness of the bill of indictment at the very
point where it was apparently strongest--the first Article. Two
conspicuous and influential Senators--Messrs. Sherman of Ohio, and Howe
of Wisconsin--declared, and gave convincing reasons therefor, that they
would not vote for the impeachment of Mr. Johnson on that Article.

In his remarks on this occasion, after giving a history of the enactment
of the Tenure-of-Office law, the first section of which specifically
excepts from its operation such members of Mr. Johnson's Cabinet as
had been appointed by Mr. Lincoln and still remaining, though not
recommissioned by Mr. Johnson, Mr. Sherman said:

I can only say as one of the Senate conferees, under the solemn
obligations that now rest upon us in construing this Act, that I did
not understand it to include members of the Cabinet not appointed by the
President, and that it was with extreme reluctance and only to secure
the passage of the bill that, in the face of the votes of the Senate
I agreed to the report LIMITING AT ALL the power of the President to
remove heads of Departments. * * * I stated explicitly that the Act
as reported did not protect from removal the members of the Cabinet
appointed by Mr. Lincoln, that President Johnson might remove them at
his pleasure; and I named the Secretary of war as one that might be
removed. * * * I could not conceive a case where the Senate would
require the President to perform his great executive office upon the
advice and through heads of Departments personally obnoxious to him,
and whom he had not appointed, and, therefore, no such case was provided
for. * * * Can I pronounce the President guilty of crime, and by that
vote aid to remove him from his high office for doing what I declared
and still believe he had a legal right to do. God forbid: * * * What
the President did do in the removal of Mr. Stanton he did under a power
which you repeatedly refused to take from the office of the President--a
power that has been held by that officer since the formation of the
Government, and is now limited only by the words of an Act, the literal
construction of which does not include Mr. Stanton. * * * It follows,
that as Mr. Stanton is not protected by the Tenure-of-Civil-Office Act,
his removal rests upon the Act of 1789, and he according to the terms of
that Act and of the commission held by him, and in compliance with the
numerous precedents cited in this cause, was lawfully removed by the
President, and his removal not being contrary to the provisions of the
Act of March 2nd 1867, the 1st, 4th, 5th, and 6th Articles, based upon
his removal, must fail.

On this point, Mr. Howe said:

If Mr. Stanton had been appointed during the present Presidential term.
I should have no doubt he was within the security of the law. But
I cannot find that, either in fact or in legal intendment, he was
appointed during the present Presidential term. It is urged that he
was appointed by Mr. Lincoln, and such is the fact. It is said that Mr.
Lincoln's term is not yet expired. Such I believe to be the fact. But
the language of the proviso is, that a Secretary shall hold not during
the term of MAN by whom he is appointed, but during the TERM of the
PRESIDENT by whom he may be appointed. Mr. Stanton was appointed by
the President in 1862. The term of that President was limited by the
Constitution. It expired on the 4th of March, 1865. That the same
incumbent was re-elected for the next term is conceded, but I do not
comprehend how that fact extended the former term.

Entertaining these views, and because the first Article of the
Impeachment charges the order of removal as a violation of the
Tenure-of-Office Act, I am constrained to hold the President not guilty
upon that Article.

These declarations, coming from two gentlemen of distinction and
influence in the party councils, both of whom had actively participated
in framing the Tenure-of-Office Act, became at once the occasion of
genuine and profound surprise, and it is unnecessary to say that they
tended largely to strengthen the doubts entertained by others as to
the sufficiency of all the other allegations of the indictment. They
naturally and logically reasoned that the removal of Mr. Stanton, set
out in the first Article, constituted, in effect, the essence of the
indictment, and that all that followed, save the 10th Article was
more in the nature of specifications, or a bill of particulars, than
otherwise--that if no impeachable offense were set out in the first
Article, then none was committed, as that Article constituted the
substructure of all the rest--its essence and logic running through and
permeating practically all--and that without that Article, there was
no coherence or force in any of them, and consequently nothing charged
against the President that was impeachable, as he had not violated the
Tenure-of-Office law, and was not charged with the violation of any
other law.

That conference developed, further, that a large majority of the
Articles of Impeachment were objectionable to and would not be supported
by a number of Republican Senators.

Mr. Edmunds would not support the 4th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Articles,
being "wholly unsustained by proof," but would support the 11th, though
apparently doubtful of its efficiency.

Mr. Ferry could not support the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, or 10th
Articles.

Mr. Howard declared that he would not support the 9th Article.

Mr. Morrill of Vermont, would not support the 4th, 6th, 9th, or 10th
Articles, as they were unproven.

Mr. Morrill, of Maine, Mr. Yates, Mr. Harlan, and Mr. Stewart,
would vote to convict on the Articles relating to the removal of Mr.
Stanton--uncommitted on all others.

Mr. Fessenden, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Grimes, Mr. Henderson, Mr. Trumbull, and
Mr. Van Winkle, each declared, at that conference, their opposition to
the entire list of the Articles of Impeachment.

But eighteen Republicans committed themselves at that conference, for
conviction, out of twenty-four who filed opinions. While it was taken
for granted that the six Democrats who had failed to declare their
position at that conference would oppose conviction, the position of the
eighteen Republicans who had failed to declare themselves became at once
a source of very grave concern in impeachment circles. Out of that
list of eighteen uncommitted Republicans, but one vote was necessary to
defeat the impeachment. This condition was still farther intensified by
the fact that eight of the eleven Articles of Impeachment were already
beaten in that conference, and practically by Republican committals,
and among them the head and front and foundation of the indictment--the
First Article--by Messrs. Sherman and Howe, two conspicuous Republican
leaders.

A forecast of the vote based on these committals as to the several
Articles, would be against the First Article, twelve Democrats and eight
Republicans, one more than necessary for its defeat--the eight "not
guilty" votes including Messrs. Sherman and Howe.

Against the Fourth Article--twelve Democrats and nine
Republicans--including Messrs. Edmunds, Ferry, and Morrill of Vermont.

Against the Fifth Article--twelve Democrats and eight
Republicans-including Messrs. Edmunds and Ferry.

Against the Sixth Article--twelve Democrats and nine
Republicans-including Messrs. Ferry, Howe, and Morrill of Vermont.

Against the Seventh--Article-twelve Democrats and seven
Republicans--including Mr. Ferry.

Against the Eighth Article--twelve Democrats and seven
Republicans--including Mr. Edmunds.

Against the Ninth Article--twelve Democrats and twelve
Republicans--including Messrs. Sherman, Edmunds, Ferry, Howe, Howard,
and Morrill of Vermont.

Against the Tenth Article--twelve Democrats and ten
Republicans--including Messrs. Edmunds, Sherman, Ferry, and Morrill of
Vermont.

It is somewhat conspicuous that but three gentlemen--Messrs. Sumner,
Pomeroy, and Tipton, in their arguments in the Conference, pronounced
the President guilty on all the charges--though five others, Messrs.
Wilson, Patterson of New Hampshire, Frelinghuysen, Cattell, and
Williams, pronounced the President guilty on general principles, without
specification; and Messrs. Morrill of Maine, Yates and Stewart, guilty
in the removal of Mr. Stanton, without further specification of charges.

As but one vote, in addition to the twelve Democratic and the six
Republican votes pledged against conviction at the Conference, was
necessary to defeat impeachment on the three remaining Articles--the
2nd, 3rd, and 11th--and as nearly a half of the Republicans of the
Senate had failed to commit themselves, at least in any public way, the
anxiety of the advocates of Impeachment became at once, and naturally,
very grave. How many of the eighteen Republicans who had failed
to declare themselves at that Conference might fail to sustain the
Impeachment, became, therefore, a matter of active solicitude on all
sides, especially in impeachment circles in and out of the Senate.
Republican committals in the Conference had rendered absolutely certain
the defeat of every Article of the Impeachment except the Second, Third,
and Eleventh, and the addition of but a single vote from the eighteen
uncommitted Republicans to the "No" side, would defeat them.

It was under this unfavorable condition of the Impeachment cause, that
the Senate assembled on May 16th, 1868, for the purpose of taking final
action on the indictment brought by the House of Representatives, the
trial of which had occupied the most of the time of the Senate for the
previous three months, and which had to a large degree engrossed the
attention of the general public, to the interruption of legislation
pending in the two Houses of Congress, and more or less to the
embarrassment of the commercial activities of the country.

For the first time in the history of the government, practically eighty
years, the President of the United States was at the bar of the Senate,
by virtue of a constitutional warrant, on an accusation of the House
of Representatives of high crimes and misdemeanors in office, and his
conviction and expulsion from office demanded in the name of all the
people. No event in the civil history of the country had ever before
occurred to so arouse public antipathies and public indignation
against any man-and these conditions found special vent in the City of
Washington, as the Capitol of the Nation, as it had become during the
trial the focal point of the politically dissatisfied element of the
entire country. Its streets and all its places of gathering had swarmed
for many weeks with representatives of every State of the Union,
demanding in a practically united voice the deposition of the President.

On numbers of occasions during the previous history of the Government
there had been heated controversies between the Congress and the
Executive, but never before characterized by the intensity, not
infrequently malevolence, that had come to mark this and never before
had a division between the Executive and the Congress reached a point at
which a suggestion of his constitutional ostracism from office had been
seriously entertained, much less attempted.

But it had now come. The active, intense interest of the country was
aroused, and everywhere the division among the people was sharply
defined and keen, though the numerical preponderance, it cannot be
denied, was largely against the President and insistent upon his
removal.

The dominant party of the country was aroused and active for the
deposition of the President. Public meetings were held throughout the
North and resolutions adopted and forwarded to Senators demanding that
Mr. Johnson be promptly expelled from office by the Senate--and it had
become apparent, long before the taking of the vote, that absolute,
swift, and ignominious expulsion from office awaited every Republican
Senator who should dare to disregard that demand.

Under these conditions it was but natural that during the trial, and
especially as the close approached, the streets of Washington and the
lobbies of the Capitol were thronged from day to day with interested
spectators from every section of the Union, or that Senators were
beleaguered day and night, by interested constituents, for some word of
encouragement that a change was about to come of that day's proceeding,
and with threats of popular vengeance upon the failure of any Republican
Senator to second that demand.

In view of this intensity of public interest it was as a matter of
course that the coming of the day when the great controversy was
expected to be brought to a close by the deposition of Mr. Johnson and
the seating of a new incumbent in the Presidential chair, brought to
the Capitol an additional throng which long before the hour for the
assembling of the Senate filled all the available space in the vast
building, to witness the culmination of the great political trial of the
age.

Upon the closing of the hearing--even prior thereto, and again during
the few days of recess that followed, the Senate had been carefully
polled, and the prospective vote of every member from whom it was
possible to procure a committal, ascertained and registered in many a
private memoranda. There were fifty-four members--all present. According
to these memoranda, the vote would stand eighteen for acquittal,
thirty-five for conviction--one less than the number required by the
Constitution to convict. What that one vote would be, and could it be
had, were anxious queries, of one to another, especially among those
who had set on foot the impeachment enterprise and staked their future
control of the government upon its success. Given for conviction and
upon sufficient proofs, the President MUST step down and out of his
place, the highest and most honorable and honoring in dignity and
sacredness of trust in the constitution of human government, a disgraced
man and a political pariah. If so cast upon insufficient proofs or from
partisan considerations, the office of President of the United States
would be degraded--cease to be a coordinate branch of the Government,
and ever after subordinated to the legislative will. It would have
practically revolutionized our splendid political fabric into a partisan
Congressional autocracy. Apolitical tragedy was imminent.

On the other hand, that vote properly given for acquittal, would at once
free the Presidential office from imputed dishonor and strengthen our
triple organization and distribution of powers and responsibilities.
It would preserve the even tenor and courses of administration, and
effectively impress upon the world a conviction of the strength
and grandeur of Republican institutions in the hands of a free and
enlightened people.

The occasion was sublimely and intensely dramatic. The President of the
United States was on trial. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court was
presiding over the deliberations of the Senate sitting for the trial
of the great cause. The board of management conducting the prosecution
brought by the House of Representatives was a body of able and
illustrious politicians and statesmen. The President's counsel,
comprising jurists among the most eminent of the country, had summed
up for the defense and were awaiting final judgment. The Senate,
transformed for the occasion into an extraordinary judicial tribunal,
the highest known to our laws, the Senators at once judges and jurors
with power to enforce testimony and sworn to hear all the facts bearing
upon the case, was about to pronounce that judgment.

The organization of the court had been severely Democratic. There were
none of the usual accompaniments of royalty or exclusivism considered
essential under aristocratic forms to impress the people with the
dignity and gravity of a great occasion. None of these were necessary,
for every spectator was an intensely interested witness to the
proceeding, who must bear each for himself, the public consequences of
the verdict, whatever they might be, equally with every member of the
court.

The venerable Chief Justice, who had so ably and impartially presided
through the many tedious weeks of the trial now about to close, was in
his place and called the Senate to order.

The impressive dignity of the occasion was such that there was
little need of the admonition of the Chief Justice to abstention from
conversation on the part of the audience during the proceeding. No one
there present, whether friend or opponent of the President, could have
failed to be impressed with the tremendous consequences of the possible
result of the prosecution about to be reached. The balances were
apparently at a poise. It was plain that a single vote would be
sufficient to turn the scales either way--to evict the President from
his great office to go the balance of his life's journey with the brand
of infamy upon his brow, or be relieved at once from the obloquy the
inquisitors had sought to put upon him--and more than all else, to keep
the honorable roll of American Presidents unsmirched before the world,
despite the action of the House.

The first vote was on the Eleventh and last Article of the Impeachment.
Senators voted in alphabetical order, and each arose and stood at
his desk as his name was called by the Chief Clerk. To each the Chief
Justice propounded the solemn interrogatory--"Mr. Senator--, how say
you--is the respondent, Andrew Johnson, President of the United States,
guilty or not guilty of a high misdemeanor as charged in this Article?"

Mr. Fessenden, of Maine, was the first of Republican Senators to vote
"Not Guilty." He had long been a safe and trusted leader in the Senate,
and had the unquestioning confidence of his partisan colleagues,
while his long experience in public life, and his great ability as a
legislator, and more especially his exalted personal character, had won
for him the admiration of all his associates regardless of political
affiliations. Being the first of the dissenting Republicans to vote, the
influence of his action was feared by the impeachers, and most strenuous
efforts had been made to induce him to retract the position he had taken
to vote against conviction. But being moved on this occasion, as he
had always been on others, to act upon his own judgment and conviction,
though foreseeing that this vote would probably end a long career
of conspicuous public usefulness, there was no sign of hesitancy or
weakness as he pronounced his verdict.

Mr. Fowler, of Tennessee, was the next Republican to vote "Not Guilty."
He had entered the Senate but two years before, and was therefore one
of the youngest Senators, with the promise of a life of political
usefulness before him. Though from the same State as the President, they
were at political variance, and there was but little in common between
them in other respects. A radical partisan in all measures where radical
action seemed to be called for, he was for the time being sitting in
a judicial capacity and under an oath to do justice to the accused
according to the law and the evidence. As in his judgment the evidence
did not sustain the charge against the President such was his verdict.

Mr. Grimes, of Iowa, was the third anti-impeaching Republican to vote.
He had for many years been a conspicuous and deservedly influential
member of the Senate. For some days prior to the taking of the vote he
had been stricken with what afterwards proved a fatal illness. The
scene presented as he rose to his feet supported on the arms of his
colleagues, was grandly heroic, and one never before witnessed in a
legislative chamber. Though realizing the danger he thus incurred, and
conscious of the political doom that would follow his vote, and having
little sympathy with the policies pursued by the President, he had
permitted himself to be borne to the Senate chamber that he might
contribute to save his country from what he deemed the stain of a
partisan and unsustained impeachment of its Chief Magistrate. Men often
perform, in the excitement and glamour of battle, great deeds of valor
and self sacrifice that live after them and link their names with the
honorable history of great events, but to deliberately face at once
inevitable political as well as physical death in the council hall, and
in the absence of charging squadrons; and shot and shell, and of the
glamor of military heroism, is to illustrate the grandest phase of human
courage and devotion to convictions. That was the part performed by
Mr. Grimes on that occasion. His vote of "Not Guilty" was the last, the
bravest, the grandest, and the most patriotic public act of his life.

Mr. Henderson of Missouri, was the fourth Republican Senator to vote
against the impeachment. A gentleman of rare industry and ability, and
a careful, conscientious legislator, he had been identified with
the legislation of the time and had reached a position of deserved
prominence and influence. But he was learned in the law, and regardful
of his position as a just and discriminating judge. Though then a young
man with a brilliant future before him, he had sworn to do justice to
Andrew Johnson "according to the Constitution and law," and his verdict
of "Not Guilty" was given with the same deliberate emphasis that
characterized all his utterances on the floor of the Senate.

Mr. Ross, of Kansas, was the fifth Republican Senator to vote "Not
Guilty." Representing an intensely Radical constituency--entering the
Senate but a few months after the close of a three years enlistment
in the Union Army and not unnaturally imbued with the extreme
partisan views and prejudices against Mr. Johnson then prevailing--his
predilections were sharply against the President, and his vote was
counted upon accordingly. But he had sworn to judge the defendant not by
his political or personal prejudices, but by the facts elicited in the
investigation. In his judgment those facts did not sustain the charge.

Mr. Trumbull, of Illinois, was the sixth Republican Senator to vote
against the Impeachment. He had been many years in the Senate. In all
ways a safe legislator and counsellor, he had attained a position
of conspicuous usefulness. But he did not belong to the legislative
autocracy which then assumed to rule the two Houses of Congress. To him
the Impeachment was a question of proof of charges brought, and not of
party politics or policies. He was one of the great lawyers of the body,
and believed that law was the essence of justice and not an engine of
wrong, or an instrumentality for the satisfaction of partisan
vengeance. He had no especial friendship for Mr. Johnson, but to him
the differences between the President and Congress did not comprise an
impeachable offense. A profound lawyer and clear headed politician and
statesman, his known opposition naturally tended to strengthen his
colleagues in that behalf.

Mr. Van Winkle, of West Virginia, was the seventh and last Republican
Senator to vote against the Impeachment. Methodical and deliberate, he
was not hasty in reaching the conclusion he did, but after giving the
subject and the testimony most careful and thorough investigation, he
was forced to the conclusion that the accusation brought by the House
of Representatives had not been sustained, and had the courage of an
American Senator to vote according to his conclusions.

The responses were as follows:

Guilty--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Cole, Chandler, Conkling, Conness,
Corbett, Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard,
Howe, Morgan, Morton, Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Nye,
Patterson of New Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart,
Sumner, Tipton, Thayer, Wade, Williams, Wilson, Willey, Yates.

Not Guilty--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fessenden,
Fowler, Grimes, Henderson, Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Norton,
Patterson of Tennessee, Ross, Saulsbury, Trumbull, Van Winkle, Vickers.

Not Guilty--19. Guilty--35--one vote less than a Constitutional
majority.



CHAPTER XI. --  THE IMPEACHERS IN A MAZE. A RECESS ORDERED.

THE FINAL VOTE TAKEN.

The defeat of the Eleventh Article was the second official set-back to
the Impeachment movement--the first being the practical abandonment of
the First Article by the change in the order of voting.

The vote had been taken on what its friends seemed to consider its
strongest proposition; the Eleventh Article having been so framed as to
group the substance, practically, of all the pending ten Articles. The
impeachers had staked their cause upon that Article, and lost. They
seemed not to have contemplated the possibility of its defeat.
So confident were they of its success, in which event it would be
immaterial what became of the other Articles, that they apparently had
agreed upon no order of procedure after that should have been defeated.
They were in the condition of a flock of game into which the sportsman
had fired a shot and broken its ranks. They were dazed, and for a moment
seemed not to know what next to do, or which way to turn. They did not
dare now go back to the fated First Article, according to the program
agreed upon, as Mr. Sherman and Mr. Howe had demonstrated its weakness,
and they were fearful of going to the Second or Third, as in the then
temper of the anti-impeachers it was manifest there would be little hope
for either of them, and the other eight had been already beaten without
a vote, at the conference previously held, and by Republican commitals.

The Chief Justice ordered the reading of the First Article, according to
the order agreed upon, but before that could begin, apparently to gain
time for recovery, Mr. Williams moved that the Senate take a recess of
fifteen minutes, but the motion was not agreed to.

The Chief Justice again ordered the reading of the First Article, but
again, before the clerk could begin the reading, Mr. Williams intervened
to move an adjournment to Tuesday, the 26th day of the month.

After numerous conflicting motions relating to the date of the proposed
reassembling, and several roll calls thereon, the anti-impeachers
generally insisting on proceeding at once to vote on the other articles
of impeachment, the motion of Mr. Williams to adjourn to June 26th,
prevailed.

Of course the purpose, and the only purpose then apparent, of that
adjournment, was to gain time, apparently in the hope of more favorable
developments in the next ten days.

The supposably strongest count of the indictment having been beaten,
it was apparent that it would be folly to hazard a vote on any other
at that time. There was a possibility that changes might occur in the
personnel of the Senate in the interim. As but one article had been
put to vote, and as that was beaten by the lack of a single vote, there
seemed a further possibility that influences could be brought to bear,
through the industry of the House, as was very soon after developed, to
secure the support of an anti-impeaching Senator on at least one of the
articles of impeachment yet to be voted upon. A vacancy in the ranks of
the anti-impeaching Republicans to be filled by an impeaching appointee
might happen. Many contingencies were possible during the next ten days
for a reversal of the action of the Senate just had. At all events,
everything would be hazarded by permitting further immediate action,
while the situation could be rendered no worse by delay, and time and
other mollifying conditions and influences might bring changes more
promising of success.

The anti-impeachment Republicans had not long to wait for the
development of the purpose of the recess, at least so far its supporters
in the House were concerned. Immediately upon the adjournment of the
Senate, the House re-assembled, and the following proceeding was had:

Mr. Bingham: I have been directed by the Managers on the part of the
House of Representatives, in the matter of the Impeachment of
Andrew Johnson, to report the following preamble and resolutions for
consideration at this time:

Whereas, information has come to the Managers which seems to them to
furnish probable cause to believe that improper or corrupt means have
been used to influence the determination of the Senate upon the Articles
of Impeachment submitted to the Senate by the House of Representatives
against the President of the United States; therefore.

Be it Resolved, That for the further and more efficient prosecution
of the Impeachment of the President, the Managers be directed and
instructed to summon and examine witnesses under oath, to send for
persons and papers, and employ a stenographer, and appoint sub-committee
to take testimony; the expense thereof to be paid from the Contingent
Fund of the House.

This resolution was immediately and without debate adopted by a vote of
88 to 14. It would be stating it mildly to say that the House was in a
tumult. The Republican leaders were wild with rage. They had selected
for the first vote what they deemed the strongest point in their
indictment, and lost; and their vengeance now turned upon those
Republican Senators who had failed to support them. Hence the
adjournment of the Senate for ten days to afford them time to discipline
the recusants and force an additional vote for conviction on the next
ballot.

The conspicuous indelicacy of this move was two-fold: 1st, in that the
House proposed to investigate the action of a co-ordinate branch of
Congress: and 2nd, that the trial not being concluded, it had to a
pointed degree the appearance of an attempt to intimidate Senators
who had voted against conviction into changing their votes at the next
ballot in fear of an inquisition for alleged corruption. In that sense
it was an act of intimidation--a warning. It was an ill-disguised
threat and a most unseemly proceeding--yet there was not one among the
supporters of the Impeachment to condemn it, and few who failed openly
to justify it. Partisan rancor and personal and political hostility to
the President had reached a point that condoned this indelicacy of the
House towards the Senate, and justified the public assault upon the
dissenting Republican Senators, and the insult to the Senate itself.

The demand for adjournment and delay seemed to have been understood
by the impeaching majority of the Senate, and was of course promptly
granted and further voting postponed, and the Senate adjourned to May
26th.

The next ten day were days of unrest--of anxiety to all who were
involved or in any way interested in the impeachment proceeding.
While the result of the 16th gave hope and comfort to the opponents of
impeachment, it caused little or no perceptible discouragement to its
more radical friends. They were more active and persistent than ever.
The footsteps of the anti-impeaching Republicans were dogged from the
day's beginning to its end and far into the night, with entreaties,
considerations and threats, in the hope of securing a reversal of the
result of the 16th. The partisan press of the States represented by
the anti-impeaching Republicans came daily filled with vigorous
animadversions upon their action, and not a few threats of violence upon
their return to their constituents. But it was in vain.

The Senate reassembled on the 26th of May to complete the vote on the
articles of impeachment. After the usual preliminary proceedings, Mr.
Williams moved to begin the voting on the Second Article, which was had
with the same result as on the 11th--and then the Third, and still
with the same result. It then became manifest that it was useless to go
farther, as all the balance had been rendered certain of defeat, and by
still more decisive votes--a considerable number of those so far voting
for impeachment having committed themselves in the previous conference
against all the balance. So, to save themselves from being forced to
vote against impeachment on any of the articles, there was a unanimous
vote of the impeachers to abandon the case and adjourn--and with it went
glimmering the visions of office, and spoils, and the riotous assaults
on the public treasury that had for months been organizing for the
day when Mr. Johnson should be put out and Mr. Wade put in, with the
political board clear for a NEW DEAL.

An analysis of the Eleventh, Article shows that it comprised four
distinct counts, or accusations.

First--That Mr. Johnson had said that the Thirty-Ninth Congress was
not a Congress of the United States, but a Congress of only part of
the States, and therefore had no power to propose amendments the
Constitution.

The latter clause of this accusation was the only portion of the first
count that received any consideration during the trial, and the only
testimony brought in its support was the Parsons-Johnson telegraphic
correspondence set out in Interrogatory No. 5.

In that dispatch, referring to then pending Constitutional amendment
(the 14th) Mr. Johnson referred to Congress as "a set of individuals."
Mr. Manager Boutwell declared this expression to be "the gist of the
offense of this particular telegraphic dispatch."

Counsel for defense objected to this testimony, but it was received by a
vote of yeas twenty-seven, nays seventeen.

As the Fourteenth Amendment was not declared adopted or a part of
the Constitution for more than a year after the transmission of that
dispatch, and as the Constitution of the United States prohibits
any abridgment of the freedom of speech, and as this remark was
unaccompanied by any act in violation of law, it is difficult to see
how it could be construed into an impeachable offense. Moreover, saying
nothing of the good taste or propriety of that dispatch, Mr. Johnson was
opposed to the proposed amendment, and had the same right to oppose it,
or to characterize it or the members of Congress favoring it, as had any
private citizen, or as had the members of Congress to characterize his
action in the premises, without being called to account therefor.

The second count of that article was:

Violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act of March 2nd, 1867, in seeking to
prevent the resumption by Mr. Stanton of the office of Secretary of War.

This clause had been very effectually disposed of by Messrs. Sherman
and Howe several days before the vote was taken on the Eleventh Article,
when they pointed out the fact that the language cage of the first
section of the Tenure-of-Office Act clearly excepted, and was intended
by the Senate, to except Mr. Stanton and all other persons then in Mr.
Johnson's Cabinet who had been originally appointed by Mr. Lincoln
and were still holding over under Mr. Johnson without having been
recommissioned by him; and that Mr. Johnson had therefore the legal
right and power to remove them at his pleasure.

And so convincing had been the argument of those gentlemen at that time,
that there was unanimous consent on the pro-impeachment side of the
Senate, on two different occasions, to set aside the First Article, of
which the alleged unlawful attempt to remove Mr. Stanton was practically
the principal accusation. Not illogically, that unanimous consent to
abandon the First article by thus setting it aside, and afterwards
refusing to put it to a vote, may be said to have been equivalent to a
vote of its insufficiency.

It is pertinent to suggest here that the President believed the
Tenure-of-Office Act to be unconstitutional, as it was clearly an
attempted abridgment of his power over his Cabinet which had never
before been questioned by Congress. The only method left him for the
determination of that question was in the course he took, except by an
agreed case, but it is manifest from the record that no such agreement
could be had, as an effort thereto was made in the Thomas case in the
District Court, but failed, the prosecution withdrawing the case at the
point where that purpose of the President became manifest.

The third count was:

Attempting to prevent the execution of the Army appropriation Act of
March 2nd, 1867.

The means specified in this alleged attempt was the appointment of Mr.
Edward Cooper to be Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, with power to
draw warrants on the Treasury without the consent of the Secretary--the
purpose being to show that, with General Thomas acting as Secretary
of War, and Mr. Cooper as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury to honor
General Thomas' drafts, and thus, in control of expenditures for the
support of the Army, a conspiracy was sought to be proven whereby the
President intended and expected to defeat the Reconstruction Acts of
Congress by preventing the use of the Army for its enforcement.

Mr. Johnson, of the Court, asked this question:

The Managers are requested to say whether they propose to show whether
Mr. Cooper was appointed by the President in November, 1867, as a means
to obtain unlawful possession of the public money, other than by the
fact of the appointment itself?

Mr. Manager Butler answered:

We certainly do.

Mr. Butler read the law on this subject, passed March 2nd, 1867, as
follows:

That the Secretary of the Treasury shall have power, by appointment
under his hand and official seal, to delegate to one of the Assistant
Secretaries of the Treasury authority to sign in his stead all warrants
for the payment of money into the public Treasury and all warrants for
the disbursments from the public Treasury of money certified by the
accounting officers of the Treasury to be due upon accounts duly audited
and settle by them; and such warrants signed shall be in all cases of
the same validity as if they had been signed by the Secretary of the
Treasury himself.

Mr. William E. Chandler, who had been Assistant Secretary of the
Treasury, was on the witness stand, called by the prosecution. Mr.
Butler asked whether it was the practice of the Assistant Secretary to
act as Secretary in case of removal of the Secretary.

Answer: I am not certain that it is, without his appointment as Acting
Secretary by the President.

Mr. Fessenden, of the Court, propounded this interrogatory?

1st--Has it been the practice, since the passage of the law, for an
Assistant Secretary to sign warrants unless especially appointed and
authorized by the Secretary of the Treasury?

2nd--Has any Assistant Secretary been authorized to sign any warrants
except such as are specified in the Act?

The witness answered as to the first:

It has not been the practice for any Assistant Secretary since the
passage of the Act to sign warrants except upon an appointment by the
Secretary for that purpose in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Immediately upon the passage of the Act, the Secretary authorized one of
his Assistant Secretaries to sign warrants of the character described
in the Act, and they have been customarily signed by that Assistant
Secretary in all cases since that time.

As to the second question the answer was:

No Assistant Secretary has been authorized to sign warrants except such
as are specified in this Act, unless when acting as Secretary.

That disposed of the third count in the Eleventh Article, and the
testimony was rejected by a vote of yeas 22, nays 27.

These answers to tire interrogatories seemed to prove the reverse of
what the Prosecution had expected. The accusation of the Third count was
not sustained.

As to the Fourth count of the Eleventh Article, that Mr. Johnson sought
to prevent the execution of the "Act to provide for the more efficient
government of the rebel States," passed March 2nd, 1867, by the removal
of Mr. Stanton from the War Office, the proceedings of the trial
disclose no testimony of a sufficiently direct character for
specification, except, possibly, a number of speeches delivered at
different points by Mr. Johnson, which are set out in the Tenth Article
of the Impeachment. As that Article was by unanimous consent abandoned
and never put to vote, all its allegations logically fell as unproven.

There was, therefore, no force and little coherency in the Eleventh
Article. It fell of its own weight. Every one of its several averments
had been disproven, or at least not proven. It was to a good degree
a summing up--an aggregation, of the entire bill of indictment on the
several distinct forms of offenses charged--a crystallization of the
whole.

The entire impeachment scheme was in reality beaten by the vote on that
Article, and the adjournment of ten days then taken could have been only
in the hope on the part of the majority that ultimate success on some
one of the remaining Articles could be made possible, in some way,
legitimate or otherwise, in part by the importunate throng of visitors
to the Capitol who were vociferously and vindictively urging Mr.
Johnson's removal largely for reasons personal to themselves--but
more especially through the efforts of the House of Representatives to
discipline one or more of the anti-impeaching Republicans of the Senate.

The allegation of the Second Article, put to vote on the 26th, and
beaten by the same vote as was the Eleventh, was a corollary of the
First-violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in the appointment of
General Thomas as Secretary of War ad interim, WITHOUT THE ADVICE AND
CONSENT OF THE SENATE. This was the first declaration ever made in the
Senate that an ad interim or merely temporary appointment to fill a
vacancy, required confirmation by that body. The power to make such
an appointment is so clearly possessed by the President without
consultation of the Senate-had been so uniformly exercised by every
preceding President without question, that argument on that point would
be superfluous.

In reality the essence of the Second Article, as of the First, was the
removal of Mr. Stanton. If the President could remove him without the
consent of the Senate, which was clearly established in the debate in
the conference by Messrs. Sherman and Howe, the way was clear for the
appointment of an act interim Secretary, to the end that the office be
filled until such time as the President would be prepared to refill the
place with a Secretary on consultation with the Senate. That was the
very thing he attempted to do on the 22nd of February, the day after Mr.
Stanton's removal, when he sent to the Senate the nomination of Thomas
Ewing, Senior, to be Secretary of War, for the action of that body.

The Third Article was so closely analagous to the Second, that an
analysis of it would be in the nature of repetition. If there were any
distinctions between them, they were so finely drawn that they amounted
simply to a distinction without a difference--a characteristic, indeed,
of a large part of the eleven Articles of Impeachment--a characteristic
so conspicuous that it was not deemed worth while by the majority to go
further in their submission to the Court.

These three Articles--the Second, Third and Eleventh--being the only
Articles of the entire list of eleven put to a vote, and having been
taken up and passed upon out of their numerical but in the order of
their supposed availability--must therefore be regarded as confessedly
the strongest and most likely of the entire list to command the support
of the Senate. They were selected and set out for the test. That
selection was equivalent to saying, "we put the Impeachment cause to
test on these three Articles. If they fail, we have nothing more to
offer."

They were put to test and failed. They failed because of their innate
weakness. Failed because they proved nothing. Failed because not a
single allegation of the entire indictment was or could be proven
or tortured into all impeachable offense. Not a remark made by the
President or an act performed in all the long and bitter controversy
that had subsisted between himself and Congress could be brought nearer
to the impeachment mark, in fact, few if any of them so near, as had
been the every day rule in the House of Representatives during the
previous two years in their treatment of the President. Yet nobody
thought of impeaching members of the House for their every day personal
vituperations against him.

Bill after bill had been offered in Congress, and law after law enacted,
with apparently the sole purpose of hampering the Constitutional
authority apparently functions of the President--even the assumption
of Executive powers and judicial functions by Congress--the not remote
purpose of which seemed to be his entrapment into some measure of
resistance upon which could be based an indictment. The House seemed to
be literally "lying in wait" for him, with traps set on every side for
his ensnarement.

At last, after two years of this sort of scheming and impatient and
anxious waiting, the opportunity seemed to have offered in the alleged
violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act. The fosterers of the impeachment
crusade, weary with their long vigil and growing desperate with every
additional day's delay, clutched at the new turn of affairs like a
drowning man at a floating straw, and with the avidity of a starved
gudgeon at a painted fly.

It was not strange that this sort of diplomacy, developed and exposed as
it was in the Senate, in spite of the unfair and partisan maneuvering of
the prosecution to prevent it, should have reacted, and contributed to
turn against the impeachment movement gentlemen who entered upon the
investigation under oath to give Mr. Johnson a fair, non-partisan trial.
The only surprise was that, after the exposure of the malignant partisan
spirit that sat in judgment upon Mr. Johnson, and the utter and absolute
failure to prove any violation of law on his part, but on the contrary,
a determination to preserve from infringement the functions of his
office and prevent a revolution from fundamental political forms by the
absorption of the Executive authority by the legislative branch of
the government--that even a majority, and more especially, that nearly
two-thirds of the Senate, could have been found at the close in support
of the Impeachment.

This record will serve to explain the omission to vote on the First
Article--Messrs. Sherman and Howe being precluded from supporting it in
consequence of the position taken by them in the controversy between the
two Houses of Congress over the first section of the Tenure-of-Office
Bill while that bill was pending, and to avoid defeat on the first vote
taken, which was inevitable on that Article--and also to explain, so
far as any explanation is possible, the zig-zag method of conducting the
ballot--skipping all the first ten Articles and going down to the bottom
of the list for the first vote, with the promise of then going back to
the first Article and continuing to the end, but instead, skipping that
for the second time, and starting in again on the Second and then the
Third.

Of course, the natural effect of this battle-dore and shuttle-cock
method of treating so grave a matter as an impeachment of the President
of the United States, added to the effect of the manifest unfairness of
the majority in their treatment of testimony offered in the President's
defense--was to disgust some who doubtless entered upon the trial
honestly inclined to vote for Andrew Johnson's impeachment, but
wanted it done fairly and openly, without any suppression of pertinent
testimony or juggling for a verdict--and amusing to others, who viewed
it as proof of weakness in the indictment, and of misgiving as to the
result on the part of its supporters.

To still others it was more than that. It was not only an indication of
weakness, but of a determination to take every possible advantage, fair
and unfair, to save votes for conviction. The impeachers not unnaturally
feared the effect of the defeat of the First Article by the nay votes
of Messrs. Sherman and Howe, and probably other Republicans, which was
certain to follow the submission of that Article to a vote. Its only
allegation was the unlawful removal of Mr. Stanton from the office of
Secretary of War in violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act. That alleged
offense was repeated in varied but more or less specific forms, in every
succeeding Article of the Impeachment except the Tenth, and constituted
the sum and substance--the gravamen--of the entire indictment. It was
the basis upon which the impeachment super-structure had been erected.
Without that Article there was not only no foundation, but no coherence
in the recital of Mr. Johnson's alleged offenses, and when that fell
by its abandonment, the entire impeachment scheme fell with it--as, if
there were nothing in the First Article on which to hang an impeachment,
there could be nothing in those that followed and were but an
amplification--a mere exploitation--of the First.

In substantiation of this view of the First Article, the declaration of
Mr. Boutwell to that effect is here inserted. Mr. Boutwell was chairman
of the committee of the House appointed to prepare the Articles of
Impeachment upon which Mr. Johnson was tried. On his report of these
Articles to the House he said, after speaking particularly of the Tenth
Article:

The other Articles are based upon facts which are of public knowledge,
growing out of the attempt of the President to remove Secretary Stanton
from the office of Secretary for the Department of War.

That is, that the basis of the entire accusation was the alleged
violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in the removal of Mr. Stanton, as
recited in the First Article.

So, after taking the vote on the Second and Third Articles and their
defeat by the same vote as that on the Eleventh, it became manifest
that further effort to the impeachment of the president on any of the
remaining eight Articles would be useless, and Mr. Williams moved that
the Senate, sitting as a Court of Impeachment, adjourn sine die, which
motion was carried by the following vote:

Yeas--Anthony, Cameron, Cattell, Chandler, Cole, Conkling Corbett,
Cragin, Drake, Edmunds, Ferry, Frelinghuysen, Harlan, Howard, Morgan,
Morrill of Maine, Morrill of Vermont, Morton, Nye, Patterson of New
Hampshire, Pomeroy, Ramsay, Sherman, Sprague, Stewart, Sumner, Thayer,
Tipton, Van Winkle, Wade. Willey, Williams, Wilson, Yates--34.

Nays--Bayard, Buckalew, Davis, Dixon, Doolittle, Fowler, Henderson,
Hendricks, Johnson, McCreery, Norton, Patterson of Tennessee, Ross,
Saulsbury, Trumbull, Vickers--16.

Every Senator present who had voted for conviction voted to abandon the
prosecution and end the trial, and every Senator present who had voted
against conviction, voted to continue and go through the indictment.

Of course, it was useless to go farther with any hope of success, as,
it will be seen by this record, all the remaining Articles were dead,
beaten in caucus before the voting commenced, and by the professed
friends and leaders of the movement.

Possibly it was the anticipation of this effect of the abandonment of
the First Article, that was the "sickness" to which Mr. Edmunds, at the
outset of the voting, ten days before, ascribed the peculiar order of
taking the vote.

It is not intended to aver that there was any privity or concert in this
particular manipulation--yet it is suggestive. The Impeachment had
been dragging since the 22nd of February, to May 26th--more than three
months,--and had been everywhere the engrossing topic of the time. It
was becoming tiresome-not only to the Senate, but to the general public.

Notwithstanding the City of Washington was still filled with people
who had been waiting weary weeks and months for the deposition of
Mr. Johnson and the accession of Mr. Wade to the Presidency, for the
fulfillment of pledges of appointment based thereon, and who were still
importunate for impeachment, the business element of the country at
large was tiring of it and its depressing effect upon the commercial
activities. Even Senators and Congressmen were being moved to a sense of
the obstructive and somewhat ridiculous phases the impeachment movement
was beginning to take on--and not a few of those who in its earlier
stages had honestly favored the movement, inside as well as outside the
membership of both Houses of Congress, had begun to realize the actual
nature and purposes, as also the shallowness of the impeachment movement
that from whatever motives it had originated, it had degenerated very
much into a game of personal ambition--of vindictiveness--and office
getting and spoils--and practically nothing higher.

While some of its supporters who had manifestly entered upon the trial
with a determination to convict, were still insistent for further
prosecution had there been a shadow of ultimate success, there were
others who had begun to realize, weeks before the end came, the
awkwardness of the predicament in which they had allowed themselves and
their party to be placed, and desired to abandon the enterprise.

The strain was becoming too great--there was certain to be a recoil
sooner or later. The foundations of the Impeachment were shown to be too
slender. There was a future ahead that must be faced, but Senators
must preserve their consistency. They could not go before their
pro-impeachment constituencies with a record indicating any degree of
weakening in the impeachment crusade. They had insisted for months that
Mr. Johnson must be removed, and it would be politically inexpedient to
retract.

But they wanted somebody to "help them let go."

So the plan of "desultory" procedure herein outlined seems to have
"happened"--whether by design or otherwise, is immaterial--and that plan
was made easy by the concerted abandonment of the head and front of
the indictment--the First Article--which was side-tracked and logically
carried with it all that followed, as would manifestly have been the
result if the voting had begun on that Article.

While, to degree, the turmoils and bitterness of that time have passed
out of public mind, there are still many living who retain a keen
remembrance of the struggle and the enmities it produced. There were
during the trial many thousands of men in the City of Washington
awaiting the Impeachment and removal of the President for the
fulfillment of pledges of official appointment based thereon, and their
numbers increased as the trial progressed.

These anticipated beneficiaries were naturally not idle in efforts to
the stimulation of zeal in the cause of Impeachment, and Senators
were importuned at all seasonable and unseasonable hours in behalf of
immediate and positive action. The lively anxiety, even anxious haste,
of these patriots for their earliest possible entry upon the service
of the Government, was emphasized on every corner and at every place of
gathering, day and night, and the lobbies of the Capitol were thronged
by them during the sessions of the Senate. No opportunity for a word
with a Senator in behalf of the immediate deposition of the President,
nor any appliance that seemed to promise a successful overture, was
overlooked or forgotten.

When these seemed to fail of the desired effect, more direct and, it was
hoped, more effective methods were resorted to. The beleaguered Senator
was reminded that the applicant represented the united sentiment of the
people of the State from which he held his Senatorial seat--that they
demanded Mr. Johnson's conviction and removal--that that demand could
not be safely denied, trifled with, or delayed; and that if money was
wanted, to use the language of a notorious inquisitor of the House, Mr.
Butler, speaking of the possibility of securing a designated vote for
Impeachment "tell the d----d scoundrel that if he wants money, there is
a bushel of it here to be had!" Mr. Butler's message was delivered.

So desperate were the inquisitors, and so close the certainty of the
vote, that even a project of kidnapping a Senator under the pretense of
taking a trip to Baltimore for much needed rest, where, if the terms
to be there proffered were refused, a vacancy was to be created--by
assassination, if necessary--then a recess of the Senate to afford
time for the appointment by the Governor of that Senator's State of
a successor who would vote for the Impeachment, of the President--was
entered upon and its execution attempted. But the trip to Baltimore for
"rest" was not taken.

These are not pleasant facts to contemplate, but they somewhat
conspicuously characterized the conditions of that time, and illustrate
the real nature of the impeachment scheme. They boded the control of the
Government by the worst element of American politics. It is unnecessary
to say here what that control would have involved. During all the
previous history of the Government--its wars and political turmoils--the
Democratic-Republican forms that characterize its administrations have
never faced so insidious or threatening a danger as during that hour.
It was a crucial test, and the result a magnificent vindication of
the wisdom and patriotism of the founders of our composite form of
Government. Its results have but strengthened those forms and broadened
the scope of the beneficent political institutions that have grown up
under and characterize its operation.

It was a test such as probably no other form of Government on earth
could have successfully passed, and it is to be hoped that its like may
never return.



CHAPTER XII. --  WAS IT A PARTISAN PROSECUTION?

The weakest point in the entire record of the Prosecution of President
Johnson, from the indictment by the House of Representatives to the
finish in the Senate, except the Bill of Impeachment itself, was the
refusal of the more than three-fourths Republican majority of the
Senate to permit the reception of testimony in his behalf. That majority
naturally gave them absolute control of the proceedings, and they should
have realized from the outset that they could not afford to give it the
least tinge of partisan bias.

It is therefore not material to discuss in detail the instances of the
two interrogatories put by counsel for the Prosecution and rejected,
Nos. 4 and 28, because it was shown that their answer would prove
nothing against the President, but rather to his vindication, and their
rejection could not have occurred but for the intervention of many more
nay Republican than Democratic votes--but will pass to the analyzation
of the votes on the twelve interrogatories propounded by counsel for
Defense and rejected, which rejections could not have occurred but by
the intervention of a large preponderance, in every instance, of
the Republican votes cast thereon, and many of them by a unanimous
Republican vote.

Without doubt, many of these votes on the admissibility of testimony
were governed by, the usual rules prevailing in the courts, but it was
deemed by others that every question not manifestly frivolous, or not
pertinent, should be permitted answer without objection, regardless of
such rules--that the Senate sitting for the trial of an Impeachment
of the President of the United States--the occasion a great State
Trial--should not be trammeled or belittled by the technicalities common
to ordinary court practice--that the Senate was composed supposedly of
gentlemen and lawyers of high standing in their profession and familiar
with public affairs and public law--that they were sitting in a
semi-judicial capacity--not merely as Senators or jurors, but, judges
also--judges of fact as well as of law--and constituted the highest
trial body known to our laws--a tribunal from which there was no
appeal--that each of its members had taken a solemn oath to "do
impartial justice" in this cause, absolutely unswerved by partisan or
personal considerations, and that as such each member had not only
the right, but it was his duty under his oath, as well, to hermit no
obstacle or condition to unnecessarily keep from him a knowledge of all
available facts pertinent to the cause, no matter on which side they
might weigh--to help or to hurt. That the body, each member for himself,
was the proper party to determine the admissibility of testimony, as
Mr. Manager Boutwell had declared in his opening argument, "AFTER HE HAD
HEARD IT," and knew its trend an purport. Every member of that body had
the right to know all the witness knew about the case, and, moreover,
the witnesses were brought for the purpose, and for the sole purpose, of
telling what they knew.

The same assurance of absolute fairness as that of Mr. Boutwell, was
also given by Mr. Bingham, another of the Managers of the Prosecution on
the part of the House, in his opening plea before the Senate: "It is,"
said he, "certainly very competent for the Senate, as it is competent
for any court of justice in the trial of cases where questions of doubt
arise, to HEAR THE EVIDENCE, and, where they themselves are the judges
of both the law and the fact, to DISMISS SO MUCH OF IT AS THEY MAY FIND
INCOMPETENT, if any of it be incompetent. * * * Under the Plea of Not
Guilty, as provided in the rules, every conceivable defense that
the accused party could make to the Articles here preferred, can be
admitted."

Mr. Manager Butler also said, on the same occasion: "Upon this so great
trial, I pray let us not belittle ourselves with the analyses of
the common law courts, or the criminal courts, because nothing is so
dangerous to mislead us."

These and other like assurances were given of the widest reasonable
latitude in the reception of testimony in the trial then opening. There
was thus every reason to expect that Mr. Johnson would have a fair
trial. But no sooner had the Prosecution completed its examination of
witnesses, in which but seven interrogatories had been objected to of
the long list proffered by the Prosecution, than a different rule seemed
to have been established for the treatment of proffered testimony, and a
large mass of relevant and valuable testimony in behalf of the President
was ruled out on objection of the Prosecution, as inadmissible, and,
as a rule that, had very few exceptions, on partisan divisions of the
Senate.

Of course it will not be admitted, nor is it here charged, that these
refusals to hear testimony were because of any fear that the answers
would have any improper force or effect upon the Senate. Nor will it
signify to say that the President's attorneys could not have proved
what they offered to prove. They hail the right to an opportunity to
so prove, and the denial of that right and opportunity was not only
a denial of a manifest right of the attorneys, but especially in this
case, a more flagrant denial of the rights of the accused, and not
only that, but they amounted to an impugnment of the discretion of the
Senate.

It is conspicuous, too, that while the defense objected to but seven of
the interrogatories submitted by the Prosecution, and five of them were
permitted answer by the vote of the Senate; twenty-one of the proffers
of testimony by the defense were objected to by the prosecution and but
nine of them permitted answer: and that condition was aggravated by the
fact that the numerical strength of the majority party in the Senate was
sufficient to determine absolutely the disposition of every question,
and they could therefore afford to be strictly fair to the accused, and
by the further fact that the objections to testimony offered in behalf
of the defense were as three to one of the objections to testimony
offered in behalf of the prosecution.

These denials of testimony in behalf of the defense were unfortunate.
That practice lowered the dignity of the occasion and of the proceeding,
as they could but have given ground for criticism of partisan bias and a
vindictive judgment in case of successful impeachment. Most, if not
all these rejected interrogatories implied important information in
possession of the witnesses which the Senate had a right to, and which
the party offering had the right to have produced. Moreover, it was the
right and the duty of the Senate to know what the witness was presumed
to know, and then to judge, each Senator for himself, of the relevancy
of the testimony.

As stated, the principal averment against the President, was his alleged
violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in the removal of Mr. Stanton from
the office of Secretary of War, presented in various phases throughout
the Articles of Impeachment.

In illustration of the treatment of testimony offered in the President's
behalf by a majority of the Republican Senators, the record shows that
on the eighth disputed interrogatory, the second put by the defense,
General Sherman being on the witness stand:--Defense asked as to a
certain conversation relating to that removal, had between the General
and the President at an interview specified. The prosecution objected to
the question being answered, and a vote of the Senate was demanded. The
vote was--for receiving the testimony, 23; against receiving it, 28. Of
the latter number, twenty-seven, all Republicans, voted at the close
of the trial to convict the President of violating the Tenure-of-Office
Act, in the removal of Mr. Stanton, after refusing to hear testimony in
his behalf on that charge.

The next interrogatory, No. 9, was "when the President asked the witness
(Gen. Sherman,) to accept the War Office, was anything further said in
reference to it?" This was objected to by the prosecution, and the vote
thereon was 23 to 29. Twenty-eight of the twenty-nine gentlemen thus
refusing answer to this question, afterwards voting to convict the
President, after refusing to bear the testimony of a very important
witness in his behalf, which his counsel proposed to produce and tried
in vain to get before the Senate.

On the tenth interrogatory, by Defense, "whether the President had
stated to the witness, (General Sherman), his object in asking him to
accept the War Office," the vote was 7 to 44 against receiving it, and
thirty-one of the gentlemen voting not to hear this testimony, at the
close of the hearing voted to convict Mr. Johnson of a high misdemeanor
in office in the removal of Mr. Stanton, after refusing to hear his
defense.

The next, No. 11, was as to the President's attempt to get a case before
the Supreme Court for a judicial determination of Mr. Stanton's right to
retain the War Office against the President's wish. This testimony
was refused by a vote of 25 to 27--every nay vote being cast by a
Republican, every one of whom at the close of the trial, voting in
effect to convict Mr. Johnson of a high misdemeanor in office in seeking
resort to the courts to test the legality of an act of Congress passed
for the practically sole purpose of restricting an executive function
never before questioned.

The next interrogatory, No. 12, was whether the witness, (General
Sherman), had formed an opinion whether the good of the service required
a Secretary of War other than Mr. Stanton. It was well understood that
General Sherman believed that for the good of the service Mr. Stanton
ought to retire, and as the Chief Officer of the Army his opinion was
certainly entitled to weight, and the President had a right to the
benefit of his judgment. This interrogatory was objected to by the
Prosecution, and was rejected by a vote of 18 to 35--thirty-one of the
thirty-five being Republicans, who at the close of the trial voted to
convict Mr. Johnson of a high misdemeanor in the removal of Mr. Stanton,
after refusing him the benefit of the opinion of the Chief Officer of
the Army on a question affecting the military service, and to which he
was in all fairness clearly entitled.

No. 13, General Sherman was asked whether he had advised, the President
to appoint a successor to Mr. Stanton. (It was well understood that he
had.) Answer to this was refused, 18 to 32--thirty of the latter, all
Republicans, voting at the close of the trial to convict Mr. Johnson,
after refusing to hear this important testimony in his behalf. No.
16. The answer to the last interrogatory, ("if he did, state what his
purpose was,") was received by a majority of one, 26 to 25--every nay
vote being a Republican, and constituting a majority of the Republicans
of the Senate.

No. 21. Mr. O. E. Perrin on the stand, was asked as to the President's
statement that Mr. Stanton would relinquish the office at once to
General Thomas--"that it was only a temporary arrangement"--that he
would "send to the Senate at once the name of a good man," (which he
did). This testimony was rejected by a vote of 9 to 37--thirty of the
latter number being Republicans who at the close of the trial voted to
convict Mr. Johnson of a high misdemeanor in sending to the Senate the
name of Thomas Ewing, Senior, for appointment as Secretary of War, vice
Stanton removed in assumed violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act.

The next offer of testimony to be rejected was No. 23--Mr. Gideon
Welles, Secretary of the Navy, on the stand, to prove that the
Cabinet had advised the President to veto the Tenure-of-Office Bill as
unconstitutional. The Chief Justice ruled the testimony admissible for
the purpose of showing the intent with which the President had acted in
the transaction. Prosecution objected, and by a vote of 20 to 29,
the decision of the Chief Justice was overruled. No answer to this
interrogatory was permitted, every vote to refuse this testimony being
cast by a Republican, every one of whom, at the close of the trial,
voting to convict and remove Mr. Johnson for alleged violation of a law
which he believed to be unconstitutional--which he was advised by the
head of the Law Department of the Government was unconstitutional
and therefore not a law which he had sworn to execute, and the
constitutionality of which he had endeavored to get before the courts
for adjudication--those 29 Republicans so voting after having refused to
hear testimony in his defense on these identical points.

The next disputed interrogatory was No. 24--that Mr. Johnson's Cabinet
had advised him that the Secretaries who had been appointed by Mr.
Lincoln and still holding, (Mr. Stanton, Mr. Seward, and Mr. Welles,)
were removable by the President, notwithstanding the assumed restriction
of the Tenure-of-Office Act. The Chief Justice ruled this testimony to
be admissible. Objection was made by the Prosecution, and a vote taken,
and the interrogatory was rejected--22 to 26--every nay vote being
a Republican, every one of whom at the close of the trial, voting to
convict and remove Mr. Johnson from office, after having refused to hear
this very important testimony in his behalf.

Defense next offered to prove (No. 25) that it was determined by the
President, with the concurrence of the Cabinet, that an agreed case for
the determination of the constitutionality of the Tenure-of-Office Act
should be made. This testimony was objected to, and a vote taken,
which was 19 to 30. Every one of the gentlemen voting to reject this
testimony, Mr. Johnson's right to which cannot with any possible showing
of fairness be successfully disputed, were Republicans, and after so
voting, at the close of the trial, declared by their several verdicts
that he had been fairly proven guilty of a high misdemeanor in
office, by violation of the Tenure-of-Office Act in seeking a judicial
determination of the validity of a disputed Act of Congress, and should
be expelled from office.

No. 26, was as to any suggestion by the President of the employment of
force for the vacation of any office, (relating of course, to the War
Office.) Mr. Johnson had been charged with seeking the removal of Mr.
Stanton by force, should he resist. Knowing perfectly that the answer
would be in the negative, the Senate refused to permit answer to this
interrogatory, by a vote of 18 to 26, every one of the twenty-six
gentlemen at the close of the trial in effect voting that the President
was guilty as charged, of seeking to remove Mr. Stanton by violence,
after refusing to hear either his denial or witnesses in his behalf on
that point.

No. 27. Defense proposed to prove that the Cabinet had advised the
President that the Tenure-of-Office Act did not prevent the removal of
those members who had been originally appointed by Mr. Lincoln.
This testimony, which, if permitted answer, would, in the minds of
unprejudiced people, have at once set aside the entire impeachment
scheme, was not permitted answer. The vote was 20 to 26--every one of
the twenty-six gentlemen who voted to reject that most important and
conclusive testimony in Mr. Johnson's behalf, at the close of the
examination voting to convict him of a high misdemeanor in office by
violating the Tenure-of-Office Act in removing Mr. Stanton from the
office of Secretary of War--after refusing this offer to prove by his
Cabinet advisers; the witness himself, (Mr. Welles, and his testimony,
if received, was to be followed by that of Mr. Seward and Mr. Stanton,
all of whom had been appointed by Mr. Lincoln and not re-appointed by
Mr. Johnson,) that that act did not apply to or protect them against
removal at the pleasure of the President. So that on eighteen of these
twenty-one disputed interrogatories put in behalf of the Defense, a
majority of the Republicans of the Senate refused in every instance
to hear testimony, after having sworn to give Mr. Johnson a fair and
impartial trial.

But the most flagrant case of unfairness to the defendant in this
examination of witnesses occurred in the treatment of interrogatory No.
3, put by the prosecution, in their introduction of a letter from the
President to General Grant, purporting to enclose letters from different
members of the Cabinet in substantiation of the position of the
President in the controversy then pending between Gen. Grant and
himself. These letters were enclosed with, and specifically referred to
and made a part of the President's communication, and were necessary to
a correct apprehension of the controversy, from the President's or any
other standpoint.

Being so enclosed and referred to in the letter transmitting and
enclosing them, they became quite as much a part of the President's
communication as his own letter which enclosed them. Counsel for Defense
objected to the introduction of the President's letter without the
enclosures, but the objection was not sustained and the letters were not
permitted to be introduced, but the letter enclosing and referring to
them was. The vote on the production of the enclosures was, yeas 20,
nays 29--twenty-eight of the thirty-eight Republicans present, voting
to exclude this essential testimony in the President's behalf, and
twenty-seven of the number afterwards voted to convict him of a high
misdemeanor in office in removing Mr. Stanton from the War Office, after
refusing him the benefit of the testimony of his Constitutional Cabinet
advisers in this important matter.

It is possible that under other conditions this proceeding might have
been legitimate and proper; but Mr. Johnson was on trial under grave
charges, before the highest, and supposably fairest tribunal on earth,
and had a right to the benefit of the testimony of his cabinet, in full,
and more especially when that testimony was presented in a distorted and
garbled shape by his accusers. Moreover, every member of the Court
had the right to know what was in those letters, if any part of the
correspondence was to be received. But whether or not Mr. Johnson had
the right to the testimony in his behalf which it was claimed these
enclosures contained, he certainly had the right to resist the
introduction of mutilated testimony against him. The purpose of the
trial was to ascertain the facts in the case--all the facts bearing on
either side. The Court was sitting and the witnesses were called for
that purpose, and no other.

This record shows, that in but three instances out of twenty-one, did
a majority of the Republicans of the Senate vote to receive testimony
offered in the President's behalf--that on one interrogatory there was
an equal division--that on seventeen of the twenty-one interrogatories
put by the Defense, a majority of the Republicans voted to exclude
testimony, in several cases by a two-thirds vote--and that but nine of
the twenty-one interrogatories put in behalf of the President were by
Republican votes permitted to be answered--also that, as a rule
which had very rare exceptions, such interrogatories in behalf of the
President as were permitted answer, were so permitted by very close
majorities.

It is undoubted that every Republican member of the Senate entered upon
that trial in the expectation that the allegations of the Prosecution
would be sustained, but it was also expected that a fair, free, full,
open investigation of all the charges preferred would be had, and that
all the information possible to be obtained bearing upon the case, pro
and con, would be admitted to testimony--but that expectation was not
realized.

To sum up this feature of the proceeding--the Republican majority of the
Senate placed themselves and their party in the attitude of prosecutors
in the case--instead of judges sworn to give the President an impartial
trial and judgment that their course had the appearance, at least, of
a conspiracy to evict the President for purely partisan purposes,
regardless of testimony or the facts of the case-that public animosity
against Mr. Johnson had been manufactured throughout the North by wild
and vicious misrepresentations for partisan effect--that practically the
entire Republican Party machinery throughout the country was bent to
the work of prosecution. The party cry was "Crucify him!" "Convict him
anyway, and try him afterwards!" With rare exceptions, the Republican
Party of the country, press and people, were a unit in this insensate
cry.

They were ready to strike, but not to hear.

There can be but one conclusion from these premises, established by the
record of the trial--that the entire proceeding, from its inception
in the House of Representatives to its conclusion in the Senate, was
a thoroughly partisan prosecution on the part of the majority in both
Houses, and that the country was saved from the shameful spectacle, and
the dangerous consequences of such a proceeding, by the intervention and
self-sacrifice of a few gentlemen who proposed to respect the obligation
of their oath, and give Mr. Johnson, so far as in their power, a fair
trial and judgment--and not having had such a trial--to give him the
benefit of what he claimed he could prove in his own behalf and was not
permitted to--and a verdict of "Not Guilty," regardless of consequences
to themselves.

What every member of the Court had sworn to do was "impartial justice"
to Andrew Johnson, and nothing less. The Counsel on neither side had
taken that oath, but the Court had; and its performance of that oath
was impossible without possession of all the information relating to and
bearing upon the case that it was reasonably possible to obtain. That is
the essential ingredient and characteristic of a fair trial.

THAT ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT OF JUDICIAL FAIRNESS WAS NOT SHOWN TO MR.
JOHNSON IN THIS CASE BY THE REPUBLICAN MAJORITY OF THE SENATE, as
the official record of the trial clearly establishes. It was an
ill-disguised and malevolent partisan prosecution.



CHAPTER XIII. --  THE CONSTITUTIONAL POWER OF IMPEACHMENT.

The power conferred by the Constitution upon Congress to impeach and
remove the President for cause, is unquestionably a wise provision. The
natural tendency of the most patriotic of men, in the exercise of power
in great public emergencies, is to overstep the line of absolute
safety, in the conscientious conviction that a departure from strict
constitutional or legal limitations is demanded by the public welfare.

The danger in such departures, even upon apparent necessity, if condoned
or permitted by public judgment is in the establishment of precedents
whereby greater and more dangerous infractions of organic law may be
invited, tolerated, and justified, till government takes on a form of
absolutism in one form or another, fatal to free institutions, fatal to
a government of law, and fatal to popular liberty.

On the other hand, a too ready resort to the power of impeachment as
a remedial agent--the deposition of a public officer in the absence
of proof of the most positive and convincing character of the
impeachability of the offense alleged, naturally tends to the other
extreme, till public officers may become by common consent removable by
impeachment upon insufficient though popular charges--even upon partisan
differences and on sharply contested questions of public administration.

The power of impeachment and removal becomes, therefore, a two-edged
sword, which must be handled with consummate judgment and skill, and
resort thereto had only in the gravest emergencies and for causes so
clearly manifest as to preclude the possibility of partisan divisions or
partisan judgments thereon. Otherwise, too ready resort to impeachment
must inevitably establish and bring into common use a new and dangerous
remedy for the cure of assumed political ills which have their origin
only in partisan differences as to methods of administration. It
would become an engine of partisan intolerance for the punishment and
ostracism of political opponents, under the operation of which the great
office of Chief Magistrate must inevitably lose its dignity, and
decline from its Constitutional rank as a co-ordinate department of
the Government, and its occupant no longer the political head and Chief
Executive of the Nation, except in name.

It was in that sense, and to a pointed degree, that in the impeachment
and trial of Andrew Johnson the quality of coordination of the three
great Departments of Government--the Executive, Legislative, and
Judicial--was directly involved--the House of Representatives as
prosecutor--the President as defendant--the Senate sitting as the trial
court in which the Chief Justice represented the judicial department as
presiding officer.

The anomaly of the situation was increased and its gravity intensified,
by the fact that the President pro tempore of the Senate, who stood
first in the line of succession to the Presidency in case of conviction,
was permitted, in a measure, indeed, forced by his pro-impeachment
colleagues, on a partisan division of the Senate, to sit and vote
as such President pro tempore for the impeachment and removal of the
President whom he was to succeed.

These facts of condition attending and characterizing the trial of
President Johnson, pointedly accentuate the danger to our composite form
of government which the country then faced. That danger, as it had found
frequent illustration in the debates in the House of Representatives on
the several propositions for the President's impeachment preceding the
bringing of the indictment, lay in the claim of superiority of political
function for the Legislative branch over the Executive. The quality
of co-ordination of these departments was repeatedly and emphatically
denied by conspicuous and influential members of that body during the
initial proceedings of the impeachment movement, and even on the floor
of the Senate by the managers of the impeachment. To illustrate:

Mr. Bingham, in the House, Feb. 22nd, 1868, announced the extraordinary
doctrine that "there is no power to review the action of Congress."
Again, speaking of the action of the Senate on the 21st of February, on
the President's message announcing the removal of Mr. Stanton, he said:
"Neither the Supreme Court nor any other Court can question or review
this judgment of the Senate."

The declaration was made by Messrs. Stevens and Boutwell in the House,
that the Senate was its own judge of the validity of its own acts.

Mr. Butler, in his opening speech to the Senate, at the beginning of the
trial, used this language:

A Constitutional tribunal solely, you are bound by no law, either
Statute or Common, which may limit your constitutional prerogative. You
consult no precedents save those of the law and custom of parliamentary
bodies. You are a law unto yourselves, bound only by the natural
principles of equity and justice, and salus populi suprema est lex.

Feb. 24, 1868, Mr. Stevens said in the House:

Neither the Executive nor the Judiciary had any right to interfere with
it (Reconstruction) except so far as was necessary to control it by
military rule until the sovereign power of the Nation had provided for
its civil administration. NO POWER BUT CONGRESS HAD ANY RIGHT TO SAY
WHETHER EVER, OR WHEN, they (the rebel States), should be admitted to
the Union as States and entitled to the privileges of the Constitution
of the United States. * * * I trust that when we come to vote upon
this question we shall remember that although it is the duty of the
President to see that the laws be executed, THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF THE
NATION RESTS IN CONGRESS.

Mr. Butler, the leading spirit of the impeachment enterprise, went so
far as to make the revolutionary suggestion of the abrogation of
the Presidential office in the event of final failure to convict the
President--set out in the 8th Chapter.

Mr. Sumner insisted that in no judicial sense was the Senate a Court,
and therefore not bound by the rules of judicial procedure:

If the Senate is a Court bound to judicial forms on the expulsion of the
President, must it not be the same in the expulsion of a Senator? But
nobody attributes to it any such strictures in the latter case. * * In
the case of Blount, which is the first in our history, the expulsion was
on the report of a committee declaring him guilty of a high misdemeanor.
At least one Senator has been expelled on simple formal motion. Others
have been expelled without any formal allegations or formal proofs. * *
* The Constitution provides that "Each House shall determine its rules
of proceeding." The Senate on the expulsion of its own members has
already done this practically and set an example of simplicity. But it
has the same power over its rules of proceeding on the expulsion of the
President, and there can be no reason for simplicity in the one case
not equally applicable in the other. Technicality is as little consonant
with the one as with the other. Each has for its object the PUBLIC
SAFETY. For this a Senator is expelled; for this, also, the President is
expelled. Salus Populi Suprema Lex. The proceedings in each case must be
in subordination to this rule."

Thus, Mr. Sumner would have removed the President by an ordinary
concurrent resolution of Congress.

The purpose of all this was apparent--that the President was in effect,
to be tried and judged before a Court of Public Opinion, and not before
the Senate sitting as a High Court of Impeachment, but BY the Senate
sitting in its legislative capacity--to create the impression in the
minds of Senators that in this high judicial procedure they were still
acting as a legislative body--simply as Senators, and not in a judicial
capacity, as judges and jurors, and therefore not bound specifically by
their oaths as such, to convict only for crime denounced by the law, or
for manifest high political misdemeanors, but could take cognizance
of and convict on alleged partisan offenses and allegations based
on differences of opinion and partisan prejudices and partisan
predilections--that it was not essential that the judgment of Senators
should be confined to the specific allegations of the indictment, but
that the whole range of alleged political and partisan misdemeanors and
delinquencies could be taken into account in seeking a pretext for Mr.
Johnson's conviction.

The superiority of the Legislative branch was thus openly advocated
and insisted, and uncontroverted by any Republican supporting the
impeachment. Mr. Johnson, according to these oft repeated declarations,
was to be tried and convicted, not necessarily for any specific
violation of law, or of the Constitution, but by prevailing public
opinion--public clamor-in a word, on administrative differences
subsisting between the President and the leaders of the dominant
party in and out of Congress, and that public opinion, as concurrent
developments fully establish, was industriously manufactured throughout
the North, on the demand of leaders of the impeachment movement in the
House, through the instrumentality of a partisan press and partisan
public meetings, and in turn reflected back upon the Senate, in the
form of resolutions denunciatory of the President and demanding his
impeachment and removal.

That was in fact, and in a large sense, the incentive to the impeachment
movement, and it was--not confined to a faction, but characterized the
dominant portion of the political party then in the ascendancy in and
out of Congress.

In this state of facts lay largely the vice of the impeachment movement,
and it illustrated to a startling degree the danger in the departure
from established forms of judicial procedure in such cases.

It became apparent, long before the close, that it was but little if
anything more than a partisan prosecution--and that fact became more
generally and firmly fixed, from day to day, as the trial approached
conclusion.

In that state of facts, again, and in that sense, the impeachment of
the President, was an assault upon the principle of coordination that
underlies our political system and thus a menace to our established
political forms, as, if successful, it would, logically, have been
the practical destruction of the Executive Department--and, in view
of previous legislation out of which the impeachment movement had to
a degree arisen, and of declarations in the House and Senate quoted in
this connection, the final and logical result of conviction would have
been the absorption of the Executive functions of the Government by the
Legislative Department, and the consequent declension of that Department
to a mere bureau for the registration of the decrees of the Legislature.

Conscious of the natural tendency to infringement by a given Department
of the Government upon the functions of its coordinates, the framers of
the Constitution wisely defined the respective spheres of the several
departments, and those definitions constitute unmistakable admonition
to each as to trespass by either upon the political territory of its
coordinates.

As John C. Calhoun wrote, in the early days of the Republic:

"The Constitution has not only made a general delegation of the
legislative power to one branch of the Government, of the executive
to another, and of the judicial to the third, but it has specifically
defined the general powers and duties of each of those departments. This
is essential to peace and safety in any Government, and especially in
one clothed only with specific power for national purposes and erected
in the midst of numerous State Governments retaining exclusive control
of their local concerns.* * * Were there no power to interpret,
pronounce and execute the law, the Government would perish through its
own imbecility, as was the case with the Articles of Confederation; or
other powers must be assumed by the legislative body, to the destruction
of liberty." Again, as was eloquently and forcefully said by Daniel
Webster in the U. S. Senate in 1834:

"The first object of a free people is the preservation of their liberty,
and liberty is only to be preserved by maintaining constitutional
restraints and just division of political power. Nothing is more
deceptive or more dangerous than the pretense of a desire to simplify
government. The simplest governments are despotisms; the next simplest,
limited monarchies; but all republics, all governments of law, must
impose numerous limitations and qualifications of authority and give
many positive and many qualified rights. In other words, they must
be subject to rule and regulation. This is the very essence of free
political institutions. The spirit of liberty is, indeed, a bold
and fearless spirit; but it is also a sharp-sighted spirit: it is a
cautious, sagacious, discriminating, far-seeing intelligence; it is
jealous of encroachment, jealous of power, jealous of man. It demands
checks; it seeks for guards; it insists on securities; it entrenches
itself behind strong defenses, and fortifies itself with all possible
care against the assaults of ambition and passion. It does not trust the
amiable weaknesses of human nature, and, therefore, it will not permit
power to overstep its prescribed limits, though benevolence, good
intent, and patriotic purpose come along with it. Neither does
it satisfy itself with flashy and temporary resistance to illegal
authority. Far otherwise. It seeks for duration and permanence; it looks
before and after; and, building on the experience of ages which are
past, it labors diligently for the benefit of ages to come. This is the
nature of constitutional liberty; and this is our liberty, if we will
rightly understand and preserve it. Every free government is necessarily
complicated, because all such governments establish restraints, as well
on the power of government itself as on that of individuals. If we will
abolish the distinction of branches, and have but one branch; if we will
abolish jury trials, and leave all to the judge; if we will then ordain
that the legislator shall himself be that judge; and if we will
place the executive power in the same hands, we may readily simplify
government. We may easily bring it to the simplest of all possible
forms, a pure despotism. But a separation of departments, so far as
practicable, and the preservation of clear lines of division between
them, is the fundamental idea in the creation of all our constitutions;
and, doubtless, the continuance of regulated liberty depends on
maintaining these boundaries."

Each department is supreme within its own constitutionally prescribed
limits, and the Supreme Court is made the umpire for the definition of
the limits and the protection of the rights of all. Neither Congress,
nor the Executive, are authorized to determine the constitutionality
and therefore the validity of their acts, or the limits of their
jurisdiction under the Constitution, but the Supreme Court is so
authorized, and it is the umpire before which all differences in that
regard must be determined. It is the tribunal of last resort, save the
people themselves, before whom both Senate and House, and the Executive,
must bow, and its decision is final in the interpretation of the
Constitution.

A due regard, therefore, for the interpretation of law and the division
of powers thus established, constitutes the great safeguard upon which
the harmonious and successful operation of our political system depends.
On its religious observance rests, primarily, the preservation of our
free institutions and the perpetuation of our peculiar system of popular
government. That quality of co-ordination--of the equality of the
several Departments as adjusted by the Organic Act--constitutes the
balance wheel of our political system.

The logical effect of the doctrines promulgated by the House of
Representatives in that regard, and re-echoed on the floor of the
Senate, in the press and on the stump throughout the North, were
therefore not only revolutionary, but destructive. To have removed
the President upon accusations in reality based upon partisan and
personal--not amounting even to substantial political differences--would
have been the establishment of a precedent of the most dangerous
character.

In a large sense, the American system of politics and of government was
on trial, quite as much as was Andrew Johnson. The extreme element
of American politics was in absolute control in the House of
Representatives, and practically so, in the Senate. The impeachment and
removal of the President on unsubstantiated, or even remotely doubtful
charges, simply: because of a disagreement between himself and Congress
as to the method of treating a great public emergency, would have
introduced a new and destructive practice into our political system.

Logically, the introduction of such a practice on that occasion would
have been construed as a precedent for the treatment of future public
emergencies. Thus, it would have tended to disturb the now perfect
adjustment of the balance of powers between the co-ordinate branches.
That quality of absolute supremacy of the several departments in their
respective spheres, or functions, and of co-ordination or equality in
their relations to each other, established by the Constitution as a
guarantee of the perpetuity of our political system, would have been
endangered, and the result could not have been otherwise than disaster
in the future.

Logically, the Presidency would in time have been degraded to the
position of a mere department for the execution of the decrees of the
legislative branch. Not illogically, the Supreme Court would have been
the next object of attack, and the legislature have become, by this
unconstitutional absorption of the powers of Government, the sole,
controlling force--in short the Government.

That would, in time, by equally logical sequence, have been the natural,
inevitable result--and the end. The wreckage of the Great Republic
of the age would have been strown upon the sands of the political
seashore--relics of the disregard of the checks and balances established
by the wisdom of its framers, in the fundamental law--and all for
the satisfaction of personal ambitions and the hates of factional
animosities.

History affords too many illustrations of that tendency to decadence
and disruption from disregard of the proper and necessary checks
and balances in the distribution and equalization of the powers of
government, to permit us to doubt what the final end would have been had
the President been removed on the unsubstantiated accusation preferred
by the House of Representatives, Our peculiar system of political
government--a Democratic Republic--passed the danger point of its
history in that hour.

It was indeed a narrow escape. The history of civilization records
no precisely similar condition. The country then passed the most
threatening period of its history--but passed it safely. The result
was the highest possible testimonial to the strength and endurance of
properly adjusted Democratic institutions that history records.

It emphasized not only the capacity of the American people for
intelligent and orderly self-government, but also the strength and
endurance of our popular forms. It was a profound surprise to those
habituated to different political conditions. They had witnessed with
astonishment the quiet disbandment of millions of men but as yesterday
engaged in mortal strife--the vast armies as peacefully returning to
former vocations as though from a great parade--and now, from a state of
civil convulsion that in many another nation would have produced
armed collision and public disorder, they saw an entire people quietly
accepting the verdict of the highest authoritive body of the land,
and practically dismissing the subject from thought. It was a splendid
world-wide tribute to the strength and endurance of our system of
popular government.

Yet the conclusion must not be deduced that the power of impeachment is
not a wise provision of our Constitution, nor in any sense inconsistent
with our popular forms. Conditions may, and are not unlikely to arise,
some day, when the exercise of the power to impeach and remove the
President may be quite as essential to the preservation of our political
system as it threatened to become in this instance destructive of that
system. Should that day ever come, it is to be hoped that the remedy
of impeachment, as established by the Constitution, may be as
patriotically, as fearlessly, and as unselfishly applied as it was on
this occasion rejected.



SUPPLEMENT.

Copy of letter addressed to each of the members of the Cabinet present
at the conversation between the President and General Grant on the 14th
of January, 1868, and the answers thereto:

Executive Mansion, Washington, D. C., February 5, 1868.

Sir:--The Chronicle of this morning contains a correspondence between
the President and General Grant, reported from the War Department, in
answer to a resolution of the House of Representatives. I beg to call
your attention to that correspondence, and especially to that part of
it which refers to the conversation between the President and General
Grant, at the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, the 14th of January, and to
request you to state what was said in that conversation.

Very respectfully yours, Andrew Johnson.

Washington, D. C., February 5, 1868.

Sir:---Your note of this date was handed to me this evening. My
recollection of the conversation at the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, the
14th of January, corresponds with your statement of it in the letter
of the 31st ultimo, in the published correspondence. The three points
specified in that letter, giving your recollection of the conversation,
are correctly stated.

Very respectfully, Gideon Welles.

To the President.

Treasury Department, February 6, 1868.

Sir:--I have received your note of the 5th instant, calling my attention
to the correspondence between yourself and General Grant, as published in
the Chronicle of yesterday, especially to that part of it which relates
to what occurred at the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday the 14th ultimo, and
requesting me to state what was said in the conversation referred to.

I cannot undertake to state the precise language used, but I have no
hesitation in saying that your account of that conversation, as given in
your letter to General Grant under date of the 31st ultimo substantially
and in all important particulars accords with my recollection of it.

With great respect, your obedient servant. Hugh McCulloch. To the
President.

Post Office Department Washington, February 6, 1868.

Sir:--I am in receipt of your letter of the 5th of February, calling my
attention to the correspondence published in the Chronicle between the
President and General Grant, and especially to that part of it which
refers to the conversation between the President and General Grant at
the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, the 14th of January, with a request that
I state what was said in that conversation. In reply, I have the honor
to state that I have read carefully the correspondence in question, and
particularly the letter of the President to General Grant, dated January
31, 1868. The following extract from your letter of the 31st January to
General Grant is, according to my recollection, a correct statement of
the conversation that took place between the President and General Grant
at the Cabinet meeting on the 14th of January last. In the presence of
the Cabinet the President asked General Grant whether, "in conversation
which took place after his appointment as Secretary of War ad interim,
he did not agree either to remain at the head of the War Department and
abide any judicial proceedings that might follow the non-concurrence by
the Senate in Mr. Stanton's suspension, or, should he wish not to
become involved in such a controversy, to put the President in the same
position with respect to the office as he occupied previous to General
Grant's appointment by returning it to the President in time to
anticipate such action by the Senate." This General Grant admitted.

The President then asked General Grant if, at the conference on the
preceding Saturday, he had not, to avoid misunderstanding, requested
General Grant to state what he intended to do; and further, if in reply
to that inquiry he (General Grant) had not referred to their former
conversations, saying that from them the President understood his
position, and that his (General Grant's) action would be consistent with
the understanding which had been reached. To these questions General
Grant replied in the affirmative.

The President asked General Grant if, at the conclusion of their
interview on Saturday, it was not understood that they were to have
another conference on Monday, before final action by the Senate in the
case of Mr. Stanton.

General Grant replied that such was the understanding, but that he did
not suppose the Senate would act so soon; that on Monday he had been
engaged in a conference with General Sherman, and was occupied with
"many little matters," and asked if General Sherman had not called on
that day.

I take this mode of complying with the request contained in the
President's letter to me, because my attention had been called
to the subject before, when the conversation between the President and
General Grant was under consideration.

Very respectfully, your obedient servant, Alexander W. Randall,
Postmaster General. To the President.

Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C., February 6, 1868.

Sir:--I am in receipt of yours of yesterday, calling my attention to
a correspondence between yourself and General Grant, published in the
Chronicle newspaper, and especially to that part of said correspondence
"which refers to the conversation between the President and General
Grant at the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, the 14th of January," and
requesting me "to state what was said in that conversation."

In reply, I submit the following statement: At the Cabinet meeting on
Tuesday, the 14th of January, 1868, General Grant appeared and took his
accustomed seat at the board. When he had been reached in the order
of business the President asked him, as usual, if he had anything to
present?

In reply, the General, after referring to a note which he had that
morning addressed to the President, inclosing a copy of the resolution
of the Senate refusing to concur in the reasons for the suspension of
Mr. Stanton, proceeded to say that he regarded his duties as Secretary
of War ad interim terminated by that resolution, and that he could not
lawfully exercise such duties for a moment after the adoption of the
resolution by the Senate. That the resolution reached him last night,
and that this morning he had gone to the War Department, entered the
Secretary's room, bolted one door on the inside, locked the other on the
outside, delivered the key to the Adjutant General, and proceeded to the
headquarters of the Army, and addressed the note above mentioned to the
President, informing him that he (General Grant) was no longer Secretary
of War ad interim.

The President expressed great surprise at the course which General Grant
had thought proper to pursue, and, addressing himself to the General,
proceeded to say, in substance, that he had anticipated such action
on the part of the Senate, and being very desirous to have the
constitutionality of the Tenure-of-Office bill tested, and his right
to suspend or remove a member of the Cabinet decided by the judicial
tribunals of the country, he had some time ago, and shortly after
General Grant's appointment as Secretary of War ad interim, asked the
General what his action would be in the event that the Senate should
refuse to concur in the suspension of Mr. Stanton, and that the General
had agreed either to remain at the head of the War Department till a
decision could be obtained from the court or resign the office in the
hands of the President before the case was acted upon by the Senate, so
as to place the President in the same situation he occupied at the time
of his (Grant's) appointment.

The President further said that the conversation was renewed on the
preceding Sunday, at which time he asked the General what he intended to
do if the Senate should undertake to reinstate Mr. Stanton; in reply to
which the General referred to their former conversation upon the same
subject, and said. "You understand my position, and my conduct will be
conformable to that understanding:" that he (the General) then expressed
a repugnance to being made a party to a judicial proceeding, saying that
he would expose himself to fine and imprisonment by doing so, as his
continuing to discharge the duties of Secretary of War ad interim,
after the Senate should have refused to concur in the suspension of Mr.
Stanton would be a violation of the Tenure-of-Office bill. That in reply
to this he (the President) informed General Grant he had not suspended
Mr. Stanton under the Tenure-of-Office bill, but by virtue of the powers
conferred on him by the Constitution: and that, as to the fine and
imprisonment, he (the President) would pay whatever fine was imposed
and submit to whatever imprisonment might be adjudged against him (the
General.) That they continued the conversation for some time, discussing
the law at length, and that they finally separated without having
reached a definite conclusion, and with the understanding that the
General would see the President again on Monday.

In reply, General Grant admitted that the conversation had occurred, and
said that at the first conversation he had given it as his opinion to
the President that in the event of non-concurrence by the Senate in the
action of the President in respect to the Secretary of War the question
would have to be decided by the court; that Mr. Stanton would have to
appeal to the court to reinstate him in office; that he would remain in
till they could be displaced and the outs put in by legal proceeding;
and that he then thought so, and had agreed that if he should change his
mind he would notify the President in time to enable him to make another
appointment, but that at the time of the first conversation he had not
looked very closely into the law; that it had recently been discussed
by the newspapers, and that this had induced him to examine it more
carefully, and that he had come to the conclusion that if the Senate
should refuse to concur in the suspension Mr. Stanton would thereby be
reinstated, and that he (Grant) could not continue thereafter to act
as Secretary of War ad interim, without subjecting himself to fine and
imprisonment; and that he came over on Saturday to inform the President
of this change in his views, and did so inform him, that the President
replied that he had not suspended Mr Stanton under the Tenure-of-Office
bill, but under the Constitution, and appointed him (Grant) by virtue of
the authority derived from the Constitution, &c.; that they continued to
discuss the matter some time, and finally he left without any conclusion
having been reached, expecting to see the President again on Monday.
He then proceeded to explain why he had not called on the President on
Monday, saying that he had had a long interview with General Sherman;
that various little matters had occupied his time till it was late, and
that he did not think the Senate would act so soon, and asked, "did not
General Sherman call on you on Monday?"

I do not know what passed between the President and General Grant on
Saturday, except as I learned it from the conversation between them at
the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, and the foregoing is substantially
what then occurred. The precise words used on the occasion are not, of
course, given exactly in the order in which they were spoken, but
the ideas expressed and the facts stated are faithfully preserved
and presented. I have the honor to be, sir, with great respect, your
obedient servant.

O. H. Browning.

The President.


Department of State, Washington, February 6, 1868.

Sir: The meeting to which you refer in your letter was a regular Cabinet
meeting. While the members were assembling, and before the President
had entered the Council Chamber, General Grant, on coming in, said to
me that he was in attendance there, not as a member of the Cabinet, but
upon invitation, and I replied by the inquiry whether there was a change
in the War Department. After the President had taken his seat business
went on in the usual way of hearing matters submitted by the several
secretaries. When the time came for the Secretary of War General
Grant said that he was now there not as Secretary of War, but upon the
President's invitation, that he had retired from the War Department. A
Blight difference then appeared about the supposed invitation, General
Grant saying that the officer who had borne his letter to the President
that morning, announcing his retirement from the War Department, had
told him that the President desired to see him at the Cabinet, to which
the President answered, that when General Grant's communication was
delivered to him the President simply replied that he supposed General
Grant would be very soon at the Cabinet meeting. I regarded the
conversation thus begun as an incidental one. It went on quite
informally, and consisted of a statement, on your part, of your views in
regard to the understanding of the tenure upon which General Grant had
assented to hold the War Department ad interim, and of his replies by
way of answer and explanation. It was respectful and courteous on both
sides. Being in this conversational form, its details could only have
been preserved by verbatim report. So far as I know, no such report
was made at the time. I can give only the general effect of the
conversation.

Certainly you stated that although you had reported the reasons for Mr.
Stanton's suspension to the Senate, you nevertheless held that he would
not be entitled to resume the office of Secretary of War, even if the
Senate should disapprove of his suspension, and that you had proposed
to have the question tested by judicial process, to be applied to
the person who should be the incumbent of the Department, under your
designation of Secretary of War ad interim in the place of Mr. Stanton.
You contended that this was well understood between yourself and Gen.
Grant; that when he entered the War Department as Secretary ad interim
he expressed his concurrence in a belief that the question of Mr.
Stanton's restoration would be a question for the courts; that in a
subsequent conversation with General Grant you had adverted to the
understanding thus had, and that General Grant expressed his concurrence
in it: that at some conversation which had been previously held General
Grant said he still adhered to the same construction of the law, but
said if he should change his opinion he would give you seasonable notice
of it, so that you should in any case, be placed in the same position in
regard to the War Department that you were while General Grant held
it ad interim. I did not understand General Grant as denying, nor as
explicitly admitting, these statements in the form and full extent
to which you made them. The admission of them was rather indirect and
circumstantial, though I did not understand it to be an evasive one.
He said that, reasoning from what occurred in the case of the police in
Maryland, which he regarded as a parallel one, he was of opinion, and
so assured you, that it would be his right and duty, under your
instructions, to hold the War Office after the Senate should disapprove
of Mr. Stanton's suspension until the question should be decided upon
by the courts; that he remained until very recently of that opinion, and
that on the Saturday before the Cabinet meeting a conversation was held
between yourself and him in which the subject was generally discussed.

General Grant's statement was, that in that conversation he had stated
to you the legal difficulties which might arise, involving fine and
imprisonment under the civil tenure bill, and that he did not care to
subject himself to those penalties; that you replied to this remark,
that you regarded the civil tenure bill as unconstitutional, and did
not think its penalties were to be feared, or that you would voluntarily
assume them; and you insisted that General Grant should either retain
the office until relieved by yourself according to what you claimed was
the original understanding, between yourself and him, or, by seasonable
notice of change of purpose on his part, put you in the same situation
which you would be if he adhered. You claimed that General Grant finally
said in that Saturday's conversation that you understood his views, and
his proceedings thereafter would be consistent with what had been so
understood. General Grant did not controvert nor can I say that he
admitted this last statement. Certainly General Grant did not at
any time in the Cabinet meeting insist that he had in the Saturday's
conversation either distinctly or finally advised you of his
determination to retire from the charge of the War Department otherwise
than under your own subsequent direction. He acquiesced in your
statement that the Saturday's conversation ended with an expectation
that there would be a subsequent conference on the subject, which he, as
well as yourself, supposed could seasonably take place on Monday.

You then alluded to the fact that General Grant did not call upon you
on Monday, as you had expected from that conversation. General Grant
admitted that it was his expectation or purpose to call upon you on
Monday. General Grant assigned reasons for the omission. He said he was
in conference with General Sherman; that there were many little matters
to be attended to. He had conversed upon the matter of the incumbency
of the War Department with General Sherman, and he expected that General
Sherman would call upon you on Monday. My own mind suggested a
further explanation, but I do not remember whether it was mentioned or
not-namely, that it was not supposed by General Grant on Monday that the
Senate would decide the question so promptly as to anticipate further
explanation between yourself and him if delayed beyond that day. General
Grant made another explanation--that he was engaged on Sunday with
General Sherman, and, I think, also on Monday, in regard to the War
Department matter, with a hope, though he did not say in an effort,
to procure an amicable settlement of the affair of Mr. Stanton, and he
still hoped that it would be brought about.

I have the honor to be, with great respect, your obedient servant,

William H. Seward.

To the President.



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





COURTS AND CRIMINALS


By Arthur Train



These essays, which were written between the years 1905-1910 are
reprinted without revision, although in a few minor instances the laws
may have been changed.




CHAPTER I. The Pleasant Fiction of the Presumption of Innocence


There was a great to-do some years ago in the city of New York over an
ill-omened young person, Duffy by name, who, falling into the bad
graces of the police, was most incontinently dragged to headquarters
and "mugged" without so much as "By your leave, sir," on the part of the
authorities. Having been photographed and measured (in most humiliating
fashion) he was turned loose with a gratuitous warning to behave himself
in the future and see to it that he did nothing which might gain him
even more invidious treatment.

Now, although many thousands of equally harmless persons had been
similarly treated, this particular outrage was made the occasion of a
vehement protest to the mayor of the city by a certain member of the
judiciary, who pointed out that such things in a civilized community
were shocking beyond measure, and called upon the mayor to remove the
commissioner of police and all his staff of deputy commissioners for
openly violating the law which they were sworn to uphold. But, the
commissioner of police, who had sometimes enforced the penal statutes in
a way to make him unpopular with machine politicians, saw nothing wrong
in what he had done, and, what was more, said so most outspokenly.
The judge said, "You did," and the commissioner said, "I didn't."
Specifically, the judge was complaining of what had been done to
Duffy, but more generally he was charging the police with despotism and
oppression and with systematically disregarding the sacred liberties of
the citizens which it was their duty to protect.

Accordingly the mayor decided to look into the matter for himself, and
after a lengthy investigation came to the alleged conclusion that the
"mugging" of Duffy was a most reprehensible thing and that all those who
were guilty of having any part therein should be instantly removed
from office. He, therefore, issued a pronunciamento to the commissioner
demanding the official heads of several of his subordinates, which order
the commissioner politely declined to obey. The mayor thereupon removed
him and appointed a successor, ostensibly for the purpose of having in
the office a man who should conduct the police business of the city with
more regard for the liberties of the inhabitants thereof. The judge
who had started the rumpus expressed himself as very much pleased and
declared that now at last a new era had dawned wherein the government
was to be administered with a due regard for law.

Now, curiously enough, although the judge had demanded the removal of
the commissioner on the ground that he had violated the law and been
guilty of tyrannous and despotic conduct, the mayor had ousted him
not for pursuing an illegal course in arresting and "mugging" a
presumptively innocent man (for illegal it most undoubtedly was), but
for inefficiency and maladministration in his department.

Said the mayor in his written opinion:


"After thinking over this matter with the greatest care, I am led to the
conclusion that as mayor of the city of New York I should not order
the police to stop taking photographs of people arrested and accused of
crime or who have been indicted by grand juries. That grave injustice
may occur the Duffy case has demonstrated, but I feel that it is not the
taking of the photograph that has given cause to the injustice, but the
inefficiency and maladministration of the police department, etc."

In other words, the mayor set the seal of his official approval upon
the very practice which caused the injustice to Duffy. "Mugging" was all
right, so long as you "mugged" the right persons.

The situation thus outlined was one of more than passing interest. A
sensitive point in our governmental nervous system had been touched and
a condition uncovered that sooner or later must be diagnosed and cured.

For the police have no right to arrest and photograph a citizen
unconvicted of crime, since it is contrary to law. And it is ridiculous
to assert that the very guardians of the law may violate it so long as
they do so judiciously and do not molest the Duffys. The trouble goes
deeper than that. The truth is that we are up against that most delicate
of situations, the concrete adjustment of a theoretical individual right
to a practical necessity. The same difficulty has always existed and
will always continue to exist whenever emergencies requiring prompt
and decisive action arise or conditions obtain that must be handled
effectively without too much discussion. It is easy while sitting on the
piazza with your cigar to recognize the rights of your fellow-men, you
may assert most vigorously the right of the citizen to immunity from
arrest without legal cause, but if you saw a seedy character sneaking
down a side street at three o'clock in the morning, his pockets bulging
with jewelry and silver! Would you have the policeman on post insist
on the fact that a burglary had been committed being established beyond
peradventure before arresting the suspect, who in the meantime would
undoubtedly escape? Of course, the worthy officer sometimes does this,
but his conduct in that case becomes the subject of an investigation
on the part of his superiors. In fact, the rules of the New York police
department require him to arrest all persons carrying bags in the small
hours who cannot give a satisfactory account of themselves. Yet there
is no such thing under the laws of the State as a right "to arrest on
suspicion." No citizen may be arrested under the statutes unless a crime
has actually been committed. Thus, the police regulations deliberately
compel every officer either to violate the law or to be made the subject
of charges for dereliction of duty. A confusing state of things, truly,
to a man who wants to do his duty by himself and by his fellow-citizens!

The present author once wrote a book dealing with the practical
administration of criminal justice, in which the unlawfulness of arrest
on mere "suspicion" was discussed at length and given a prominent place.
But when the time came for publication that portion of it was omitted
at the earnest solicitation of certain of the authorities on the ground
that as such arrests were absolutely necessary for the enforcement
of the criminal law a public exposition of their illegality would do
infinite harm. Now, as it seems, the time has come when the facts, for
one reason or another, should be faced. The difficulty does not end,
however, with "arrest on suspicion," "the third degree," "mugging," or
their allied abuses. It really goes to the root of our whole theory of
the administration of the criminal law. Is it possible that on final
analysis we may find that our enthusiastic insistence upon certain of
the supposedly fundamental liberties of the individual has led us into
a condition of legal hypocrisy vastly less desirable than the frank
attitude of our continental neighbors toward such subjects?

The Massachusetts Constitution of 1785 concludes with the now famous
words: "To the end that this may be a government of laws and not of
men." That is the essence of the spirit of American government. Our
forefathers had arisen and thrown off the yoke of England and her
intolerable system of penal government, in which an accused had no
right to testify in his own behalf and under which he could be hung
for stealing a sheep. "Liberty!" "Liberty or death!" That was the note
ringing in the minds and mouths of the signers of the Declaration and
framers of the Constitution. That is the popular note to-day of the
Fourth of July orator and of the Memorial Day address. This liberty was
to be guaranteed by laws in such a way that it was never to be curtailed
or violated. No mere man was to be given an opportunity to tamper
with it. The individual was to be protected at all costs. No king, or
sheriff, or judge, or officer was to lay his finger on a free man
save at his peril. If he did, the free man might immediately have his
"law"--"have the law on him," as the good old expression was--for no
king or sheriff was above the law. In fact, we were so energetic in
providing safeguards for the individual, even when a wrong-doer, that we
paid very little attention to the effectiveness of kings or sheriffs or
what we had substituted for them. And so it is to-day. What candidate
for office, what silver-tongued orator or senator, what demagogue or
preacher could hold his audience or capture a vote if, when it came to a
question of liberty, he should lift up his voice in behalf of the rights
of the majority as against the individual?

Accordingly in devising our laws We have provided in every possible way
for the freedom of the citizen from all interference on the part of the
authorities. No one may be stopped, interrogated, examined, or arrested
unless a crime has been committed. Every one is presumed to be innocent
until shown to be guilty by the verdict of a jury. No one's premises
may be entered or searched without a warrant which the law renders it
difficult to obtain. Every accused has the right to testify in his own
behalf, like any other witness. The fact that he has been held for a
crime by a magistrate and indicted by a grand jury places him at not the
slightest disadvantage so far as defending himself against the charge
is concerned, for he must be proven guilty beyond any reasonable
doubt. These illustrations of the jealousy of the law for the rights of
citizens might be multiplied to no inconsiderable extent. Further,
our law allows a defendant convicted of crime to appeal to the highest
courts, whereas if he be acquitted the people or State of New York have
no right of appeal at all.

Without dwelling further on the matter it is enough to say that in
general the State constitutions, their general laws, or penal statutes
provide that a person who is accused or suspected of crime must be
presumed innocent and treated accordingly until his guilt has been
affirmatively established in a jury trial; that meantime he must not be
confined or detained unless a crime has in fact been committed and there
is at least reasonable cause to believe that he has committed it; and,
further, that if arrested he must be given an immediate opportunity
to secure bail, to have the advice of counsel, and must in no way be
compelled to give any evidence against himself. So much for the law. It
is as plain as a pikestaff. It is printed in the books in words of
one syllable. So far as the law is concerned we have done our best
to perpetuate the theories of those who, fearing that they might be
arrested without a hearing, transported for trial, and convicted in a
king's court before a king's judge for a crime they knew nothing of,
insisted on "liberty or death." They had had enough of kings and their
ways. Hereafter they were to have "a government of laws and not of men."

But the unfortunate fact remains that all laws, however perfect, must in
the end be administered by imperfect men. There is, alas! no such thing
as a government of laws and not of men. You may have a government
more of laws and less of men, or vice versa, but you cannot have an
auto-administration of the Golden Rule. Sooner or later you come to a
man--in the White House, or on a wool sack, or at a desk in an office,
or in a blue coat and brass buttons--and then, to a very considerable
extent, the question of how far ours is to be a government of laws or of
men depends upon him. Generally, so far as he is concerned, it is going
to be of man, for every official finds that the letter of the law works
an injustice many times out of a hundred. If he is worth his salary he
will try to temper justice with mercy. If he is human he will endeavor
to accomplish justice as he sees it so long as the law can be stretched
to accommodate the case. Thus, inevitably there is a conflict
between the law and its application. It is the human element in the
administration of the law that enables lawyers to get a living. It is
usually not difficult to tell what the law is; the puzzle is how it
is going to be applied in any individual case. How it is going to be
applied depends very largely upon the practical side of the matter and
the exigencies of existing conditions.

It is pretty hard to apply inflexibly laws over a hundred years old. It
is equally hard to police a city of a million or so polyglot inhabitants
with a due regard to their theoretic constitutional rights. But suppose
in addition that these theoretic rights are entirely theoretic and fly
in the face of the laws of nature, experience, and common sense? What
then? What is a police commissioner to do who has either got to make an
illegal arrest or let a crook get away, who must violate the rights of
men illegally detained by outrageously "mugging" them or egregiously
fail to have a record of the professional criminals in his bailiwick?
He does just what all of us do under similar conditions--he "takes a
chance." But in the case of the police the thing is so necessary that
there ceases practically to be any "chance" about it. They have got to
prevent crime and arrest criminals. If they fail they are out of a
job, and others more capable or less scrupulous take their places. The
fundamental law qualifying all systems is that of necessity. You can't
let professional crooks carry off a voter's silverware simply because
the voter, being asleep, is unable instantly to demonstrate beyond
a reasonable doubt that his silver has been stolen. You can't permit
burglars to drag sacks of loot through the streets of the city at 4 A.M.
simply because they are presumed to be innocent until proven guilty. And
if "arrest on suspicion" were not permitted, demanded by the public,
and required by the police ordinances, away would go the crooks and off
would go the silverware, the town would be full of "leather snatchers"
and "strong-arm men," respectable citizens would be afraid to go out o'
nights, and liberty would degenerate into license. That is the point. We
Americans, or at least some of the newer ones of us, have an idea that
"liberty" means the right to steal apples from our neighbor's orchard
without interference. Now, somewhere or other, there has got to be a
switch and a strong arm to keep us in order, and the switch and arm must
not wait until the apples are stolen and eaten before getting busy. If
we come climbing over the fence sweating apples at every pore, is Farmer
Jones to go and count his apples before grabbing us?

The most presumptuous of all presumptions is this "presumption of
innocence." It really doesn't exist, save in the mouths of judges and in
the pages of the law books. Yet as much to-do is made about it as if
it were a living legal principle. Every judge in a criminal case is
required to charge the jury in form or substance somewhat as follows:
"The defendant is presumed to be innocent until that presumption is
removed by competent evidence"... "This presumption is his property,
remaining with him throughout the trial and until rebutted by the
verdict of the jury."... "The jury has no right to consider the fact
that the defendant stands at the bar accused of a crime by an indictment
found by the grand jury." Shades of Sir Henry Hawkins! Does the judge
expect that they are actually to swallow that? Here is a jury sworn "to
a true verdict find" in the case of an ugly looking customer at the bar
who is charged with knocking down an old man and stealing his watch. The
old man--an apostolic looking octogenarian--is sitting right over there
where the jury can see him. One look at the plaintiff and one at the
accused and the jury may be heard to mutter, "He's guilty,--all right!"

"Presumed to be innocent?" Why, may I ask? Do not the jury and everybody
else know that this good old man would never, save by mistake, accuse
anybody falsely of crime? Innocence! Why, the natural and inevitable
presumption is that the defendant is guilty! The human mind works
intuitively by comparison and experience. We assume or presume with
considerable confidence that parents love their children, that all
college presidents are great and good men, and that wild bulls are
dangerous animals. We may be wrong. But it is up to the other fellow to
show us the contrary.

Now, if out of a clear sky Jones accuses Robinson of being a thief we
know by experience that the chances are largely in favor of Jones's
accusation being well founded. People as a rule don't go rushing around
charging each other with being crooks unless they have some reason
for it. Thus, at the very beginning the law flies in the face of
probabilities when it tells us that a man accused of crime must be
presumed to be innocent. In point of fact, whatever presumption there is
(and this varies with the circumstances) is all the other way, greater
or less depending upon the particular attitude of mind and experience of
the individual.

This natural presumption of guilt from the mere fact of the charge is
rendered all the more likely by reason of the uncharitable readiness
with which we believe evil of our fellows. How unctuously we repeat some
hearsay bit of scandal. "I suppose you have heard the report that
Deacon Smith has stolen the church funds?" we say to our friends with a
sententious sigh--the outward sign of an invisible satisfaction. Deacon
Smith after the money-bag? Ha! ha! Of course, he's guilty! These deacons
are always guilty! And in a few minutes Deacon Smith is ruined forever,
although the fact of the matter may well have been that he was but
counting the money in the collection-plate. This willingness to believe
the worst of others is a matter of common knowledge and of historical
and literary record. "The evil that men do lives after them--" It might
well have been put, "The evil men are said to have done lives forever."
However unfair, this is a psychologic condition which plays an important
part in rendering the presumption of innocence a gross absurdity.

But let us press the history of Jones and Robinson a step further. The
next event in the latter's criminal history is his appearance in
court before a magistrate. Jones produces his evidence and calls his
witnesses. Robinson, through his learned counsel, cross-examines
them and then summons his own witnesses to prove his innocence. The
proceeding may take several days or perhaps weeks. Briefs are submitted.
The magistrate considers the testimony and finally decides that he
believes Robinson guilty and must hold him for the action of the
grand jury. You might now, it would perhaps seem, have some reason for
suspecting that Robinson was not all that he should be. But no! He is
still presumed in the eyes of the law, and theoretically in the eyes of
his fellows, to be as innocent as a babe unborn. And now the grand jury
take up and sift the evidence that has already been gone over by the
police judge. They, too, call witnesses and take additional testimony.
They likewise are convinced of Robinson's guilt and straightway hand
down an indictment accusing him of the crime. A bench warrant issues.
The defendant is run to earth and ignominiously haled to court. But he
is still presumed to be innocent! Does not the law say so? And is not
this a "government of laws"? Finally, the district attorney, who is not
looking for any more work than is absolutely necessary, investigates the
case, decides that it must be tried and begins to prepare it for trial.
As the facts develop themselves Robinson's guilt becomes more and more
clear. The unfortunate defendant is given any opportunity he may desire
to explain away the charge, but to no purpose.

The district attorney knows Robinson is guilty, and so does everybody
else, including Robinson. At last this presumably innocent man is
brought to the bar for trial. The jury scan his hang-dog countenance
upon which guilt is plainly written. They contrast his appearance with
that of the honest Jones. They know he has been accused, held by a
magistrate, indicted by a grand jury, and that his case, after careful
scrutiny, has been pressed for trial by the public prosecutor. Do they
really presume him innocent? Of course not. They presume him guilty. "So
soon as I see him come through dot leetle door in the back of the room,
then I know he's guilty!" as the foreman said in the old story. What
good does the presumption of innocence, so called, do for the miserable
Robinson? None whatever--save perhaps to console him in the long days
pending his trial. But such a legal hypocrisy could never have deceived
anybody. How much better it would be to cast aside all such cant and
frankly admit that the attitude of the continental law toward the man
under arrest is founded upon common sense and the experience of mankind.
If he is the wrong man it should not be difficult for him to demonstrate
the fact. At any rate circumstances are against him, and he should be
anxious to explain them away if he can.

The fact of the matter is, that in dealing with practical conditions,
police methods differ very little in different countries. The
authorities may perhaps keep considerably more detailed "tabs" on people
in Europe than in the United States, but if they are once caught in a
compromising position they experience about the same treatment wherever
they happen to be. In France (and how the apostles of liberty condemn
the iniquity of the administration of criminal justice in that country!)
the suspect or undesirable receives a polite official call or note, in
which he is invited to leave the locality as soon as convenient. In
New York he is arrested by a plainclothes man, yanked down to Mulberry
Street for the night, and next afternoon is thrust down the gangplank
of a just departing Fall River liner. Many an inspector has earned
unstinted praise (even from the New York Evening Post) by "clearing New
York of crooks" or having a sort of "round-up" of suspicious characters
whom, after proper identification, he has ejected from the city by the
shortest and quickest possible route. Yet in the case of every person
thus arrested and driven out of the town he has undoubtedly violated
constitutional rights and taken the law into his own hands.

What redress can a penniless tramp secure against a stout inspector of
police able and willing to spend a considerable sum of money in his own
defence, and with the entire force ready and eager to get at the tramp
and put him out of business? He swallows his pride, if he has any, and
ruefully slinks out of town for a period of enforced abstinence from the
joys of metropolitan existence. Yet who shall say that, in spite of the
fact that it is a theoretic outrage upon liberty, this cleaning out of
the city is not highly desirable? One or two comparatively innocent men
may be caught in the ruck, but they generally manage to intimate to the
police that the latter have "got them wrong" and duly make their
escape. The others resume their tramp from city to city, clothed in the
presumption of their innocence.

Since the days of the Doges or of the Spanish Inquisition there has
never been anything like the morning inspection or "line up" of arrested
suspects at the New York police head-quarters.* (*Now abolished.) One by
one the unfortunate persons arrested during the previous night (although
not charged with any crime) are pointed out to the assembled detective
force, who scan them from beneath black velvet masks in order that they
themselves may not be recognized when they meet again on Broadway or
the darker side streets of the city. Each prisoner is described and his
character and past performances are rehearsed by the inspector or head
of the bureau. He is then measured, "mugged," and, if lucky, turned
loose. What does his liberty amount to or his much-vaunted legal rights
if the city is to be made safe? Yet why does not some apostle of liberty
raise his voice and cry aloud concerning the wrong that has been done?
Are not the rights of a beggar as sacred as those of a bishop?

One of the most sacred rights guaranteed under the law is that of not
being compelled to give evidence against ourselves or to testify to
anything which might degrade or incriminate us. Now, this is all very
fine for the chap who has his lawyer at his elbow or has had some
similar previous experience. He may wisely shut up like a clam and set
at defiance the tortures of the third degree. But how about the poor
fellow arrested on suspicion of having committed a murder, who has never
heard of the legal provision in question, or, if he has, is cajoled or
threatened into "answering one or two questions"? Few police officers
take the trouble to warn those whom they arrest that what they say may
be used against them. What is the use? Of course, when they testify
later at the trial they inevitably begin their testimony with the
stereotyped phrase, "I first warned the defendant that anything which
he said might be used against him." If they did warn him they probably
whispered it or mumbled it so that he didn't hear what they said, or,
in any event, whether they said it or not, half a dozen of them probably
took him into a back room and, having set him with his back against the
wall, threatened and swore at him until he told them what he knew, or
thought he knew, and perhaps confessed his crime. When the case comes to
trial the police give the impression that the accused quietly summoned
them to his cell to make a voluntary statement. The defendant denies
this, of course, but the evidence goes in and the harm has been done. No
doubt the methods of the inquisition are in vogue the world over under
similar conditions. Everybody knows that a statement by the accused
immediately upon his arrest is usually the most important evidence that
can be secured in any case. It is a police officer's duty to secure one
if he can do so by legitimate means. It is his custom to secure one
by any means in his power. As his oath, that such a statement was
voluntary, makes it ipso facto admissible as evidence, the statutes
providing that a defendant cannot be compelled to give evidence against
himself are practically nullified.

In the more important cases the accused is usually put through some sort
of an inquisitorial process by the captain at the station-house. If
he is not very successful at getting anything out of the prisoner the
latter is turned over to the sergeant and a couple of officers who can
use methods of a more urgent character. If the prisoner is arrested
by headquarters detectives, various efficient devices to compel him to
"give up what he knows" may be used--such as depriving him of food and
sleep, placing him in a cell with a "stool pigeon" who will try to worm
a confession out of him, and the usual moral suasion of a heart-to-heart
talk in the back room with the inspector.

This is the darker side of the picture of practical government. It
is needless to say that the police do not always suggest the various
safeguards and privileges which the law accords to defendants thus
arrested, but the writer is free to confess that, save in exceptional
cases, he believes the rigors of the so-called third degree to be
greatly exaggerated. Frequently in dealing with rough men rough methods
are used, but considering the multitude of offenders, and the thousands
of police officers, none of whom have been trained in a school of
gentleness, it is surprising that severer treatment is not generally
met with on the part of those who run afoul of the criminal law. The
ordinary "cop" tries to do his duty as effectively as he can. With the
average citizen gruffness and roughness go a long way in the assertion
of authority. In the task of policing a big city, the rights of the
individual must indubitably suffer to a certain extent if the rights
of the multitude are to be properly protected. We can make too much of
small injustices and petty incivilities. Police business is not gentle
business. The officers are trying to prevent you and me from being
knocked on the head some dark night or from being chloroformed in our
beds. Ten thousand men are trying to do a thirty-thousand-man job. The
struggle to keep the peace and put down crime is a hard one anywhere.
It requires a strong arm that cannot show too punctilious a regard for
theoretical rights when prompt decisions have to be made and equally
prompt action taken. The thieves and gun men have got to be driven
out. Suspicious characters have got to be locked up. Somehow or other a
record must be kept of professional criminals and persons likely to
be active in law-breaking. These are necessities in every civilized
country. They are necessities here. Society employs the same methods of
self-protection the world over. No one presumes a person charged with
crime to be innocent, either in Delhi, Pekin, Moscow, or New York. Under
proper circumstances we believe him guilty. When he comes to be tried
the jury consider the evidence, and if they are reasonably sure he is
guilty they convict him. The doctrine of reasonable doubt is almost as
much of a fiction as that of the presumption of innocence. From the
time a man is arrested until arraignment he is quizzed with a view to
inducing him to admit his offence or give some evidence that may help
convict him. Logically, why should not a person charged with a crime
be obliged to give what explanation he can of the affair? Why should he
have the privilege of silence? Doesn't he owe a duty to the public the
same as any other witness? If he is innocent he has nothing to fear; if
he is guilty--away with him! The French have no false ideas about such
things and at the same time they have a high regard for liberty. We
merely cheat ourselves into thinking that our liberty is something
different from French liberty because we have a lot of laws upon our
statute books that are there only to be disregarded and would have to be
repealed instantly if enforced.

Take, for instance, the celebrated provision of the penal laws that the
failure of an accused to testify in his own behalf shall not be taken
against him. Such a doctrine flies in the face of human nature. If a
man sits silent when witnesses under oath accuse him of a crime it is an
inevitable inference that he has nothing to say--that no explanation of
his would explain. The records show that the vast majority of accused
persons who do not avail themselves of the opportunity to testify are
convicted. Thus, the law which permits a defendant to testify in reality
compels him to testify, and a much-invoked safeguard of liberty turns
out to be a privilege in name only. In France or America alike a man
accused of crime sooner or later has to tell what he knows--or take
his medicine. It makes little difference whether he does so under the
legalized interrogation of a "juge d'instruction" in Paris or under the
quasi-voluntary examination of an assistant district attorney or police
inspector in New York. It is six of one and half a dozen of the other if
at his trial in France he remains mute under examination or in America
refrains from availing himself of the privilege of testifying in his own
behalf.

Thus, we are reluctantly forced to the conclusion that all human
institutions have their limitations, and that, however theoretically
perfect a government of laws may be, it must be administered by men
whose chief regard will not be the idealization of a theory of liberty
so much as an immediate solution of some concrete problem.

Not that the matter, after all, is particularly important to most of us,
but laws which exist only to be broken create a disrespect and disregard
for law which may ultimately be dangerous. It would be perfectly simple
for the legislature to say that a citizen might be arrested under
circumstances tending to create a reasonable suspicion, even if he had
not committed a crime, and it would be quite easy to pass a statute
providing that the commissioner of police might "mug" and measure all
criminals immediately after conviction. As it is, the prison authorities
won't let him, so he has to do it while he has the opportunity.

It must be admitted that this is rather hard on the innocent, but they
now have to suffer with the guilty for the sins of an indolent and
uninterested legislature. Moreover, if such a right of arrest were
proposed, some wiseacre or politician would probably rise up and
denounce the suggestion as the first step in the direction of a military
dictatorship. Thus, we shall undoubtedly fare happily on in the
blissful belief that our personal liberties are the subject of the most
solicitous and zealous care on the part of the authorities, guaranteed
to us under a government which is not of men but of laws, until one
of us happens to be arrested (by mistake, of course) and learns by sad
experience the practical methods of the police in dealing with criminals
and the agreeable but deceptive character of the pleasant fiction of the
presumption of innocence.




CHAPTER II. Preparing a Criminal Case for Trial


When the prosecuting attorney in a great criminal trial arises to open
the case to the impanelled jury, very few, if any, of them have the
slightest conception of the enormous expenditure of time, thought and
labor which has gone into the preparation of the case and made possible
his brief and easily delivered speech. For in this opening address of
his there must be no flaw, since a single misstated or overstated fact
may prejudice the jury against him and result in his defeat. Upon
it also depends the jury's first impression of the case and of the
prosecutor himself--no inconsiderable factor in the result. In a trial
of importance its careful construction with due regard to what facts
shall be omitted (in order to enhance their dramatic effect when
ultimately proven) may well occupy the district attorney every evening
for a week. But if the speech itself has involved study and travail, it
is as nothing compared with the amount required by that most important
feature of every criminal case--the selection of the jury.

For a month before the trial, or whenever it may be that the jury has
been drawn, every member upon the panel has been subjected to an unseen
scrutiny. The prosecutor, through his own or through hired sleuths, has
examined into the family history, the business standing and methods, the
financial responsibility, the political and social affiliations, and the
personal habits and "past performances" of each and every talesman. When
at the beginning of the trial they, one by one, take the witness-chair
(on what is called the voir dire) to subject themselves to an
examination by both sides as to their fitness to serve as jurors in
the case, the district attorney probably has close fit hand a rather
detailed account of each, and perchance has great difficulty in
restraining a smile. When some prospective juror, in his eagerness
either to serve or to escape, deliberately equivocates in answer to an
important question as to his personal history.

"Are you acquainted with the accused or his family?" mildly inquires the
assistant prosecutor. "No--not at all," the talesman may blandly reply.

The answer, perhaps, is literally true, and yet the prosecutor may be
pardoned for murmuring

"Liar!" to himself as he sees that his memorandum concerning the juror's
qualifications states that he belongs to the same "lodge" with the
prisoner's uncle by marriage and carries an open account on his books
with the defendant's father.

"I think we will excuse Mr. Ananias," politely remarks the prosecutor;
then in an undertone he turns to his chief and mutters: "The old rascal!
He would have knifed us if we'd given him the chance!" And all this time
the disgruntled Mr. Ananias is wondering why, if he didn't "know the
defendant or his family," he was not accepted as a juror.

Of course, every district attorney has, or should have, information as
to each talesman's actual capabilities as a juror and something of
a record as to how he has acted under fire. If he is a member of the
"special" panel, it is easy to find out whether he has ever acquitted
or convicted in any cause celebre, and if he has acquitted any plainly
guilty defendant in the past it is not likely that his services will
be required. If, however, he has convicted in such a case the district
attorney may try to lure the other side into accepting him by making
it appear that he himself is doubtful as to the juror's desirability.
Sometimes persons accused of crime themselves, and actually under
indictment, find their way onto the panels, and more than one ex-convict
has appeared there in some inexplicable fashion. But to find them out
may well require a double shift of men working day and night for a month
before the case is called, and what may appear to be the most trivial
fact thus discovered may in the end prove the decisive argument for or
against accepting the juror.

Panel after panel may be exhausted before a jury in a great murder
trial has been selected, for each side in addition to its challenges
for "cause" or "bias" has thirty* peremptory ones which it may exercise
arbitrarily. If the writer's recollection is not at fault, the large
original panel drawn in the first Molineux trial was used up and
several others had to be drawn until eight hundred talesmen had been
interrogated before the jury was finally selected. It is usual to
examine at least fifty in the ordinary murder case before a jury is
secured.



     * In the State of New York.


It may seem to the reader that this scrutiny of talesmen is not strictly
preparation for the trial, but, in fact, it is fully as important
as getting ready the facts themselves; for a poor jury, either from
ignorance or prejudice, will acquit on the same facts which will lead
a sound jury to convict. A famous prosecutor used to say, "Get your
jury--the case will take care of itself."

But as the examination of the panel and the opening address come last
in point of chronology it will be well to begin at the beginning and
see what the labors of the prosecutor are in the initial stages of
preparation. Let us take, for example, some notorious case, where an
unfortunate victim has died from the effects of a poisoned pill or
draught of medicine, or has been found dead in his room with a revolver
bullet in his heart. Some time before the matter has come into the hands
of the prosecutor, the press and the police have generally been doing
more or less (usually less) effective work upon the case. The yellow
journals have evolved some theory of who is the culprit and have loosed
their respective reporters and "special criminologists" upon him. Each
has its own idea and its own methods--often unscrupulous. And each has
its own particular victim upon whom it intends to fasten the blame.
Heaven save his reputation! Many an innocent man has been ruined for
life through the efforts of a newspaper "to make a case," and, of
course, the same thing, though happily in a lesser degree, is true of
the police and of some prosecutors as well.

In every great criminal case there are always four different and
frequently antagonistic elements engaged in the work of detection and
prosecution--first, the police; second, the district attorney; third,
the press; and, lastly, the personal friends and family of the deceased
or injured party. Each for its own ends--be it professional pride,
personal glorification, hard cash, or revenge--is equally anxious to
find the evidence and establish a case. Of course, the police are the
first ones notified of the commission of a crime, but as it is now
almost universally their duty to inform at once the coroner and also
the district attorney thereof, a tripartite race for glory frequently
results which adds nothing to the dignity of the administration of
criminal justice.

The coroner is at best no more than an appendix to the legal anatomy,
and frequently he is a disease. The spectacle of a medical man of
small learning and less English trying to preside over a court of first
instance is enough to make the accused himself chuckle for joy.

Not long ago the coroners of New York discovered that, owing to the
fact that the district attorney or his representatives generally
arrived first at the scene of any crime, there was nothing left for the
"medicos" to do, for the district attorney would thereupon submit the
matter at once to the grand jury instead of going through the formality
of a hearing in the coroner's court. The legal medicine men felt
aggrieved, and determined to be such early birds that no worm should
escape them. Accordingly, the next time one of them was notified of a
homicide he raced his horse down Madison Avenue at such speed that he
collided with a trolley car and broke his leg.

Another complained to the district attorney that the assistants of the
latter, who had arrived at the scene of an asphyxiation before him, had
bungled everything.

"Ach, dose young men!" he exclaimed, wringing his hands--"Dose young
men, dey come here and dey opened der vindow and let out der gas and all
mine evidence esgaped."

It is said that this interesting personage once instructed his jury
to find that "the diseased came to his death from an ulster on the
stomach."

These anecdotes are, perhaps, what judges would call obiter dicta, yet
the coroner's court has more than once been utilized as a field in the
actual preparation of a criminal case. When Roland B. Molineux was first
suspected of having caused the death of Mrs. Adams by sending the famous
poisoned package of patent medicine to Harry Cornish through the
mails, the assistant district attorney summoned him as a witness to the
coroner's court and attempted to get from him in this way a statement
which Molineux would otherwise have refused to make.

When all the first hullabaloo is over and the accused is under arrest
and safely locked up, it is usually found that the police have merely
run down the obvious witnesses and made a prima facie case. All the
finer work remains to be done either by the district attorney himself
or by the detective bureau working under his immediate direction or
in harmony with him. Little order has been observed in the securing of
evidence. Every one is a fish who runs into the net of the police, and
all is grist that comes to their mill. The district attorney sends
for the officers who have worked upon the case and for the captain
or inspector who has directed their efforts, takes all the papers and
tabulates all their information. His practiced eye shows him at once
that a large part is valueless, much is contradictory, and all needs
careful elaboration. A winnowing process occurs then and there; and
the officers probably receive a "special detail" from headquarters and
thereafter take their orders from the prosecutor himself. The detective
bureau is called in and arrangements made for the running down of
particular clues. Then he will take off his coat, clear his desk, and
get down to work.

Of course, his first step is to get all the information he can as to the
actual facts surrounding the crime itself. He immediately subpoenas all
the witnesses, whether previously interrogated by the police or not,
who know anything about the matter, and subjects them to a rigorous
cross-examination. Then he sends for the police themselves and
cross-examines them. If it appears that any witnesses have disappeared
he instructs his detectives how and where to look for them. Often this
becomes in the end the most important element in the preparation for
the trial. Thus in the Nan Patterson case the search for and ultimate
discovery of Mr. and Mrs. Morgan Smith (the sister and brother-in-law of
the accused) was one of its most dramatic features. After they had been
found it was necessary to indict and then to extradite them in order
to secure their presence within the jurisdiction, and when all this had
been accomplished it proved practically valueless.

It frequently happens that an entire case will rest upon the testimony
of a single witness whose absence from the jurisdiction would prevent
the trial. An instance of such a case was that of Albert T. Patrick, for
without the testimony of his alleged accomplice--the valet, Jones--he
could not have been convicted of murder. The preservation of such a
witness and his testimony thus becomes of paramount importance, and
rascally witnesses sometimes enjoy considerable ease, if not luxury, at
the expense of the public while waiting to testify. Often, too, a case
of great interest will arise where the question of the guilt of the
accused turns upon the evidence of some one person who, either from
mercenary motives or because of "blood and affection," is unwilling
to come to the fore and tell the truth. A striking case of this sort
occurred some ten years ago. The "black sheep" of a prominent New York
family forged the name of his sister to a draft for thirty thousand
dollars. This sister, who was an elderly woman of the highest character
and refinement, did not care to pocket the loss herself and declined to
have the draft debited to her account at the bank. A lawsuit followed,
in which the sister swore that the name signed to the draft was not in
her handwriting. She won her case, but some officious person laid the
matter before the district attorney. The forger was arrested and
his sister was summoned before the grand jury. Here was a pleasant
predicament. If she testified for the State her brother would
undoubtedly go to prison for many years, to say nothing of the notoriety
for the entire family which so sensational a case would occasion. She,
therefore, slipped out of the city and sailed for Europe the night
before she was to appear before the grand jury. Her brother was in due
course indicted and held for trial in large bail, but there was and
is no prospect of convicting him for his crime so long as his sister
remains in the voluntary exile to which she has subjected herself. She
can never return to New York to live unless something happens either to
the indictment or her brother, neither of which events seems likely in
the immediate future.

Perhaps, if the case is one of shooting, the weapon has vanished. Its
discovery may lead to the finding of the murderer. In one instance where
a body was found in the woods with a bullet through the heart, there was
nothing to indicate who had committed the crime. The only scintilla of
evidence was an exploded cartridge--a small thing on which to build
a case. But the district attorney had the hammer marks upon the cap
magnified several hundred times and then set out to find the rifle which
bore the hammer which had made them. Thousands of rifles all over the
State were examined. At last in a remote lumber camp was found the
weapon which had fired the fatal bullet. The owner was arrested, accused
of the murder, and confessed his crime. In like manner, if it becomes
necessary to determine where a typewritten document was prepared the
letters may be magnified, and by examining the ribbons of suspected
machines the desired fact may be ascertained. The magnifying glass still
plays an important part in detecting crime, although usually in ways
little suspected by the general public.

On the other hand, where the weapon has not been spirited away the
detectives may spend weeks in discovering when and where it was
purchased. Every pawnshop, every store where a pistol could be bought,
is investigated, and under proper circumstances the requisite evidence
to show deliberation and premeditation may be secured.

These investigations are naturally conducted at the very outset of the
preparation of the case.

The weapon, in seven trials out of ten, is the most important thing in
it. By its means it can generally be demonstrated whether the shooting
was accidental or intentional--and whether or not the killing was in
self-defence.

Where this last plea is interposed it is usually made at once upon the
arrest, the accused explaining to the police that he fired only to
save his own life. In such a situation, where the killing is admitted,
practically the entire preparation will centre upon the most minute
tests to determine whether or not the shot was fired as the accused
claims that it was. The writer can recall at least a dozen cases in his
own experience where the story of the defendant, that the revolver was
discharged in a hand-to-hand struggle, was conclusively disproved by
experimenting with the weapon before the trial. There was one homicide
in which a bullet perforated a felt cap and penetrated the forehead of
the deceased. The defendant asserted that he was within three feet of
his victim when he fired, and that the other was about to strike him
with a bludgeon. A quantity of felt, of weight similar to that of
the cap, was procured and the revolver discharged at it from varying
distances. A microscopic examination showed that certain discolorations
around the bullet-hole (claimed by the defence to be burns made by the
powder) were, in fact, grease marks, and that the shot must have been
fired from a distance of about fifteen feet. The defendant was convicted
on his own story, supplemented by the evidence of the witness who made
the tests.

The most obvious and first requirement is, as has been said, to find
the direct witnesses to the facts surrounding the crime, commit their
statements under oath to writing, so that they cannot later be denied
or evaded, and make sure that these witnesses will not only hold no
intercourse with the other side, but will be on hand when wanted. This
last is not always an easy task, and various expedients often have to
be resorted to, such as placing hostile witnesses under police
surveillance, or in some cases in "houses of detention," and hiding
others in out-of-the-way places, or supplying them with a bodyguard if
violence is to be anticipated. When the proper time comes the favorable
witnesses must be duly drilled or coached, which does not imply anything
improper, but means merely that they must be instructed how to deliver
their testimony, what answers are expected to certain questions, and
what facts it is intended to elicit from them. Witnesses are often
offended and run amuck because they are not given a chance upon the
stand to tell the story of their lives. This must be guarded against and
steps taken to have their statements given in such a way that they are
audible and intelligible. A few lessons in elementary elocution are
generally vitally necessary. The man with the bassoon voice must be
tamed, and the birdlike old lady made to chirp more loudly. But all this
is the self-evident preparation which must take place in every case, and
while highly important is of far less interest than the development
of the circumstantial evidence which is the next consideration of the
district attorney.

The discovery and proper proof of minute facts which tend to demonstrate
the guilt of an accused are the joy of the natural prosecutor, and he
may in his enthusiasm spend many thousands of dollars on what seems, and
often is, an immaterial matter. Youthful officials intrusted with the
preparation of important cases often become unduly excited and forget
that the taxpayers are paying the bills. The writer remembers sitting
beside one of these enthusiasts during a celebrated trial. A certain
woman witness had incidentally testified to a remote meeting with
the deceased at which a certain other woman was alleged to have been
present. The matter did not seem of much interest or importance, but
the youth in question seized a yellow pad and excitedly wrote in blue
pencil, "Find Birdie" (the other lady) "at any cost!" This he handed
to a detective, who hastened importantly away. It is to be hoped that
"Birdie" was found speedily and in an inexpensive manner.

When the case against Albert T. Patrick, later convicted of the murder
of the aged William M. Rice, was in course of preparation, it was found
desirable to show that Patrick had called up his accomplice on the
telephone upon the night of the murder. Accordingly, the telephone
company was compelled to examine several hundred thousand telephone
slips to determine whether or not this had actually occurred. While the
fact was established in the affirmative, the company now destroys its
slips in order not to have to repeat the performance a second time.

Likewise, in the preparation of the Molineux case it became important
to demonstrate that the accused had sent a letter under an assumed name
ordering certain remedies. As a result, one of the employees of the
patent-medicine company spent several months going over their old mail
orders and comparing them with a certain sample, until at last the
letter was unearthed. Of course, the district attorney had to pay for
it, and it was probably worth what it cost to the prosecution, although
Molineux's conviction was reversed by the Court of Appeals and he was
acquitted upon his second trial.

The danger is, however, that a prosecutor who has an unlimited amount
of money at his disposal may be led into expenditures which are hardly
justified simply because he thinks they may help to secure a conviction.
Nothing is easier than to waste money in this fashion, and public
officials sometimes spend the county's money with considerably more
freedom than they would their own under similar circumstances.

The legitimate expenses connected with the preparation of every
important case are naturally large. For example, diagrams must be
prepared, photographs taken of the place of the crime, witnesses
compensated for their time and their expenses paid, and, most important
of all, competent experts must be engaged. This leads us to an
interesting aspect of the modern jury trial.

When no other defence to homicide is possible the claim of insanity is
frequently interposed. Nothing is more confusing to the ordinary juryman
than trying to determine the probative value of evidence touching
unsoundness of mind, and the application thereto of the legal test
of criminal responsibility. In point of fact, juries are hardly to be
blamed for this, since the law itself is antiquated and the subject one
abounding in difficulty. Unfortunately the opportunity for vague yet
damaging testimony on the part of experts, the ease with which
any desired opinion can be defended by a slight alteration in the
hypothetical facts, and the practical impossibility of exposure,
have been seized upon with avidity by a score or more of unscrupulous
alienists who are prepared to sell their services to the highest bidder.
These men are all the more dangerous because, clever students of mental
disease and thorough masters of their subject as they are, they are able
by adroit qualifications and skilful evasions to make half-truths seem
as convincing as whole ones. They ask and receive large sums for their
services, and their dishonest testimony must be met and refuted by the
evidence of honest physicians, who, by virtue of their attainments, have
a right to demand substantial fees. Even so, newspaper reports of the
expense to the State of notorious trials are grossly exaggerated.
The entire cost of the first Thaw trial to the County of New York was
considerably less than twenty thousand dollars, and the second trial
not more than half that amount. To the defence, however, it was a costly
matter, as the recent schedules in bankruptcy of the defendant show.
Therein it appears that one of his half-dozen counsel still claims
as owing to him for his services on the first trial the modest sum of
thirty-five thousand dollars. The cost of the whole defence was probably
ten times that sum. Most of the money goes to the lawyers, and the
experts take the remainder.

It goes without saying that both prosecutor and attorney for the defence
must be masters of the subject involved. A trial for poisoning means
an exhaustive study not only of analytic chemistry, but of practical
medicine on the part of all the lawyers in the case, while a plea of
insanity requires that, for the time being, the district attorney shall
become an alienist, familiar with every aspect of paranoia, dementia
praecox, and all other forms of mania. He must also reduce his knowledge
to concrete, workable form, and be able to defeat opposing experts
on their own ground. But such knowledge comes only by prayer and
fasting--or, perhaps, rather by months of hard and remorseless grind.

The writer once prosecuted a druggist who had, by mistake, filled
a prescription for a one-fourth-grain pill of calomel with a
one-fourth-grain pill of morphine. The baby for whom the pill was
intended died in consequence. The defence was that the prescription
had been properly filled, but that the child was the victim of various
diseases, from acute gastritis to cerebro-spinal meningitis. In
preparation the writer was compelled to spend four hours every evening
for a week with three specialists, and became temporarily a minor expert
on children's diseases. To-day he is forced to admit that he would not
know a case of acute gastritis from one of mumps. But the druggist was
convicted.

Yet it is not enough to prepare for the defence you believe the accused
is going to interpose. A conscientious preparation means getting ready
for any defence he may endeavor to put in. Just as the prudent general
has an eye to every possible turn of the battle and has, if he can,
re-enforcements on the march, so the prosecutor must be ready for
anything, and readiest of all for the unexpected. He must not rest upon
the belief that the other side will concede any fact, however clear
it may seem. Some cases are lost simply because it never occurs to the
district attorney that the accused will deny something which the State
has twenty witnesses to prove. The twenty witnesses are, therefore, not
summoned on the day of trial, the defendant does deny it, and as it is a
case of word against word the accused gets the benefit of the doubt and,
perhaps, is acquitted.

No case is properly prepared unless there is in the court-room every
witness who knows anything about any aspect of the case. No one can
foretell when the unimportant will become the vital. Most cases turn
on an unconsidered point. A prosecutor once lost what seemed to him the
clearest sort of a case. When it was all over, and the defendant had
passed out of the courtroom rejoicing, he turned to the foreman and
asked the reason for the verdict.

"Did you hear your chief witness say he was a carpenter?" inquired the
foreman.

"Why, certainly," answered the district attorney,

"Did you hear me ask him what he paid for that ready-made pine door he
claimed to be working on when he saw the assault?"

The prosecutor recalled the incident and nodded.

"Well, he said ten dollars--and I knew he was a liar. A door like that
don't cost but four-fifty!"

It is, perhaps, too much to require a knowledge of carpentry on the part
of a lawyer trying an assault case. Yet the juror was undoubtedly right
in his deduction.

In a case where insanity is the defence, the State must dig up and have
at hand every person it can find who knew the accused at any period of
his career. He will probably claim that in his youth he was kicked in
a game of foot-ball and fractured his skull, that later he fell into an
elevator shaft and had concussion of the brain, or that he was hit on
the head by a burglar. It is usually difficult, if not impossible, to
disprove such assertions, but the prosecutor must be ready, if he can,
to show that foot-ball was not invented until after the defendant had
attained maturity, that it was some other man who fell down the elevator
shaft, and to produce the burglar to deny that the assault occurred.
Naturally, complete preparation for an important trial demands the
presence of many witnesses who ultimately are not needed and who are
never called. Probably in most such cases about half the witnesses
do not testify at all. Most of what has been said relates to the
preparation for trial of cases where the accused is already under arrest
when the district attorney is called into the case. If this stage has
not been reached the prosecutor may well be called upon to exercise some
of the functions of a detective in the first instance.

A few years ago it was brought to the attention of the New York
authorities that many blackmailing letters were being received bearing
the name of "Lewis Jarvis." These were of a character to render the
apprehension of the writer of them a matter of much importance. The
letters directed that the replies be sent to a certain box in the New
York post-office, but as the boxes are numerous and close together it
seemed doubtful if "Lewis Jarvis" could be detected when he called
for his mail. The district attorney, the police, and the post-office
officials finally evolved the scheme of plugging the lock of "Lewis
Jarvis's" box with a match. The scheme worked, for "Jarvis," finding
that he could not use his key, went to the delivery window and asked for
his mail. The very instant the letters reached his hand the gyves were
upon the wrists of one of the best-known attorneys in the city.

When the district attorney has been apprised that a crime has been
committed, and that a certain person is the guilty party, he not
infrequently allows the suspect to go his way under the careful watch
of detectives, and thus often secures much new evidence against him. In
this way it is sometimes established that the accused has endeavored
to bribe the witnesses and to induce them to leave the State, while
the whereabouts of stolen loot is often discovered. In most instances,
however, the district attorney begins where the police leave off, and
he merely supplements their labors and prepares for the actual trial
itself. But the press he has always with him, and from the first moment
after the crime up to the execution of the sentence or the liberation of
the accused, the reporters dog his footsteps, sit on his doorstep, and
deluge him with advice and information.

Now a curious feature about the evidence "worked up" by reporters for
their papers is that little of it materializes when the prosecutor
wishes to make use of it. Of course, some reporters do excellent
detective work, and there are one or two veterans attached to the
criminal courts in New York City who, in addition to their literary
capacities, are natural-born sleuths, and combine with a knowledge of
criminal law, almost as extensive as that of a regular prosecutor, a
resourcefulness and nerve that often win the case for whichever side
they espouse. I have frequently found that these men knew more about the
cases which I was prosecuting than I did myself, and a tip from them has
more than once turned defeat into victory. But newspaper men, for one
reason or another, are loath to testify, and usually make but poor
witnesses. They feel that their motives will be questioned, and are
naturally unwilling to put themselves in an equivocal position.
The writer well remembers that in the Mabel Parker case, where the
defendant, a young and pretty woman, had boasted of her forgeries before
a roomful of reporters, it was impossible, when her trial was called, to
find more than one of them who would testify--and he had practically to
be dragged to the witness chair. In point of fact, if reporters made a
practice of being witnesses it would probably hurt their business. But,
however much "faked" news may be published, a prosecutor who did not
listen to all the hints the press boys had to give would make a great
mistake; and as allies and advisers they are often invaluable, for they
can tell him where and how to get evidence of which otherwise he would
never hear.

The week before a great case is called is a busy one for the prosecutor
in charge. He is at his office early to interview his main witnesses and
go over their testimony with them so that their regular daily work
may not be interrupted more than shall be actually necessary. Some he
cautions against being overenthusiastic and others he encourages to
greater emphasis. The bashful "cop" is badgered until at last he ceases
to begin his testimony in the cut-and-dried police fashion.

"On the morning of the twenty-second of July, about 3.30 A.M., while on
post at the corner of Desbrosses Street--," he starts.

"Oh, quit that!" shouts the district attorney. "Tell me what you saw in
your own words."

The "cop" blushes and stammers:

"Aw, well, on the morning of the twenty-second of July, about 3.30 A.M."

"Look here!" yells the prosecutor, jumping to his feet and shaking his
fist at him, "do you want to be taken for a d--n liar? 'Morning of
the twenty-second of July, about 3.30 A.M., while on post I' You never
talked like that in your life."

By this time the "cop" is "mad clear through."

"I'm no liar!" he retorts. "I saw the ------ pull his gun and shoot!"

"Well, why didn't you say so?" laughs the prosecutor, and the officer
mollified with a cigar, dimly perceives the objectionable feature of his
testimony.

About this time one of the sleuths comes in to report that certain
much-desired witnesses have been "located" and are in custody
downstairs. The assistant makes immediate preparation for taking their
statements. Then one of the experts comes in for a chat about a new
phase of the case occasioned by the discovery that the defendant
actually did have spasms when an infant. The assistant wisely makes an
appointment for the evening. A telegram arrives saying that a witness
for the defence has just started for New York from Philadelphia and
should be duly watched on arrival. The district attorney sends for the
assistant to inquire if he has looked up the law on similar cases in
Texas and Alabama--which he probably has not done; and a friend on the
telephone informs him that Tomkins, who has been drawn on the jury, is
a boon companion of the prisoner and was accustomed to play bridge with
him every Sunday night before the murder.

Coincidently, some private detectives enter with a long report on the
various members of the panel, including the aforesaid Tomkins, whom they
pronounce to be "all right," and as never having, to their knowledge,
laid eyes on the accused. Finally, in despair, the prosecutor locks
himself in his library with a copy of the Bible, "Bartlett's Familiar
Quotations," and a volume of celebrated speeches, to prepare his summing
up, for no careful trial lawyer opens a case without first having
prepared, to some extent, at least, his closing address to the jury. He
has thought about this for weeks and perhaps for months. In his dreams
he has formulated syllogisms and delivered them to imaginary yet
obstinate talesman. He has glanced through many volumes for similes and
quotations of pertinency. He has tried various arguments on his friends
until he knows just how, if he succeeds in proving certain facts and
the defence expected is interposed, he is going to convince the twelve
jurors that the defendant is guilty and, perhaps, win an everlasting
reputation as an orator himself.

This superficial sketch of how an important criminal case is got
ready for trial would be incomplete without some further reference to
something which has been briefly hinted at before--preparation upon its
purely legal aspect. This may well demand almost as much labor as
that required in amassing the evidence. Yet a careful and painstaking
investigation of the law governing every aspect of the case is
indispensable to success. The prosecutor with a perfectly clear case may
see the defendant walk out of court a free man, simply because he has
neglected to acquaint himself with the various points of law which may
arise in the course of the trial, and the lawyer for an accused may
find his client convicted upon a charge to which he has a perfectly good
legal defence, for the same reason.

Looking at it from the point of view of the prisoner's counsel, it is
obvious that it is quite as efficacious to free your client on a point
of law, without having the case go to the jury at all, as to secure an
acquittal at their hands.

At the conclusion of the evidence introduced in behalf of the State
there is always a motion made to dismiss the case on the ground of
alleged insufficiency in the proof. This has usually been made the
subject of the most exhaustive study by the lawyers for the defence,
and requires equal preparation on the part of the prosecutor. The writer
recalls trying a bankrupt, charged with fraud, where the lawyer for
the defendant had written a brief of some three hundred pages upon the
points of law which he proposed to argue to the court upon his motion to
acquit. But, unfortunately, his client pleaded guilty and the volume was
never brought into play.

But a mastery of the law, a thorough knowledge and control of the
evidence, a careful preparation for the opening and closing addresses,
and an intimate acquaintance with the panel from which the jury is to be
drawn are by no means the only elements in the preparation for a
great legal battle. One thing still remains, quite as important as the
rest--the selection of the best time and the best court for the trial.
"A good beginning" in a criminal case means a beginning before the right
judge, the proper jury, and at a time when that vague but important
influence known as public opinion augurs success. A clever criminal
lawyer, be he prosecutor or lawyer for the defendant, knows that all the
preparation in the world is of no account provided his case is to come
before a stupid or biased judge, or a prejudiced or obstinate jury.
Therefore, each side, in a legal battle of importance, studies, as well
as it can, the character, connections, and cast of mind of the different
judges who may be called upon to hear the case, and, like a jockey
at the flag, tries to hurry or delay, as the case may be, until the
judicial auspices appear most favorable. A lawyer who has a weak defence
seeks to bring the case before a weak judge, or, if public clamor is
loud against his client, makes use of every technical artifice to secure
delay, by claiming that there are flaws in the indictment, or by moving
for commissions to take testimony in distant points of the country.
The opportunities for legal procrastination are so numerous that in a
complicated case the defence may often delay matters for over a year.
This may be an important factor in the final result.

Yet even this is not enough, for, ultimately, it is the judge's charge
to the jury which is going to guide their deliberations and, in
large measure, determine their verdict. The lawyers for the defence,
therefore, prepare long statements of what they either believe or
pretend to believe to be the law. These statements embrace all the legal
propositions, good or bad, favorable to their side of the case. If
they can induce the judge to follow these so much the better for their
client, for even if they are not law it makes no difference, since the
State has no appeal from an acquittal in a criminal case, no matter how
much the judge has erred. In the same way, but not in quite the same
fashion, the district attorney prepares "requests to charge," but his
desire for favorable instructions should be, and generally is, curbed by
the consideration that if the judge makes any mistake in the law and the
defendant is convicted he can appeal and upset the case. Of course, some
prosecutors are so anxious to convict that they will wheedle or deceive
a judge into giving charges which are not only most inimical to the
prisoner, but so utterly unsound that a reversal is sure to follow; but
when one of these professional bloodhounds is baying upon the trail all
he thinks of is a conviction--that is all he wants, all the public
will remember; to him will be the glory; and when the case is finally
reversed he will probably be out of office. These "requests" cover
pages, and touch upon every phase of law applicable or inapplicable to
the case. Frequently they number as many as fifty, sometimes many more.
It is "up to" the judge to decide "off the bat" which are right and
which are wrong. If he guesses that the right one is wrong or the wrong
one right the defendant gets a new trial.




CHAPTER III. Sensationalism and Jury Trials


For the past twenty-five years we have heard the cry upon all sides
that the jury system is a failure, and to this general indictment is
frequently added the specification that the trials in our higher
courts of criminal justice are the scenes of grotesque buffoonery and
merriment, where cynical juries recklessly disregard their oaths and
where morbid crowds flock to satisfy the cravings of their imaginations
for details of blood and sexuality.

It is unnecessary to question the honesty of those who thus picture the
administration of criminal justice in America. Indeed, thus it probably
appears to them. But before such an arraignment of present conditions
in a highly civilized and progressive nation is accepted as final, it is
well to examine into its inherent probabilities and test it by what we
know of the actual facts.

In the first place, it should be remembered that the jury was instituted
and designed to protect the English freeman from tyranny upon the part
of the crown. Judges were, and sometimes still are, the creatures of a
ruler or unduly subject to his influence. And that ruler neither was,
nor is, always the head of the nation; but just as in the days of the
Normans he might have been a powerful earl whose influence could make or
unmake a judge, so to-day he may be none the less a ruler if he exists
in the person of a political boss who has created the judge before whom
his political enemy is to be tried. The writer has seen more than one
judge openly striving to influence a jury to convict or to acquit a
prisoner at the dictation of such a boss, who, not content to issue his
commands from behind the arras, came to the courtroom and ascended
the bench to see that they were obeyed. Usually the jury indignantly
resented such interference and administered a well-merited rebuke by
acting directly contrary to the clearly indicated wishes of the judge.

But while admitting its theoretic value as a bulwark of liberty,
the modern assailant of the jury brushes the consideration aside by
asserting that the system has "broken down" and "degenerated into a
farce."

Let us now see how much of a farce it is. If four times out of five
a judge rendered decisions that met with general approval, he would
probably be accounted a highly satisfactory judge. Now, out of every
one hundred indicted prisoners brought to the bar for trial, probably
fifteen ought to be acquitted if prosecuted impartially and in
accordance with the strict rules of evidence. In the year 1910 the
juries of New York County convicted in sixty-six per cent of the cases
before them. If we are to test fairly the efficiency of the system,
we must deduct from the thirty-four acquittals remaining the fifteen
acquittals which were justifiable. By so doing we shall find that in
the year 1910 the New York County juries did the correct thing in about
eighty-one cases out of every hundred. This is a high percentage of
efficiency.* Is it likely that any judge would have done much better?


     * The following table gives the yearly percentages of
     convictions and acquittals by verdict in New York County since
     1901:

                NUMBER        NUMBER
     YEAR     CONVICTIONS   ACQUITTALS  CONVICTIONS   ACQUITTALS
               BY VERDICT   BY VERDICT   PER CENT      PER CENT

     1901........551...........344..........62............38
     1902........419...........349..........55............45
     1903........485...........307..........61............39
     1904........495...........357..........58............42
     1905........489...........299..........62............38
     1906........464...........246..........65............35
     1907........582...........264..........68............32
     1908........649...........301..........62............38
     1909........463...........235..........66............34
     1910........649...........325..........66............34


After a rather long experience as a prosecutor, in which he conducted
many hundreds of criminal cases, the writer believes that the ordinary
New York City jury finds a correct general verdict four times out of
five. As to talesmen in other localities he has no knowledge or reliable
information. It seems hardly possible, however, that juries in
other parts of the United States could be more heterogeneous or less
intelligent than those before which he formed his conclusions. Of
course, jury judgments are sometimes flagrantly wrong. But there are
many verdicts popularly regarded as examples of lawlessness which, if
examined calmly and solely from the point of view of the evidence, would
be found to be the reasonable acts of honest and intelligent juries.

For example, the acquittal of Thaw upon the ground of insanity is
usually spoken of as an illustration of sentimentality on the part of
jurymen, and of their willingness to be swayed by their emotions where
a woman is involved. But few clearer cases of insanity have been
established in a court of justice. The district attorney's own experts
had pronounced the defendant a hopeless paranoiac; the prosecutor had,
at a previous trial, openly declared the same to be his own opinion; and
the evidence was convincing. At the time it was rendered, the verdict
was accepted as a foregone conclusion. To-day the case is commonly
cited as proof of the gullibility of juries and of the impossibility of
convicting a rich man of a crime.

There will always be some persons who think that every defendant should
be convicted and feel aggrieved if he is turned out by the jury. Yet
they entirely forget, in their displeasure at the acquittal of a man
whom they instinctively "know" to be guilty, that the jury probably
had exactly the same impression, but were obliged under their oaths to
acquit because of an insufficiency of evidence.

An excellent illustration of such a case is that of Nan Patterson. She
is commonly supposed to have attended, upon the night of her acquittal,
a banquet at which one of her lawyers toasted her as "the guilty girl
who beat the case." Whether she was guilty or not, there is a general
impression that she murdered Caesar Young. Yet the writer, who was
present throughout the trial, felt at the conclusion of the case that
there was a fairly reasonable doubt of her guilt. Even so, the jury
disagreed, although the case is usually referred to as an acquittal and
a monument to the sentimentality of juries.

The acquittal of Roland B. Molineux is also recalled as a case where a
man, previously proved guilty, managed to escape. The writer, who
was then an assistant district attorney, made a careful study of the
evidence at the time, and feels confident that the great majority of the
legal profession would agree with him in the opinion that the Court of
Appeals had no choice but to reverse the defendant's first conviction on
account of the most prejudicial error committed at the trial, and that
the jury who acquitted him upon the second occasion had equally no
choice when the case was presented with a proper regard to the rules of
evidence and procedure. Indeed, on the second trial the evidence pointed
almost as convincingly toward another person as toward the defendant.

I have mentioned the Patterson, Thaw, and Molineux trials because they
are cases commonly referred to in support of the general contention
that the jury system is a failure. But I am inclined to believe that
any single judge, bench of judges, or board of commissioners would have
reached the same result as the juries did in these instances.

It is quite true that juries, for rather obvious reasons, are more apt
to acquit in murder cases than in others. In the first place, save where
the defendant obviously belongs to the vicious criminal class, a jury
finds it somewhat difficult to believe, unless overwhelming motive be
shown, that he could have deliberately taken another's life. Thus, with
sound reason, they give great weight to the plea of self-defence which
the accused urges upon them. He is generally the only witness. His story
has to be disproved by circumstantial evidence, if indeed there be any.
Frequently it stands alone as the only account of the homicide. Thus
murder cases are almost always weaker than others, since the chief
witness has been removed by death; while at the same time the nature of
the punishment leads the jury unconsciously to require a higher degree
of proof than in cases where the consequences are less abhorrent. All
this is quite natural and inevitable. Moreover, homicide cases as a rule
are better defended than others, a fact which undoubtedly affects the
result. These considerations apply to all trials for homicide, notorious
or otherwise, the results of which in New York County for ten years are
set forth in the following table:

     YEAR     CONVICTIONS   ACQUITTALS  CONVICTIONS   ACQUITTALS
                                         PER CENT      PER CENT
     1901.........25............17..........60............40
     1902.........31............11..........74............26
     1903.........42.............8..........84............16
     1904.........37............14..........72............28
     1905.........32............13..........71............29
     1906.........53............22..........70............30
     1907.........39............10..........78............22
     1908.........35............17..........67............33
     1909.........43............11..........80............20
     1910.........45............15..........75............25
     TOTAL.......382...........138......Av. 74........Av. 27


A popular impression exists at the present time that a man convicted of
murder has but to appeal his case on some technical ground in order to
secure a reversal, and thus escape the consequences of his crime. How
wide of the mark such a belief may be, at least so far as one locality
is concerned, is shown by the fact that in New York State, from 1887 to
1907, there were 169 decisions by the Court of Appeals on appeals from
convictions of murder in the first degree, out of which there were only
twenty-nine reversals. Seven of these defendants were again immediately
tried and convicted, and a second time appealed, upon which occasion
only two were successful, while five had their convictions promptly
affirmed. Thus, so far as the ultimate triumph of justice is concerned,
out of 169 cases in that period the appellants finally succeeded in
twenty-two only.

Since 1902 there have been twenty-seven decisions rendered in
first-degree murder cases by the Court of Appeals, with only three
reversals.* (* Written in 1909.) The more important convictions
throughout the State are affirmed with great regularity.

As to the conduct of such cases, the writer's own experience is that
a murder trial is the most solemn proceeding known to the law. He has
prosecuted at least fifty men for murder, and convicted more than he
cares to remember. Such trials are invariably dignified and deliberate
so far as the conduct of the legal side of the case is concerned.
No judge, however unqualified for the bench; no prosecutor, however
light-minded; no lawyer however callous, fails to feel the serious
nature of the transaction or to be affected strongly by the fact that
he is dealing with life, and death. A prosecutor who openly laughed
or sneered at a prisoner charged with murder would severely injure his
cause. The jury, naturally, are overwhelmed with the gravity of the
occasion and the responsibility resting upon them.

In the Patterson, Thaw, and Molineux cases the evidence, unfortunately,
dealt with unpleasant subjects and at times was revolting, but there was
a quiet propriety in the way in which the witnesses were examined
that rendered it as inoffensive as it could possibly be. Outside the
court-room the vulgar crowd may have spat and sworn; and inside no doubt
there were degenerate men and women who eagerly strained their ears to
catch every item of depravity. But the throngs that filled the courtroom
were quiet and well ordered, and the justified interested outnumbered
the morbid.

The writer deprecates the impulse which leads judges, from a feeling
that justice should be publicly administered, to throw wide the doors
of every courtroom, irrespective of the subject-matter of the trial. We
need have no fear of Star Chamber proceedings in America, and no harm
would be done by excluding from the courtroom all persons who have no
business there.

It is, of course, not unnatural that in the course of a trial occupying
weeks or months the tension should occasionally be relieved by a gleam
of humor. After one has been busy trying a case for a couple of weeks
one goes to court and sets to work in much the same frame of mind in
which one would attack any other business. But the fact that a small
boy sometimes sees something funny at a funeral, or a bevy of giggling
shop-girls may be sitting in the gallery at a fashionable wedding,
argues little in respect to the solemnity or beauty of the service
itself.

What are the celebrated cases--the trials that attract the attention
and interest of the public? In the first place, they are the very cases
which contain those elements most likely to arouse the sympathy and
prejudices of a jury--where a girl has taken the life of her supposed
seducer, or a husband has avenged his wife's alleged dishonor. Such
cases arouse the public imagination for the very reason that every
man realizes that there are two sides to every genuine tragedy of
this character--the legal and the natural. Thus, aside from any other
consideration, they are the obvious instances where justice is most
likely to go astray.

In the next place, the defence is usually in the hands of counsel of
adroitness and ability; for even if the prisoner has no money to pay his
lawyer, the latter is willing to take the case for the advertising he
will get out of it.

Third, a trial which lasts for a long time naturally results in creating
in the jury's mind an exaggerated idea of the prisoner's rights, namely,
the presumption of innocence and the benefit of the reasonable doubt.
For every time that the jury will hear these phrases once in a petty
larceny or forgery case, they will hear them in a lengthy murder trial
a hundred times. They see the defendant day after day, and the relation
becomes more personal. Their responsibility seems greater toward him
than toward the defendant in petty cases.

Last, as previously suggested, murder cases are apt to be inherently
weaker than others, and more often depend upon circumstantial evidence.

The results of such cases are therefore an inadequate test of the
efficiency of a jury system. They are, in fact, the precise cases where,
if at all, the jury might be expected to go wrong.

But juries would go astray far less frequently even in such trials were
it not for that most vicious factor in the administration of criminal
justice--the "yellow" journal. For the impression that public trials
are the scenes of buffoonery and brutality is due to the manner in which
these trials are exploited by the sensational papers.

The instant that a sensational homicide occurs, the aim of the editors
of these papers is--not to see that a swift and sure retribution is
visited upon the guilty, or that a prompt and unqualified vindication is
accorded to the innocent, but, on the contrary, so to handle the matter
that as many highly colored "stories" as possible can be run about it.

Thus, where the case is perfectly clear against the prisoner, the
"yellow" press seeks to bolster up the defence and really to justify
the killing by a thinly disguised appeal to the readers' passions. Not
infrequently, while the editorial page is mourning the prevalence of
homicide, the front columns are bristling with sensational accounts of
the home-coming of the injured husband, the heartbreaking confession of
the weak and erring wife, and the sneering nonchalance of the seducer,
until a public sentiment is created which, if it outwardly deprecates
the invocation of the unwritten law, secretly avows that it would have
done the same thing in the prisoner's place.

This antecedent public sentiment is fostered from day to day until it
has unconsciously permeated every corner of the community. The juryman
will swear that he is unaffected by what he has read, but unknown to
himself there are already tiny furrows in his brain along which the
appeal of the defence will run.

In view of this deliberate perversion of truth and morals, the
euphemisms of a hard-put defendant's counsel when he pictures a chorus
girl as an angel and a coarse bounder as a St. George seem innocent
indeed. It is not within the rail of the courtroom but within the pages
of these sensational journals that justice is made a farce. The phrase
"contempt of court" has ceased practically to have any significance
whatever. The front pages teem with caricatures of the judge upon the
bench, of the individual jurors with exaggerated heads upon impossible
bodies, of the lawyers ranting and bellowing, juxtaposed with sketches
of the defendant praying beside his prison cot or firing the fatal shot
in obedience to a message borne by an angel from on high.

How long would the "unwritten law" play any part in the administration
of criminal justice if every paper in the land united in demanding, not
only in its editorials, but upon its front pages, that private vengeance
must cease? Let the "yellow" newspapers confine themselves simply to
an accurate report of the evidence at the trial, with a reiterated
insistence that the law must take its course. Let them stop pandering
to those morbid tastes which they have themselves created. Let the
"Sympathy Sisters," the photographer, and the special artist be excluded
from the court-room. When these things are done, we shall have the same
high standard of efficiency upon the part of the jury in great murder
trials that we have in other cases.



CHAPTER IV. Why Do Men Kill?


When a shrewd but genial editor called me up on the telephone and asked
me how I should like to write an article on the above lurid title, I
laughed in his--I mean the telephone's face.

"My dear fellow!" I said (I should only have the nerve to call him that
over a wire). "It would ruin me! How could I keep my self-respect and
write that kind of sensational stuff--Why do men kill? Why do men eat?
Why do men drink? Why do men love? Why do men--"

"Look here!" he interrupted. "I want to know why one man kills another
man. If we knew why, maybe we could stop it, couldn't we? We could try
to, anyhow. And you know something about it. You've prosecuted nearly
a hundred men for murder. Get the facts--that's what I want. Cut
the adjectives and morality, and get down to the reasons. Anything
particularly undignified about that?" And he rang off.

I arose and walked over to the bookcase on which reposed several
shelves of "minutes" of criminal trials. They were dusty and depressing.
Practically every one of them was a memento of some poor devil gone to
prison or to the chair. Where were they now--and why did they kill--yes,
why DID they?

I glanced along the red-labeled backs.

"People versus Candido." Now why did HE kill? I remembered the Italian
perfectly. He killed his friend because the latter had been too
attentive to his wife. "People versus Higgins." Why did he? That was
a drunken row on a New Year's Eve within the sound of Trinity chimes.
"People versus Sterling Greene." Yes, he was a colored man--I recalled
the evidence--drink and a "yellow gal." "People versus Mock Duck"-a
Chinese feud between the On Leong Tong and the Hip Sing Tong--a
vendetta, first one Chink shot and then another, turn and turn about,
running back through Mott Street, New York, Boston, San Francisco, until
the origin of the quarrel was lost in the dim Celestial mists across
the sea. Out of the first four cases the following motives: Jealousy--1.
Drink--1. Drink and jealousy--1. Scattering (how can you term a "Tong"
row?)--1.

I began to get interested. Supposing I dug out all the homicide cases I
had ever tried, what would the result show as to motive for the killing?
Would drink and women account for seventy-five per cent? Mentally I ran
my eye back over nearly ten years. What OTHER motives had the defendants
at the bar had? There was Laudiero--an Italian "Camorrista"--he had
killed simply for the distinction it gave him among his countrymen
and the satisfaction he felt at being known as a "bad" man--a "capo
maestra." There was Joseph Ferrone--pure jealousy again. Hendry--animal
hate intensified by drink. Yoscow--a deliberate murder, planned in
advance by several of a gang, to get rid of a young bully who had made
himself generally unpleasant. There was Childs, who had killed, as he
claimed, in self-defence because he was set upon and assaulted by rival
runners from another seaman's boarding house. Really it began to look as
if men killed for a lot of reasons.

One consideration at once suggested itself. How about the killings where
the murderer is never caught? The prisoners tried for murder are only a
mere fraction of those who commit murder. True, and the more deliberate
the murder, the greater, unfortunately, the chance of the villain
getting away. Still, in cases merely of suspected murder, or in cases
where no evidence is taken, it would be manifestly unfair arbitrarily to
assign motives for the deed, if deed it was. No, one must start with the
assumption, sufficiently accurate under all the circumstances, that
the killings in which the killer is caught are fairly representative of
killings as a whole.

All crimes naturally tend to divide themselves into two classes--crimes
against property and crimes against the person, each class having an
entirely different assortment of reasons for their commission.

There can be practically but one motive for theft, burglary, or robbery.
It is, of course, conceivable that such crimes might be perpetrated for
revenge--to deprive the victim of some highly prized possession. But in
the main there is only one object--unlawful gain. So, too, blackmail,
extortion, and kidnapping are all the products of the desire for
"easy money." But, unquestionably, this is the reason for murder in
comparatively few cases.

The usual motive for crimes against the person--assault, manslaughter,
mayhem, murder, etc.--is the desire to punish, or be avenged upon
another by inflicting personal pain upon him or by depriving him of his
most valuable asset--life. And this desire for retaliation or revenge
generally grows out of a recent humiliation received at the hands of
the other person, a real or fancied wrong to oneself, a member of
one's family, or one's property. But this was too easy an answer to my
friend's question. He wanted and deserved more than that, and I set out
to give it to him.

My first inquiry was in the direction of original sources. I sought out
the man in the district attorney's office who had had the widest general
experience and put the question to him. This was Mr. Charles C. Nott,
Jr., (now judge of the General Sessions) who had been trying murder
cases for nearly ten years. It so happened that he had kept a complete
record of all of them and this he courteously placed at my disposal. The
list contains sixty-two cases, and the defendants were of divers races.
These homicides included seventeen committed in cold blood (about
twenty-five per cent, an extraordinary percentage) from varying motives,
as follows: One defendant (white) murdered his colored mistress simply
to get rid of her; another killed out of revenge because the deceased
had "licked" him several times before; another, having quarrelled
with his friend over a glass of soda water, later on returned and
precipitated a quarrel by striking him, in the course of which he killed
him; another because the deceased had induced his wife to desert him;
another lay in wait for his victim and killed him without the motive
ever being ascertained; one man killed his brother to get a sum of
money, and another because his brother would not give him money; another
because he believed the deceased had betrayed the Armenian cause to the
Turks; another because he wished to get the deceased out of the way in
order to marry his wife; and another because deceased had knocked him
down the day before. One man had killed a girl who had ridiculed him;
and one a girl who had refused to marry him; another had killed his
daughter because she could no longer live in the house with him; one, an
informer, had been the victim of a Black Hand vendetta; and the last
had poisoned his wife for the insurance money in order to go off with
another woman. There were two cases of infanticide, one in which a woman
threw her baby into the lake in Central Park, and another in which she
gave her baby poison. Besides these murders, five homicides had been
committed in the course of perpetrating other crimes, including burglary
and robbery.

Passing over three cases of culpable negligence resulting in death, we
come to thirty-seven homicides during quarrels, some of which might have
been technically classified as murders, but which being committed
"in the heat of passion," in practically every instance resulted in a
verdict of manslaughter. The quarrels often arose over the most trifling
matters. One was a dispute over a broom, another over a horse blanket,
another over food, another over a twenty-five cent bet in a pool game,
another over a loan of fifty cents, another over ten cents in a crap
game, and still another over one dollar and thirty cents in a crap game.
Five men were killed in drunken rows which had no immediate cause except
the desire to "start something." One man killed another because he had
not prevented the theft of some lumber, one (a policeman) because the
deceased would not "move on" when ordered, one because a bartender
refused to serve him with any more drinks, and one (a bartender) because
the deceased insisted that he should serve more drinks. One man was
killed in a quarrel over politics, one in a fuss over some beer, one in
a card game, one trying to rob a fruit-stand, one in a dispute with a
ship's officer, one in a dance hall row. One man killed another whom
he found with his wife, and one wife killed her husband for a similar
cause; another wife killed her husband simply because she "could not
stand him," and one because he was fighting with their son. One man
was killed by another who was trying to collect from him a debt of six
hundred dollars. One quarrel resulting in homicide arose because the
defendant had pointed out deceased to the police, another because
the participants called each other names, and another arose out of an
alleged seduction. Three homicides grew out of street rows originating
in various ways. One man killed another who was fighting with a friend
of the first, a janitor was killed in a "continuous row" which had been
going on for a long time, and one homicide was committed for "nothing in
particular."

This astonishing olla podrida of reasons for depriving men of their
lives leaves one stunned and confused. Is it possible to deduce any
order out of such homicidal chaos? Still, an attempt to classify such
diverse causes enables one to reach certain general conclusions. Out of
the sixty-two homicides there were seventeen cold-blooded murders,
with deliberation and premeditation (in such cases the reasons for
the killing are by comparison unimportant); three homicides due to
negligence, five committed while perpetrating a felony; thirty-seven
manslaughters, due in sixteen cases to quarrels (simply), thirteen
to drink, four to disputes over money, three to women, one to race
antagonism.

Reclassifying the seventeen murders according to causes, we have:
Six due to women, four to quarrels, five to other causes, and two
infanticides. Added to the manslaughters previously classified, we have
a total of sixty-two killings, due in twenty cases to quarrels, thirteen
to drink, nine to women, four to disputes over money, one to
race antagonism, five to general causes, three to negligence, two
infanticides, five during the commission of other crimes.

The significant features of this analysis are that about seventy-five
per cent of the killings were due to quarrels over small sums or
other matters, drink and women; over fifty per cent to drink and petty
quarrels; and about thirty per cent to quarrels simply. The trifling
character of the causes of the quarrels themselves is shown by the fact
that in three of these particular cases, tried in a single week, the
total amount involved in the disputes was only eighty-five cents. That
is about twenty-eight and one-half cents a life. Many a murder in a
barroom grows out of an argument over whether a glass of beer has, or
has not, been paid for, or whose turn it is to treat; and more than one
man has been killed in New York City because he was too clumsy to avoid
stepping on somebody's feet or bumping into another man on the sidewalk.

The writer sincerely regrets that his own lack of initiative prevented
his keeping a diary during his seven years's service as a prosecutor. It
is now impossible for him to refresh his memory as to the causes of all
the various homicides which he prosecuted, but where he can do so the
evidence points to a conclusion similar to that deduced from Mr. Nott's
record. The proximate causes were trifling--the underlying cause was
the lack of civilization of the defendant--his brutality and absence of
self-control.

With a view to ascertaining conditions in general throughout the United
States, I asked a clipping agency to send me the first one hundred
notices of actual homicides which should come under its scissors. The
immediate result of this experiment was that I received forty-five
notices supposedly relating to murders and homicides, which on closer
examination proved to be anything but what I wanted for the purpose in
view. With only one or two exceptions they related not to deaths from
violence reported as having occurred on any particular day, but to
notices of convictions, acquittals, indictments, pleas of guilty and
not guilty, rewards offered, sentences, executions, "suspicions" of the
police, "mysteries revived," and even editorials on capital punishment.

A letter of protest brought in due course, but much more slowly, one
hundred and seven clippings, which yielded the following reasons why
men killed: There were four suicides, three lynchings, one infanticide,
three murders while resisting arrest, three criminals killed while
resisting arrest, two men killed in riots, eight murders in the
course of committing burglaries and robberies, seven persons killed in
vendettas, three grace murders, and twenty-four killed in quarrels over
petty causes; there were twelve murders from jealousy, followed in
four instances by suicide on the part of the murderer; six killings
justifiable on the "higher law" theory only, but involving great
provocation, and thirty deliberate slaughters. The last clipping
recounted how an irate husband pounded a "masher" so hard that he died.
Leaving out the suicides and those killed while resisting arrest, there
remain one hundred persons murdered, not only by persons insane or
wild from the effects of liquor, but by robbers and burglars, brutes,
bullies, and thugs, husbands, wives, and lovers, and by a vast number of
people who not only destroyed their enemies in the fury of anger, but in
many instances openly went out gunning for them, lay in wait for them in
the dark, or hacked off their heads with hatchets while they slept.

It is, indeed, a sanguinary record, from which little consolation is to
be derived, and the only comfort is the probability that the accounts
of the first one hundred murders anywhere in Europe would undoubtedly be
just as blood-curdling. I had simply asked the clipping bureau to
send me one hundred horrors and I had got them. They did not indicate
anything at all so far as the ratio of homicide to population was
concerned or as to the bloodthirstiness of Americans in general. They
merely showed what despicable things murders were.

As to the reasons for the killings, they were as diverse as those
which Mr. Nott had prosecuted, save that there were more of an ultra
blood-thirsty character, due probably to the fact that the young lady
who did the clipping wanted (after one rebuff) to make sure that I was
satisfied with the goods she sent me. And this suggests a reason for
the large percentage of cold-blooded killings prosecuted by my
friend--namely, that Mr. Nott being the most astute prosecutor
available, the district attorney, whenever the latter had a particularly
atrocious case, sent it to him in order that the defendant might surely
get his full deserts.

The reasons for these homicides were of every sort; police officers and
citizens were shot and killed by criminals trying to make "get-aways,"
and by negroes and others "running amuck"; despondent young men shot
their unresponsive sweethearts and then either blew out their own brains
of pretended to try to do so; two stable-men had a duel with revolvers,
and each killed the other; several men were shot for being too attentive
to young women residing in the same hotels; an Italian, whose wife had
left him and gone to her mother, went to the house and killed her,
her sister, her sister's husband, his mother-in-law, two children, and
finally himself; the "Gopher Gang" started a riot at a "benefit" dance
given to a widow and killed a man, after which they fled to the woods
and fired from cover upon the police until eighteen were overpowered and
arrested; a young girl and her fiance, sitting in the parlor, planning
their honeymoon, were unexpectedly interrupted by a rejected suitor of
the girl's, who shot and killed both of them; an Italian who peeked into
a bedroom, just for fun, afterward rushed in and cut off two persons'
heads with an ax--one of them was his wife; a gang of white ruffians
shot and then burned a negro family of three peacefully working in the
fields; a man who went to the front door to see who had tapped on
his window was shot through the heart; a striker was killed by a
twenty-five-pound piece of flagging thrown from a roof; there was a gun
fight of colored men at Madison, Wisconsin, at which three were shot; a
gang of negro ruffians killed and mutilated a white woman (with a baby
in her arms) and her husband; masked robbers called a man to his barn at
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and cut his throat; an Italian was
found with his head split in two by a butcher's cleaver; a negress in
Lafayette, Louisiana, killed a family of six with a hatchet; a negro
farmer and his two daughters were lynched and their bodies burned by
four white men (who will probably also be lynched if caught); a girl
of eleven shot her girl friend of about the same age and killed her;
several persons were found stabbed to death; a plumber killed his
brother (also a plumber) for saying that he stole two dollars; a
murderer was shot by a posse of militia in a cornfield; a card game at
Bayonne, New Jersey, resulted in a revolver fight on the street in which
one of the players was killed; bank robbers killed a cashier at twelve
o'clock noon; a jealous lover in Butte, Montana, shot and killed his
sweetheart, her father, and mother; a deputy sheriff was murdered;
burglars killed several persons in the course of their business;
Kokolosski, a Pole, kicked his child to death; and a couple of dozen
people were incidentally shot, stabbed, or otherwise disposed of in the
course of quarrels over the most trivial matters. In almost no case was
there what an intelligent, civilized man would regard as an adequate
reason for the homicide. They killed because they felt like killing, and
yielded to the impulse, whatever its immediate origin.

This conclusion is abundantly supported by the figures of the 'Chicago
Tribune' for the seven years ending in 1900, when carefully analyzed.
During this period 62,812 homicides were recorded. Of these there were
17,120 of which the causes were unknown and 3,204 committed while making
a justifiable arrest, in self-defence, or by the insane, so that there
were in fact only 42,488 felonious homicides the causes of which can
be definitely alleged. The ratio of the "quarrels" to this net total is
about seventy-five per cent. There were, in addition, 2,848 homicides
due to liquor--that is, without cause. Thus eighty per cent of all the
murders and manslaughters in the United States for a period of seven
years were for no reason at all or from mere anger or habit, arising out
of causes often of the most trifling character.

Nor are the conclusions changed by the figures of the years between 1904
and 1909.

During this period 61,786 homicides were recorded. Of these there were
9,302 of which the causes were not known, and 2,480 committed while
making a justifiable arrest, in self-defence, or by the insane, leaving
50,004 cases of felonious homicides of known causes. Of these homicides,
33,476 were due to quarrels and 4,799 to liquor, a total of 38,275 out
of the 50,004 cases of known causes being traceable in this, another
seven years, to motives the most casual.

It would be stupid to allege that the reason men killed was because they
had been stepped on or had been deprived of a glass of beer. The cause
lies deeper than that. It rests in the willingness or desire of the
murderer to kill at all. Among barbaric or savage peoples this is
natural; but among civilized nations it is hardly to be anticipated. If
the negro who shoots his fellow because he believes himself to have been
cheated out of ten cents were really civilized, he would either not
have the impulse to kill or, having the impulse to kill, would have
sufficient power of self-control to refrain from doing so. This power
of self-control may be natural or acquired, and it may or may not be
possessed by the man who feels a desire to commit a homicide. The fact
to be observed--the interesting and, broadly speaking, the astonishing
fact--is that among a people like ourselves anybody should have a desire
to kill. It is even more astonishing than that the impulse should be
yielded to so often if it comes.

This, then, is the real reason why men kill--because it is inherent
in their state of mind, it is part of their mental and physical
make-up--they are ready to kill, they want to kill, they are the kind
of men who do kill. This is the result of their heredity, environment,
educational and religious training, or the absence of it. How many
readers of this paper have ever experienced an actual desire to kill
another human being? Probably not one hundredth of one per cent. They
belong to the class of people who either never have such an impulse, or
at any rate have been taught to keep such impulses under control. Hence
it is futile to try to explain that some men kill for a trifling sum of
money, some because they feel insulted, others because of political or
labor disputes, or because they do not like their food. Any one of these
may be the match that sets off the gunpowder, but the real cause of the
killing is the fact that the gunpowder is there, lying around loose,
and ready to be touched off. What engenders this gunpowder state of
mind would make a valuable sociological study, but it may well be that a
seemingly inconsequential fact may so embitter a boy or man toward life
or the human race in general that in time he "sees red" and goes through
the world looking for trouble. Any cause that makes for crime and
depravity makes for murder as well. The little boy who is driven out of
the tenement onto the street, and in turn off the street by a policeman,
until, finding no wholesome place to play, he joins a "gang" and begins
an incipient career of crime, may end in the "death house."

The table on the opposite page gives the figures collected by the
'Chicago Tribune' for the years from 1881 to 1910.

In view of the foregoing it may seem paradoxical for the writer to state
that he questions the alleged unusual tendency to commit murder on the
part of citizens of the United States. Yet of one fact he is absolutely
convinced--namely, that homicide has substantially decreased in the last
fifteen years. Even according to the figures collected by the 'Chicago
Tribune', there were but 8,975 homicides in 1910 as compared with 10,500
in 1895, and 10,652 in 1896. Meantime the population of our country has
been leaping onward.


     NUMBER OF MURDERS AND HOMICIDES IN THE UNITED STATES EACH
     YEAR SINCE 1891, COMPARED WITH THE POPULATION

              NUMBER OF                          NUMBER OF
              MURDERS AND     ESTIMATED          MURDERS AND
     YEAR     HOMICIDES IN    POPULATION         HOMICIDES
              THE UNITED      OF THE             FOR EACH
              STATES          UNITED STATES      MILLION OF
                                                 PEOPLE

     1881......1,266..........51,316,000..........24.7

     1882......1.467..........----------..........27.9

     1883......1,697..........----------..........31.6

     1884......1,465..........----------..........26.7

     1885......1,808..........56,148,000..........32.2

     1886......1,499..........----------..........26.1

     1887......2,335..........----------..........39.8

     1888......2,184..........---------...........36.4

     1889......3,567..........---------...........58.0

     1890......4,290.........62,622,250...........68.5

     1891......5,906..........---------...........92.4

     1892......6,791..........---------..........104.2

     1893......6,615..........---------..........99.5

     1894......9,800..........---------.........144.7

     1895.....10,500.........69,043,000.........152.2

     1896.....10,652..........---------.........151.3

     1897......9,520..........---------.........132.8

     1898......7,840..........---------.........107.2

     1899......6,225..........---------..........83.6

     1900......8,275.........75,994,575.........108.7

     1901......7,852.........77,754,000.........100.9

     1902......8,834.........79,117,000.........111.7

     1903......8,976..........---------.........112.0

     1904......8,482..........---------...............

     1905......9,212..........---------...............

     1906......9,350.........---------................

     1907......8,712..........---------...............

     1908......8,952..........---------...............

     1909......8,103..........---------...............

     1910......8,975.........91,972,266...........97.5

     Total......191,150


We are blood-thirsty enough, God knows, without making things out any
worse than they are. Our murder rate per 100,000 unquestionably exceeds
that of most of the countries of western Europe, but, as the saying is,
"there's a reason." If our homicide statistics related only to the white
population of even the second generation born in this country we should
find, I am convinced, that we are no more homicidal than France and
Belgium, and less so than Italy. It is to be expected that with our
Chinese, "greaser," and half-breed population in the West, our Black
Belt in the South, and our Sicilian and South Italian immigration in the
North and East, our murder rate should exceed those of the continental
nations, which are nothing if not well policed.

But of one thing we can be abundantly certain without any figures at
all, and that is that our present method of administering justice
(less the actions of juries than of judges)--the system taken as a
whole--offers no deterrent to the embryonic or professional criminal.
The administration of justice to-day is not the swift judgment of honest
men upon a criminal act, but a clever game between judge and lawyer, in
which the action of the jury is discounted entirely and the moves are
made with a view to checkmating justice, not in the trial courtroom, but
before the appellate tribunal two or three years later.

"My young feller," said a grizzled veteran of the criminal bar to me
long years ago, after our jury had gone out, "there's lots of things in
this game you ain't got on to yet. Do you think I care what this jury
does? Not one mite. I got a nice little error into the case the very
first day--and I've set back ever since. S'pose we are convicted? I'll
get Jim here [the prisoner] out on a certificate and it'll be two years
before the Court of Appeals will get around to the case. Meantime
Jim'll be out makin' money to pay me my fee--won't you, Jim? Then your
witnesses, will be gone, and nobody'll remember what on earth it's all
about. You'll be down in Wall Street practicing real law yourself, and
the indictment will kick around the office for a year or so, all covered
with dust, and then some day I'll get a friend of mine to come in
quietly and move to dismiss. And it'll be dismissed. Don't you worry!
Why, a thousand other murders will have been committed in this county by
the time that happens. Bless your soul! You can't go on tryin' the same
man forever! Give the other fellers a chance. You shake your head? Well,
it's a fact. I've been doin' it for forty years. You'll see." And I
did. That may not be why men kill, but perhaps indirectly it may have
something to do with it.




CHAPTER V. Detectives and Others


A Detective, according to the dictionaries, is one "whose occupation it
is to discover matters as to which information is desired, particularly
wrong-doers, and to obtain evidence to be used against them." A private
detective, by the same authority, is one "engaged unofficially in
obtaining secret information for or guarding the private interests of
those who employ him." The definition emphasizes the official character
of detectives in general as contrasted with those whose services may be
enlisted for hire by the individual citizen, but the distinction is of
little importance, since it is based arbitrarily upon the character of
the employer (whether the State or a private client) instead of upon the
nature of the employment itself, which is the only thing which is likely
to interest us about detectives at all.

The sanctified tradition that a detective was an agile person with a
variety of side-whiskers no longer obtains even in light literature, and
the most imaginative of us is frankly aware of the fact that a detective
is just a common man earning (or pretending to earn) a common living by
common and obvious means. Yet in spite of ourselves we are accustomed
to attribute superhuman acuteness and a lightning-like rapidity of
intellect to this vague and romantic class of fellow-citizens. The
ordinary work of a detective, however, requires neither of these
qualities. Honesty and obedience are his chief requirements, and if he
have intelligence as well, so much the better, provided it be of the
variety known as "horse" sense. A genuine candidate for the job of
Sherlock Holmes would find little competition. In the first place, the
usual work of a detective does not demand any extraordinary powers of
deduction at all.

Leaving out of consideration those who are merely private policemen
(often in uniform), and principally engaged in patrolling residential
streets, preserving order at fairs, race-tracks, and political meetings,
or in breaking strikes and preventing riots, the largest part of the
work for which detectives are employed is not in the detection of
crime and criminals, but in simply watching people, following them, and
reporting as accurately as possible their movements. These functions are
known in the vernacular as spotting, locating, and trailing. It
requires patience, some powers of observation, and occasionally a little
ingenuity. The real detective under such circumstances is the man to
whom they hand in their reports. Yet much of the most dramatic and
valuable work that is done involves no acuteness at all, but simply a
willingness to act as a spy and to brave the dangers of being found out.

There is nothing more thrilling in the pages of modern history than the
story of the man (James McPartland) who uncovered the conspiracies of
the Molly McGuires. But the work of this man was that of a spy pure and
simple.

Another highly specialized class of detectives is that engaged in police
and banking work, who by experience (or even origin) have a wide and
intimate acquaintance with criminals of various sorts, and by their
familiarity with the latters' whereabouts, associates, work, and methods
are able to recognize and run down the perpetrators of particular
crimes.

Thus, for example, there are men in the detective bureau of New York
City who know by name, and perhaps have a speaking acquaintance with,
a large number of the pick-pockets and burglars of the East Side. They
know their haunts and their ties of friendship or marriage. When any
particular job is pulled off they have a pretty shrewd idea of who is
responsible for it and lay their plans accordingly. If necessary,
they run in the whole gang and put each of them through a course of
interrogation, accusation, and browbeating until some one breaks down
or makes a slip that involves him in a tangle. These men are special
policemen whose knowledge makes them detectives by courtesy. But
their work does not involve any particular superiority or quickness of
intellect--the quality which we are wont to associate with the detection
of crime.

Now, if the ordinary householder finds that his wife's necklace has
mysteriously disappeared, his first impulse is to send for a detective
of some sort or other. In general, he might just as well send for his
mother-in-law. Of course, the police can and will watch the pawnshops
for the missing baubles, but no crook who is not a fool is going to
pawn a whole necklace on the Bowery the very next day after it has been
"lifted." Or he can enlist a private detective who will question the
servants and perhaps go through their trunks, if they will let him.
Either sort will probably line up the inmates of the house for general
scrutiny and try to bully them separately into a confession. This may
save the master a disagreeable experience, but it is the simplest sort
of police work and is done vicariously for the taxpayer, just as the
public garbage man relieves you from the burden of taking out the
ashes yourself, because he is paid for it, not on account of your own
incapacity or his superiority.

The real detective is the one who, taking up the solution of a crime or
other mystery, brings to bear upon it unusual powers of observation
and deduction and an exceptional resourcefulness in acting upon his
conclusions. Frankly, I have known very few such, although for some ten
years I have made use of a large number of so-called detectives in both
public and private matters. As I recall the long line of cases where
these men have rendered service of great value, almost every one
resolves itself into a successful piece of mere spying or trailing.
Little ingenuity or powers of reason were required. Of course, there
are a thousand tricks that an experienced man acquires as a matter of
course, but which at first sight seem almost like inspiration. I shall
not forget my delight when Jesse Blocher, who had been trailing Charles
Foster Dodge through the South (when the latter was wanted as the chief
witness against Abe Hummel on the charge of subornation of perjury of
which he was finally convicted), told me how he instantly located his
man, without disclosing his own identity, by unostentatiously leaving a
note addressed to Dodge in a bright-red envelope upon the office counter
of the Hotel St. Charles in New Orleans, where he knew his quarry to be
staying. A few moments later the clerk saw it, picked it up, and, as
a matter of course, thrust it promptly into box No. 420, thus
involuntarily hanging, as it were, a red lantern on Dodge's door.

There is no more reason to look for superiority of intelligence or
mental alertness among detectives of the ordinary class than there is to
expect it from clerks, stationary engineers, plumbers, or firemen. While
comparisons are invidious, I should be inclined to say that the ordinary
chauffeur was probably a brighter man than the average detective. This
is not to be taken in derogation of the latter, but as a compliment to
the former. There are a great many detectives of ambiguous training. I
remember in one case discovering that of the more important detectives
employed by a well-known private Anti-Criminal Society in New York, one
had been a street vender of frankfurters (otherwise yclept "hot dogs"),
and another the keeper of a bird store, which last perhaps qualified him
for the pursuit and capture of human game. There is a popular fiction
that lawyers are shrewd and capable, similar to the prevailing one
that detectives are astute and cunning. But, as the head of one of
the biggest agencies in the country remarked to me the other day, when
discussing the desirability of retaining local counsel in a distant
city: "You know how hard it is to find a lawyer that isn't a dead one."
I feel confident that he did not mean this in the sense that there was
no good lawyer except a dead lawyer. What my detective friend probably
had in mind was that it was difficult to find a lawyer who brought to
bear on a new problem any originality of thought or action. It is even
harder to find a detective who is not in this sense a dead one. I have
the feeling, being a lawyer myself, that it is harder to find a live
detective than a live lawyer. There are a few of both, however, if you
know where to look for them. But it is easy to fall into the hands of
the Philistines.

The fundamental reason why it is so hard to form any just opinion of
detectives in general is that (except by their fruits) there is little
opportunity to discriminate between the able and the incapable. Now, the
more difficult and complicated his task the less likely is the sleuth
(honest or otherwise) to succeed. The chances are a good deal more than
even that he will never solve the mystery for which he is engaged.
Thus at the end of three months you will have only his reports and his
bill--which are poor comfort, to say the least. And yet he may have
really worked eighteen hours a day in your service. But a dishonest
detective has only to disappear (and take his ease for the same period)
and send you his reports and his bill--and you will have only his word
for how much work he has done and how much money he has spent. You are
absolutely in his power--unless you hire another detective to watch
HIM. Consequently there is no class in the world where the temptation to
dishonesty is greater than among detectives. This, too, is, I fancy,
the reason that the evidence of the police detective is received with so
much suspicion by jurymen--they know that the only way for him to retain
his position is by making a record and getting convictions, and hence
they are always looking for jobs and frame-ups. If a police detective
doesn't make arrests and send a man to jail every once in a while there
is no conclusive way for his superiors to be sure he isn't loafing.

There are a very large number of persons who go into the detective
business for the same reason that others enter the ministry--they can't
make a living at anything else, Provided he has squint eyes and a dark
complexion, almost anybody feels that he is qualified to unravel the
tangled threads of crime. The first resource of the superannuated or
discharged police detective is to start an agency. Of course, he may be
first class in spite of these disqualifications, but the presumption in
the first instance is that he is no longer alert or effective, and
in the second that in one way or another he is not honest. Agencies
recruited from deposed and other ex-policemen usually have all the
faults of the police without any of their virtues. There are many small
agencies which do reliable work, and there are a number of private
detectives in all the big cities who work single-handed and achieve
excellent results. However, if he expects to accomplish anything by
hiring detectives, the layman or lawyer must first make sure of his
agency or his man.

One other feature of the detective business should not be overlooked. In
addition to charging for services not actually rendered and expenses not
actually incurred, there is in many cases a strong temptation to betray
the interests of the employer. A private detective may, and usually
does, become possessed of information even more valuable to the person
who is being watched than to the person to whom he owes his allegiance.
Unreliable rascals constantly sell out to the other side and play
both ends against the middle. In this they resemble some of the famous
diplomatic agents of history. And police detectives employed to run down
criminals and protect society have been known instead to act as stalls
for bank burglars and (for a consideration) to assist them to dispose of
their booty and protect them from arrest and capture. It has repeatedly
happened that reliable private detectives have discovered that the
police employed upon the same case have in reality been tipping off
the criminals as to what was being done and coaching them as to their
conduct. Of course the natural jealousy existing between official and
unofficial agents of the law leads to many unfounded accusations of
this character, but, on the other hand, the fact that much of the most
effective police work is done by employing professional criminals to
secure information and act as stool-pigeons often results in a definite
understanding that the latter shall be themselves protected in the quiet
enjoyment of their labors. The relations of the regular police to crime,
however, and the general subject of police graft have little place in a
chapter of this character.

The first question that usually arises is whether a detective shall or
shall not be employed at all in any particular case. Usually the most
important thing is to find out what the real character, past, and
associations of some particular individual may be. Well-established
detective agencies with offices throughout the country are naturally in
a better position to acquire such information quickly than the private
individual or lawyer, since they are on the spot and have an organized
staff containing the right sort of men for the work. If the information
lies in your own city you can probably hire some one to get it or ferret
it out yourself quite as well, and much more cheaply, than by employing
their services. The leads are few and generally simple. The subject's
past employers and business associates, his landlords and landladies,
his friends and enemies, and his milkman must be run down and
interrogated. Perhaps his personal movements must be watched. Any
intelligent fellow who is out of a job will do this for you for about $5
a day and expenses. The agencies usually charge from $6 to $8 (and up),
and prefer two men to one, as a matter of convenience and to make sure
that the subject is fully covered. If the suspect is on the move and
trains or steamships must be met, you have practically no choice but to
employ a national agency. It alone has the proper plant and equipment
for the work. In an emergency, organization counts more than anything
else. Where time is of the essence, the individual has no opportunity to
hire his own men or start an organization of his own. But if the matter
is one where there is plenty of leisure to act, you can usually do your
own detective work better and cheaper than any one else.

Regarding the work of the detective as a spy (which probably constitutes
seventy-five per cent of his employment to-day), few persons realize
how widely such services are being utilized. The insignificant old
Irishwoman who stumbles against you in the department store is
possibly watching with her cloudy but eagle eye for shoplifters. The
tired-looking man on the street-car may, in fact, be a professional
"spotter." The stout youth with the pince nez who is examining the
wedding presents is perhaps a central-office man. All this you know or
may suspect. But you are not so likely to be aware that the floor-walker
himself is the agent of a rival concern placed in the department store
to keep track, not only of prices but of whether or not the wholesalers
are living up to their agreements in regard to the furnishing of
particular kinds of goods only to one house; or that the conductor on
the car is a paid detective of the company, whose principal duty is not
to collect fares, but to report the doings of the unions; or that the
gentleman who is accidentally introduced to you at the wedding breakfast
is employed by a board of directors to get a line on your host's
business associates and social companions.

In the great struggle between capital and labor, each side has
expended large sums of money in employing confederates to secure secret
information as to the plans and doings of the enemy. Almost every labor
union has its Judas, and less often a secretary to a capitalist is
in the secret employment of a labor union. The railroads must be kept
informed of what is going on, and, if necessary, they import a man from
another part of the country to join the local organization. Often such
men, on account of their force and intelligence, are elected to high
office in the brotherhoods whose secrets they are hired to betray.
Practically every big manufacturing plant in the United States has
on its payrolls men acting as engineers, foremen, or laborers who are
drawing from $80 to $100 per month as detectives either (1) to keep
their employers informed as to the workings of the labor unions, (2)
to report to the directors the actual conduct of the business by its
salaried officers, superintendents, and overseers, or (3) to ascertain
and report to outside competing concerns the methods and processes made
use of, the materials utilized, and the exact cost of production.

There are detectives among the chambermaids and bellboys in the hotels,
and also among the guests; there are detectives on the passenger lists
and in the cardrooms of the Atlantic liners; the colored porter on
the private car, the butler at your friend's house, the chorus girl on
Broadway, the clerk in the law office, the employee in the commercial
agency, may all be drawing pay in the interest of some one else, who may
be either a transportation company, a stock-broker, a rival financier,
a yellow newspaper, an injured or even an erring wife, a grievance
committee, or a competing concern; and the duties of these persons
may and will range from the theft of mailing lists, books, papers,
and private letters, up to genuine detective work requiring some real
ability.

Detective work of the sort which involves the betrayal of confidences
and friendships naturally excites our aversion--yet in many cases the
end undoubtedly justifies the means employed, and often there is no
other way to avert disaster and prevent fiendish crimes. Sometimes, on
the other hand, the information sought is purely for mercenary or even
less worthy reasons, and those engaged in these undertakings range from
rascals of the lowest type to men who are ready to risk death for the
cause which they represent and who are really heroes of a high order.
One of the latter with whom I happened to be thrown professionally was a
young fellow of about twenty named Guthrie.

It was during a great strike, and outrages were being committed all over
the city of New York by dynamiters supposed to be in the employ of
the unions. Young Guthrie, who was a reckless daredevil, offered his
services to the employers, and agreed to join one of the local unions
and try to find out who were the men blowing up office buildings in
process of construction and otherwise terrorizing the inhabitants of the
city. Accordingly he applied for membership in the organization, and by
giving evidence of his courage and fiber managed to secure a place as a
volunteer in the dynamiting squad. So cleverly did he pass himself off
as a bitter enemy of capital that he was entrusted with secrets of
the utmost value and took part in making the plans and procuring the
dynamite to execute them. The quality of his nerve (as well as his
foolhardiness) is shown by the fact that he once carried a dress-suit
case full of the explosive around the city, jumping on and off street
cars, and dodging vehicles. When the proper moment came and the dynamite
had been placed in an uncompleted building on Twenty-second Street,
Guthrie gave the signal and the police arrested the dynamiters--all of
them, including Guthrie, who was placed with the rest in a cell in
the Tombs and continued to report to the district attorney all the
information which he thus secured from his unsuspecting associates.
Indeed, it was hard to convince the authorities that Guthrie was a spy
and not a mere accomplice who had turned State's evidence, a distinction
of far-reaching legal significance so far as his evidence was concerned.

The final episode in the drama was the unearthing by the police of
Hoboken of the secret cache of the dynamiters, containing a large
quantity of the explosive. Guthrie's instructions as to how they should
find it read like a page from Poe's "Gold Bug." You had to go at night
to a place where a lonely road crossed the Erie Railroad tracks in the
Hackensack meadows, and mark the spot where the shadow of a telegraph
pole (cast by an arc light) fell on a stone wall. This you must climb
and walk so many paces north, turn and go so many feet west, and then
north again. You then came to a white stone, from which you laid your
course through more latitude and longitude until you were right over the
spot. The police of Hoboken did as directed, and after tacking round and
round the field, found the dynamite. Of course, the union said the whole
thing was a plant, and that Guthrie had put the dynamite in the field
himself at the instigation of his employers, but before the case came to
trial both dynamiters pleaded guilty and went to Sing Sing. One of them
turned out to be an ex-convict, a burglar. I often wonder where Guthrie
is now. He certainly cared little for his life. Perhaps he is down in
Venezuela or Mexico. He could never be aught than a soldier of fortune.
But for a long time the employers thought that Guthrie was a detective
sent by the unions to compromise THEM in the very dynamiting they were
trying to stop!

I once had a particularly dangerous and unfortunate case where a private
client was being blackmailed by a half-crazy ruffian who had never seen
him, but had selected him arbitrarily as a person likely to give
up money. The blackmailer was a German Socialist, who was out of
employment--a man of desperate character. He had made up his mind that
the world owed him a living, and he had decided that the easiest way
to get it was to make some more prosperous person give him a thousand
dollars under threat of being exposed as an enemy of society.

The charge was so absurd as to be almost ludicrous, but had my client
caused the blackmailer's arrest the matter would have been the subject
of endless newspaper notoriety and comment. It was therefore thought
wise to make use of other means, and I procured the assistance of
a young German-American of my acquaintance, who, in the guise of
a vaudeville artist seeking a job, went to the blackmailer's
boarding-house and pretended to be looking for an actor friend with a
name not unlike that of the criminal.

After two or three visits he managed to scrape an acquaintance with the
blackmailer and thereafter spent much time with him. Both were out of
work, both were German, and both liked beer. My friend had just enough
money to satisfy this latter craving. In a month or so they were
intimate friends and used to go fishing together down the bay. At last,
after many months, the criminal disclosed to the detective his plan of
blackmailing my client, and suggested that as two heads were better than
one they had better make it a joint venture. The detective pretended to
balk at the idea at first, but was finally persuaded, and at the other's
request undertook the delivery of the blackmailing letters to my client!
Inside of three weeks he had in his possession enough evidence in the
criminal's own handwriting to send him to a prison for the rest of his
life. When at last the detective disclosed his identity the blackmailer
at first refused to believe him, and then literally rolled on the floor
in his agony and fear at discovering how he had been hoodwinked. The
next day he disappeared and has not been heard of since, but his letters
are in my vault, ready to be used if he again puts in an appearance.

The records of the police and of the private agencies contain many
instances where murderers have confessed their guilt long after the
crime to supposed friends, who were in reality decoys placed there for
that very purpose. It is a peculiarity of criminals that they cannot
keep their secrets locked in their own breasts. The impulse to
confession is universal, particularly in women. Egotism has some part in
this, but the chief element is the desire for companionship. Criminals
have a horror of dying under an alias. The dignity of identity appeals
even to the tramp. This impulse leads oftentimes to the most unnecessary
and suicidal disclosures. The murderer who has planned and executed a
diabolical homicide and who has retired to obscurity and safety will
very likely in course of time make a clean breast of it to some one whom
he believes to be his friend. He wants to "get it off his chest," to
talk it over, to discuss its fine points, to boast of how clever he was,
to ask for unnecessary advice about his conduct in the future, to
have at least one other person in the world who has seen his soul's
nakedness.

The interesting feature of such confessions from a legal point of view
is that, no matter how circumstantial they may be, they are not usually
of themselves sufficient under our law to warrant a conviction. The
admission or confession of a defendant needs legal corroboration. This
corroboration is often very difficult to find, and frequently cannot be
secured at all. This provision of the statutes is doubtless a wise one
to prevent hysterical, suicidal, egotistical, and semi-insane persons
from meeting death in the electric chair or on the gallows, but it often
results in the guilty going unpunished. Personally, I have never known a
criminal to confess a crime of which he was innocent. The nearest thing
to it in my experience is when one criminal, jointly guilty with another
and sure of conviction, has drawn lots with his pal, lost, confessed,
and in the confession exculpated his companion.

In the police organization of almost every large city there are a few
men who are genuinely gifted for the work of detection. Such an one was
Guiseppe Petrosino, a great detective, and an honest, unselfish,
and heroic man, who united indefatigable patience and industry with
reasoning powers of a high order. The most thrilling evening of my life
was when I listened before a crackling fire in my library to Joe's
story of the Van Cortlandt Park murder, the night before I was going to
prosecute the case. Sitting stiffly in an arm-chair, his ugly moon-face
expressionless save for an occasional flash from his black eyes,
Petrosino recounted slowly and accurately how, by means of a single
slip of paper bearing the penciled name "Sabbatto Gizzi, P.O. Box 239,
Lambertville, N.J.," he had run down the unknown murderer of an unknown
Italian stabbed to death in the park's shrubbery.

Petrosino's physical characteristics were so pronounced that he was
probably as widely, if not more widely, known than any other Italian
in New York. He was short and heavy, with enormous shoulders and a bull
neck, on which was placed a great round head like a summer squash. His
face was pock-marked, and he talked with a deliberation that was due to
his desire for accuracy, but which at times might have been suspected
to arise from some other cause. He rarely smiled and went methodically
about his business, which was to drive the Italian criminals out of the
city and country. Of course, being a marked man in more senses than one,
it was practically impossible to disguise himself, and, accordingly,
he had to rely upon his own investigations and detective powers,
supplemented by the efforts of the trained men in the Italian branch,
many of whom are detectives of a high order of ability. If the life of
Petrosino were to be written, it would be a book unique in the history
of criminology and crime, for this man was probably the only great
detective of the world to find his career in a foreign country amid
criminals of his own race.

I have instanced Petrosino as an example of a police detective of a very
unusual type, but I have known several other men on the New York Police
Force of real genius in their own particular lines of work. One of these
is an Irishman who makes a specialty of get-rich-quick men, oil and
mining stock operators, wire-tappers and their kin, and who knows the
antecedents and history of most of them better than any other man in the
country. He is ready to take the part of either a "sucker" or a fellow
crook, as the exigencies of the case may demand.

There are detectives--real ones--on the police force of all the great
cities of the world to-day, most of them specialists, a few of them
geniuses capable of undertaking the ferreting out of any sort of
mystery, but the last are rare. The police detective usually lacks the
training, education, and social experience to make him effective in
dealing with the class of elite criminals who make high society their
field. Yet, of course, it is this class of crooks who most excite our
interest and who fill the pages of popular detective fiction.

The headquarters man has no time nor inclination to follow the sporting
duchess and the fictitious earl who accompanies her in their picturesque
wanderings around the world. He is busy inside the confines of his own
country. Parents or children may disappear, but the mere seeking of
oblivion on their part is no crime and does not concern him except by
special dispensation on the part of his superiors. Divorced couples may
steal their own children back and forth, royalties may inadvertently
involve themselves with undesirables, governmental information exude
from State portals in a peculiar manner, business secrets pass into
the hands of rivals, racehorses develop strange and untimely diseases,
husbands take long and mysterious trips from home--a thousand exciting
and worrying things may happen to the astonishment, distress, or
intense interest of nations, governments, political parties, or private
individuals, which from their very nature are outside the purview of the
regular police. Here, then, is the field of the secret agent or private
detective, and here, forsooth, is where the detective of genuine
deductive powers and the polished address of the so-called "man of the
world" is required.

There are two classes of cases where a private detective must needs be
used, if indeed any professional assistance is to be called in: first,
where the person whose identity is sought to be discovered or whose
activities are sought to be terminated is not a criminal or has
committed no crime, and second, where, though a crime has been
committed, the injured parties cannot afford to undertake a public
prosecution.

For example, if you are receiving anonymous letters, the writer of which
accuses you of all sorts of unpleasant things, you would, of course,
much prefer to find out who it is and stop him quietly than to turn over
the correspondence to the police and let the writer's attorneys publicly
cross-examine you at his trial as to your past career. Even if a diamond
necklace is stolen from a family living on Fifth Avenue, there is more
than an even chance that the owner will prefer to conceal her loss
rather than to have her picture in the morning paper. Yet she will wish
to find the necklace if she can.

When the matter has no criminal side at all, the police cannot be
availed of, although we sometimes read that the officers of the local
precinct have spent many hours in trying to locate Mrs. So-and-So's lost
Pomeranian, or in performing other functions of an essentially private
nature--most generously. But if, for example, your daughter is made the
recipient, almost daily, of anonymous gifts of jewelry which arrive
by mail, express, or messenger, and you are anxious to discover the
identity of her admirer and return them, you will probably wish to
engage outside assistance.

Where will you seek it? You can do one of two things: go to a big agency
and secure the services of the right man, or engage such a man outside
who may or may not be a professional detective. I have frequently
utilized with success in peculiar and difficult cases the services of
men whom I knew to be common-sense persons, with a natural taste for
ferreting out mysteries, but who were not detectives at all. Your head
bookkeeper may have real talents in this direction--if he is not above
using them. Naturally, the first essential is brains--and if you can
give the time to the matter, your own head will probably be the best
one for your purposes. If, then, you are willing to undertake the job
yourself, all you need is some person or persons to carry out your
instructions, and such are by no means difficult to find. I have had
many a case run down by my own office force--clerks, lawyers, and
stenographers, all taking a turn at it. Why not? Is the professional
sleuth working on a fixed salary for a regular agency and doing a dozen
different jobs each month as likely to bring to bear upon your own
private problem as much intelligence as you yourself?

There is no mystery about such work, except what the detective himself
sees fit to enshroud it with. Most of us do detective work all the time
without being conscious of it. Simply because the matter concerns the
theft of a pearl, or the betraying of a business or professional secret,
or the disappearance of a friend, the opinion of a stranger becomes no
more valuable. And the chances are equal that the stranger will make a
bungle of it.

Many of the best available detectives are men who work by themselves
without any permanent staff, and who have their own regular clients,
generally law firms and corporations. Almost any attorney knows several
such, and the chief advantage of employing one of them lies in the fact
that you can learn just what their abilities are by personal experience.
They usually command a high rate of remuneration, but deductive ability
and resourcefulness are so rare that they are at a premium and can only
be secured by paying it. These men are able, if necessary, to assume
the character of a doctor, traveller, man-about-town, or business agent
without wearing in their lapels a sign that they are detectives, and
they will reason ahead of the other fellow and can sometimes calculate
pretty closely what he will do. Twenty-five dollars a day will generally
hire the best of them, and they are well worth it.

The detective business swarms with men of doubtful honesty and morals,
who are under a constant temptation to charge for services not rendered
and expenses not incurred, who are accustomed to exaggeration if not
to perjury, and who have neither the inclination nor the ability to do
competent work.

Once they get their clutches on a wealthy client, they resemble the
shyster lawyer in their efforts to bleed him by stimulating his fears of
publicity and by holding out false hopes of success, and thus prolonging
their period of service. An unscrupulous detective will, almost as a
matter of course, work on two jobs at once and charge all his time to
each client. He will constantly report progress when nothing has been
accomplished, and his expenses will fill pages of his notebook. Meantime
his daily reports will fall like a shower of autumn leaves. In no
profession is it more essential to know the man who is working for you.
If you need a detective, get the best you can find, put a limit on the
expense, and give him your absolute confidence.




CHAPTER VI. Detectives Who Detect


In the preceding chapter the writer discussed at some length the real,
as distinguished from the fancied, attributes of detectives in general,
and the weaknesses as well as the virtues of the so-called detective
"agency." There are in the city of New York at the present time about
one hundred and fifty licensed detectives. Under the detective license
laws each of these has been required to file with the State comptroller
written evidences of his competency, and integrity, approved by five
reputable freeholders of his county, and to give bond in the sum of
two thousand dollars. He also has to pay a license fee of one hundred
dollars per annum, but this enables him to employ as many "operators"
as he chooses. In other words, the head of the agency may be of good
character and his agents wholly undesirable citizens. How often this is
the case is known to none better than the heads themselves. The strength
and efficiency of a detective agency does not lie in the name at the
top of its letter-paper, but in the unknown personnel of the men who are
doing or shirking the work. I believe that most of the principals of
the many agencies throughout the United States are animated by a serious
desire to give their clients a full return for their money and loyal and
honest service. But the best intentions in the world cannot make up
for the lack of untiring vigilance in supervising the men who are being
employed in the client's service.

It is the right here that the "national" has an immense advantage
over the small agency which cannot afford to keep a large staff of men
constantly on hand, but is forced to engage them temporarily as they may
be needed. The "national" agency can shift its employees from place
to place as their services are required, and the advantages of
centralization are felt as much in this sort of work as in any other
industry. The licensed detective who sends out a hurry call for
assistants is apt to be able to get only men whom he would otherwise not
employ. In this chapter, the word "national," as applied to a detective
agency, refers not to the title under which such an agency may do its
business, but to the fact that it is organized and equipped to render
services all over the country.

In this connection it is worth noticing that the best detective agencies
train their own operators, selecting them from picked material. The
candidate must as rule be between twenty and thirty-five years of age,
sound of body, and reasonably intelligent. He gets pretty good wages
from the start. From the comparatively easy work of watching or
"locating," he is advanced through the more difficult varieties of
"shadowing" and "trailing," until eventually he may develop into a
first-class man who will be set to unravel a murder mystery or to "rope"
a professional criminal. But with years of training the best material
makes few real detectives, and the real detective remains in fact the
man who sits at the mahogany desk in the central office and presses the
row of mother of pearl buttons in front of him.

If you know the heads or superintendents of the large agencies you will
find that the "star" cases, of which they like to talk, are, for the
most part, the pursuit and capture of forgers and murderers. The
former, as a rule, are "spotted" and "trailed" to their haunts, and when
sufficient evidence has been obtained the police are notified, and a
raid takes place, or the arrest is made, by the State authorities.
In the case of a murderer, in a majority of cases, his capture is the
result of skilful "roping" by an astute detective who manages to get
into his confidence. For example, a murder is committed by an
Italian miner. Let us suppose he has killed his "boss," or even the
superintendent or owner. He disappears. As the reader known, the
Italians are so secretive that it is next to impossible to secure any
information--even from the relatives of the murdered man.

The first thing is to locate the assassin. An Italian detective is sent
into the mine as a laborer. Months may elapse before he gets on familiar
or intimate terms with his fellows. All the time he is listening and
watching. Presently he hears something that indicates that the murderer
is communicating with one of his old friends either directly or through
third parties. It is then generally only a question of time before his
whereabouts are ascertained. Once he is "located" the same method is
followed in securing additional evidence or material in the nature of
a confession or admission tending to establish guilt. Having previously
"roped" the murderer's friends, the detective now proceeds to the more
difficult task of "roping" the murderer himself. Of course, the life
of a detective in a Pennsylvania coal mine would be valueless if his
identity were discovered, and yet the most daring pieces of detective
work are constantly being performed under these and similar conditions.
Where the criminal is not known, the task becomes far more difficult and
at times exceedingly dangerous.

One of my own friends, an Italian gentleman, spent several months in the
different mines of this country, where Italians are largely employed,
investigating conditions and ascertaining for the benefit of his
government the extent to which anarchy was prevalent. It was necessary
for him to secure work as a miner at the lowest wages and to disguise
himself in such a way that it would be impossible for anybody to detect
his true character. Fortunately, the great diversity of Italian dialects
facilitated his efforts and enabled him to pass himself off as
from another part of the country than his comrades. Having made his
preparations he came to New York as an immigrant and joined a party of
newly arrived Italians on their way to the coal mines of West Virginia.
Without following him further, it is enough to say that during his
service in the mines he overheard much that was calculated to interest
exceedingly the authorities at Rome. Had his disguise been penetrated
the quick thrust of a five-inch blade would have ended his career.
He would never have returned to New York. There would only have been
another dead "Dago" miner. The local coroner would have driven up in
his buggy, looked at the body, examined the clean, deep wound in the
abdomen, shrugged his shoulders, and empanelled a hetrogeneous jury who
would have returned a verdict to the effect that "deceased came to
his death through a stab wound inflicted by some person to the jury
unknown." My friend was not a professional detective, but the recital of
his experiences was enough to fill me with new respect for those engaged
in the "man hunt" business among the half civilized miners of the coal
regions.

But the work of even the "national" agencies is not of the kind which
the novel-reading public generally associates with detectives--that is
to say, it rarely deals with the unravelling of "mysteries," except the
identity of passers of fraudulent paper and occasional murderers. The
protection of the banks is naturally the most important work that such
an agency can perform.

The National Bankers' Association has eleven thousand members.
"Pinkerton's Bank and Bankers' Protection" also has a large organization
of subscribers. These devote themselves to identifying and running down
all criminals whose activities are dangerous to them. Here the agency
and the police work hand in hand, exchanging photographs of crooks and
suspects and keeping closely informed as to each other's doings. Yet
there is no official connection between any detective agency and the
police of any city. It is an almost universal rule that a private
detective shall not make an arrest. The reasons for this are manifold.
In the first place, the private detective has neither the general
authority nor the facilities for the manual detention of a criminal. A
blue coat and brass buttons, to say nothing of a night stick, are often
invaluable stage properties in the last act of the melodrama. And as the
criminal authorities are eventually to deal with the defendant anyway,
it is just as well if they come into the case as soon as may be. It goes
without saying, of course, that a detective per se has no more right to
make an arrest than any private citizen--nor has a policeman, for that
matter, save in exceptional cases. The officer is valuable for his
dignity, avoirdupois, "bracelets," and other accessories. The police
thus get the credit of many arrests in difficult cases where all the
work has been done by private detectives, and it is good business for
the latter to let them know it.

One of the chief assets of the big agency is its accumulated information
concerning all sorts of professional criminals. Its galleries are quite
as complete as those of the local police headquarters, for a constant
exchange of art objects is going on with the police throughout the
world. And as the agency is protecting banks all over the United States
it has greater interest in all bank burglars as a class than the police
of any particular city who are only concerned with the burglars who
(as one might say) burgle in their particular burg. Thus, you are more
likely to find a detective from a national agency than a sleuth from
300 Mulberry Street, New York, following a forger to Australasia or
Polynesia.

The best agencies absolutely decline to touch divorce and matrimonial
cases of any sort. It does not do a detective agency any good to have
its men constantly upon the witness stand subject to attack, with
a consequent possible reflection upon their probity of character or
truthfulness. Moreover, a good detective is too valuable a person to
be wasting his time in the court-room. In the ordinary divorce case the
detective, having procured evidence, is obliged to remain on tap and
subject to call as a witness for at least three or four months, during
which time he cannot be sent away on distant work. Neither can the
customer be charged ordinarily for waiting time, and apart from its
malodorous character the business is not desirable from a financial
point of view.

The national agencies prefer clean criminal work, murder cases,
and general investigating. They no longer undertake any policing,
strike-breaking, or guarding. The most ridiculous misinformation in
regard to their participation in this sort of work has been spread
broadcast largely by jealous enemies and by the labor unions.

By way of illustration, one Thomas Beet, describing himself as an
English detective, contributed an article to the 'New York Tribune' of
September 16, 1906, in which he said:

"In one of the greatest of our strikes, that involving the steel
industry, over two thousand armed detectives were employed supposedly to
protect property, while several hundred men were scattered in the ranks
of strikers as workmen. Many of the latter became officers in the labor
bodies, helped to make laws for the organizations, made incendiary
speeches, cast their votes for the most radical movements made by the
strikers, participated in and led bodies of the members in the acts of
lawlessness that eventually caused the sending of State troops and the
declaration of martial law. While doing this, these spies within
the ranks were making daily reports of the plans and purposes of the
strikers. To my knowledge, when lawlessness was at its height and murder
ran riot, these men wore little patches of white on the lapels of their
coats so that their fellow detectives of the two thousand would not
shoot them down by mistake."

He, of course, referred to the great strike at Homestead, Pennsylvania,
in 1892. In point of fact, there were only six private detectives
engaged on the side of the employers at that time, and these were there
to assist the local authorities in taking charge of six hundred and
fifty watchmen, and to help place the latter upon the property of the
steel company. These watchmen were under the direction of the sheriff
and sworn in as peace officers of the county. Mr. Beet seems to
have confused his history and mixed up the white handkerchief of the
Huguenots of Nantes with the strike-breakers of Pennsylvania. It is
needless to repeat (as Mr. Robert A. Pinkerton stated at the time),
that the white label story is ridiculously' untrue, and that it was the
strikers who attacked the watchmen, and not the watchmen the strikers.
One striker and one watchman were killed.

But this attack of Mr. Beet upon his own profession, under the guise
of being an English detective (it developed that he was an ex-divorce
detective from New York City), was not confined to his remarks about
inciting wanton murder. On the contrary, he alleged (as one having
authority and not merely as a scribe) that American detective agencies
were practically nothing but blackmailing concerns, which used the
information secured in a professional capacity to extort money from
their own clients.

"Think of the so-called detective," says Mr. Beet, "whose agency pays
him two dollars or two dollars and fifty cents a day, being engaged upon
confidential work and in the possession of secrets that he knows
are worth money! Is it any wonder that so many cases are sold out by
employees, even when the agencies are honest?"

We are constrained to answer that it is no more wonderful than that any
person earning the same sum should remain honest when he might so easily
turn thief. As the writer has himself pointed out in these pages, there
are hundreds of so-called detective agencies which are but traps for the
guileless citizen who calls upon them for aid. But there are many which
are as honestly conducted as any other variety of legitimate business. I
do not know Mr. Beet's personal experience, but it appears to have been
unfortunate. At any rate, his diatribe is unfounded and false, and the
worst feature of it is his assertion that detective agencies make a
business of manufacturing cases when there happen to be none on hand.

"Soon," says he, "there were not enough cases to go around, and then
with the aid of spies and informers the unscrupulous detectives began to
make cases. Agencies began to work up evidence against persons and then
resorted to blackmail, or else approached those to whom the information
might be valuable, and by careful manoeuvring had themselves retained
to unravel the case. This brought into existence hordes of professional
informers who secured the opening wedges for the fake agencies. Men and
women, many of them of some social standing, made it a practice to pry
around for secrets which might be valuable able; spies kept up their
work in large business establishments and began to haunt the cafes and
resorts of doubtful reputation, on the watch for persons of wealth
and prominence who might be foolish enough to place themselves in
compromising circumstances. Even the servants in wealthy families soon
learned that certain secrets of the master and mistress could be
turned to profitable account. We shudder when we hear of the system
of espionage maintained in Russia, while in the large American cities,
unnoticed, are organizations of spies and informers on every hand who
spend their lives digging pitfalls for the unwary who can afford to
pay."

One would think that we were living in the days of the Borgias! "Ninety
per cent," says Mr. Beet, "of private detective agencies are rotten to
the core and simply exist and thrive upon a foundation of dishonesty,
deceit, conspiracy, and treachery to the public in general and their own
patrons in particular. There are detectives at the heads of prominent
agencies in this country whose pictures adorn the Rogues' Gallery; men
who have served time in various prisons for almost every crime on the
calendar."

This harrowing picture has the modicum of truth that makes it
insidiously dangerous. But this last extravagance betrays the
denunciator. One would be interested to have this past-master of
overstatement mention the names of these distinguished crooks that head
the prominent agencies. Their exposure, if true, would not be libellous,
and it would seem that he had performed but half his duty to the public
in refraining from giving this important, if not vital, information.

I know several of these gentlemen whose pictures I feel confident do not
appear in the Rogues' Gallery, and who have not been, as yet, convicted
of crime. A client is as safe in the hands of a good detective agency as
he is in the hands of a good attorney; he should know his agency, that
is all--just as he should know his lawyer. The men at the head of the
big agencies generally take the same pride in their work as the members
of any other profession. They know that a first-class reputation for
honesty is essential to their financial success and that good will is
their stock in trade. Take this away and they would have nothing.

In 1878 the founder of one of the most famous of our national agencies
promulgated in printed form for the benefit of his employees what he
called his general principles. One of these was the following:

"This agency only offers its services at a stated per diem for each
detective employed on an operation, giving no guarantee of success,
except in the reputation for reliability and efficiency; and any person
in its service who shall, under any circumstances, permit himself or
herself to receive a gift, reward, or bribe shall be instantly dismissed
from the service."

Another:

"The profession of the detective is a high and honorable calling. Few
professions excel it. He is an officer of justice, and must himself be
pure and above reproach."

Again:

"It is an evidence of the unfitness of the detective for his profession
when he is compelled to resort to the use of intoxicating liquors; and,
indeed, the strongest kind of evidence, if he continually resorts to
this evil practice. The detective must not do anything to farther sink
the criminal in vice or debauchery, but, on the contrary, must seek to
win his confidence by endeavoring to elevate him, etc."

"Kindness and justice should go hand in hand, whenever it is possible,
in the dealings of the detective with the criminal. There is no human
being so degraded but there is some little bright spark of conscience
and of right still existing in him."

Last:

"The detective must, in every instance, report everything which is
favorable to the suspected party, as well as everything which may be
against him."

The man who penned these principles had had the safety of Abraham
Lincoln in his keeping; and these simple statements are the best
refutation of the baseless assertions above referred to.

It may be that in those days the detection of crime was a bit more
elementary than at the present time. One can hardly picture a modern
sleuth delaying long in an attempt to evangelize his quarry, but these
general principles are the right stuff and shine like good deeds in a
naughty world.

As one peruses this little pink pamphlet he is constantly struck by the
repeated references to the detective as an actor. That was undoubtedly
the ancient concept of a sleuth. "He must possess, also, the player's
faculty of assuming any character that his case may require, and of
acting it out to the life with an ease and naturalness which shall not
be questioned." This somewhat large order is, to our relief, qualified a
little later on. "It is not to be expected, however," the author admits,
"that every detective shall possess these rare qualifications, although
the more talented and versatile he is, the higher will be the sphere of
operation which he will command."

The modern detective agency is conducted on business principles and does
not look for histrionic talent or general versatility. As one of the
heads of a prominent agency said to me the other day:

"When we want a detective to take the part of a plumber we get a
plumber, and when we need one to act as a boiler-maker we go out and get
a real one--if we haven't one on our pay rolls."

"But," I replied, "when you need a man to go into a private family and
pretend to be an English clergyman, or a French viscount, or a brilliant
man of the world--who do you send?"

The "head" smiled.

"The case hasn't arisen yet," said he. "When it does I guess we'll get
the real thing."

The national detective agency, with its thousands of employees who have,
most of them, grown up and received their training in its service, is a
powerful organization, highly centralized, and having an immense sinking
fund of special knowledge and past experience. This is the product of
decades of patient labor and minute record. The agency which offers
you the services of a Sherlock Holmes is a fraud, but you can accept as
genuine a proposition to run down any man whose picture you may be able
to identify in the gallery. The day of the impersonator is over. The
detective of this generation is a hard-headed business man with a stout
pair of legs.

This accumulated fund of information is the heritage of an honest and
long established industry. It is seventy-five per cent of its capital.
It is entirely beyond the reach of the mushroom agency, which in
consequence has to accept less desirable retainers involving no such
requirements, or go to the wall. The collection of photographs is almost
priceless and the clippings, letters, and memoranda in the filing cases
only secondarily so. Very few of the "operators" pretend to anything but
common-sense, with perhaps some special knowledge of the men they
are after. They are not clairvoyants or mystery men, but they will
tirelessly follow a crook until they get him. They are the regular
troops who take their orders without question. The real "detective" is
the "boss" who directs them.

The reader can easily see that in all cases where a crime, such as
forgery, is concerned, once the identity of the criminal is ascertained,
half the work (or more than half) is done. The agencies know the face
and record of practically every man who ever flew a bit of bad paper in
the United States, in England, or on the Continent. If an old hand gets
out of prison his movements are watched until it is obvious that he does
not intend to resort to his old tricks. After the criminal is known or
"located," the "trailing" begins and his "connections" are carefully
studied. This may or may not require what might be called real detective
work; that is to say, work requiring superior power of deducing
conclusions from first-hand information, coupled with unusual skill
in acting upon them. Mere trailing is often simple, yet sometimes
very difficult. A great deal depends on the operator's own peculiar
information as to his man's habits, haunts, and associates. It is very
hard to say in most cases just where mere knowledge ends and detective
work proper begins. As for disguises, they are almost unknown, except
such as are necessary to enable an operator to join a gang where his
quarry may be working and "rope" him into a confession.

Detective agencies of the first-class are engaged principally in
clean-cut criminal work, such as guarding banks from forgers and
"yeggmen"--an original and dangerous variety of burglar peculiar to the
United States and Canada. In other words, they have large associations
of clients who need more protection than the regular police can give
them, and whose interest it is that the criminal shall not only be
driven out of town, but run down (wherever he may be), captured, and put
out of the way for as long a time as possible.

The work done for private individuals is no less important and
effective, but it is secondary to the other. The great value of the
"agency" to the victim of a theft is the speed with which it can
disseminate its information--something quite impossible so far as the
individual citizen is concerned. Let me give an illustration or two.

Between 10.30 P.M. Saturday, February 25, 1911, and 9.30 A.M. Sunday,
February 26, 1911, one hundred and thirty thousand dollars worth of
pearls belonging to Mrs. Maldwin Drummond were stolen from a stateroom
on the steamship 'Amerika' of the Hamburg-American line. The London
underwriters cabled five thousand dollars reward and retained to
investigate the case a well-known American agency, which before
the 'Amerika' had reached Plymouth on her return trip had their
notifications in the hands of all the jewelers and police officials of
Europe and the United States, and had covered every avenue of disposal
in North and South America. In addition, this agency investigated every
human being on the Amerika from first cabin to forecastle.

Within a year or so an aged stock-broker, named Bancroft, was robbed
on the street of one hundred thousand dollars in securities. Inside of
fifty-five minutes after he had reported his loss a detective agency had
notified all banks, brokers, and the police in fifty-six cities of the
United States and Canada.

In the story books your detective scans with eagle eye the surface of
the floor for microscopic evidences of crime. His mind leaps from a
cigar ash to a piece of banana peel and thence to what the family had
for dinner. His brain is working all the time. It is, of course, all
quite wonderful and most excellent reading, and the old-style sleuth
really thought he could do it! Nowadays, while the fake detective
is snooping around the back piazza with a telescope, the real one is
getting the "dope" from the village blacksmith or barber or the waitress
at the station. He may not be highly intelligent, but he knows the
country, and, what is more important, he knows the people. All the
brains in the world cannot make up for the lack of an elementary
knowledge of the place and the characters themselves. It stands to
reason that no strange detective could form as good an opinion as to
which of the members of your household would be most likely to steal a
piece of jewelry as you could yourself. Yet the old-fashioned Sherlock
knew and knows it all.

One of the best illustrations of the practical necessity of some
first-hand knowledge is that afforded by the recovery of a diamond
necklace belonging to the wife of a gentleman in a Connecticut town.
The facts that are given here are absolutely accurate. The gentleman in
question was a retired business man of some means who lived not far from
the town and who made frequent visits to New York City. He had made his
wife a present of a fifteen thousand-dollar diamond necklace, which she
kept in a box in a locked trunk in her bedroom. While she had owned
the necklace for over a year she had never worn it. One evening having
guests for dinner on the occasion of her wedding anniversary she decided
to put it on and wear it for the first time. That night she replaced it
in its box and enclosed this in another box, which she locked and placed
in her bureau drawer. This she also locked. The following night she
decided to replace the necklace in the trunk. She accordingly unlocked
the bureau drawer, and also the larger box, which apparently was in
exactly the same condition as when she had put it away. But the inner
box was empty and the necklace had absolutely disappeared. Now, no
one had seen the necklace for a year, and then only her husband, their
servants, and two or three old friends. No outsider could have known of
its existence. There was no evidence of the house or bureau having been
disturbed.

A New York detective agency was at once retained, which sent one of its
best men to the scene of the crime. He examined the servants, heard the
story, and reported that it must have been an inside job--that there was
no possibility of anything else. But there was nothing to implicate any
one of the servants, and there seemed no hope of getting the necklace
back. Two or three days later the husband turned up at the agency's
office in New York, and after beating about the bush for a while,
remarked:

"I want to tell you something. You have got this job wrong. There's one
fact your man didn't understand. The truth is that I'm a pretty easy
going sort, and every six months or so I take all the men and girls
employed around my house down to Coney Island and give 'em a rip-roaring
time. I make 'em my friends, and I dance with the girls and I jolly
up the men, and we are all good pals together. Sort of unconventional,
maybe, but it pays. I know--see?--that there isn't a single one of those
people who would do me a mean trick. Not one of 'em but would lend me
all the money he had. I don't care what your operator says, the person
who took that necklace came from outside. You take that from me. The
superintendent, who is wise in his generation, scratched his chin.

"Is that dead on the level?" he inquired.

"Gospel!" answered the other.

"I'll come up myself!" said the boss.

Next day the boss behind a broken-winded horse, in a dilapidated buggy,
drove from another town to the place where his client lived. At the
smithy on the crossroads he stopped and borrowed a match.

"Anybody have good hosses in this town?" asked the detective.

"Sure!" answered the smith. "Mr. ------ up on the hill has the best in
the county!"

"What sort of a feller is he?"

The smith chewed in silence for a moment.

"Don't know him myself, but I tell you what, his help says he's the best
employer they ever had--and they stay there forever!"

The boss drove on to the house, which he observed was situated at about
an equal distance from three different railway stations and surrounded
by a piazza with pillars. He walked around it, examining the vines until
his eye caught a torn creeper and a white scratch on the paint. It had
been an outside job after all, and two weeks had already been lost.
Deduction was responsible for a mistake which would not have occurred
had a little knowledge been acquired first. That is the lesson of this
story.

The denouement, which has no lesson at all, is interesting. The
superintendent saw no prospect of getting back the necklace, but before
so informing the client, decided to cogitate on the matter for a day or
two. During that time he met by accident a friend who made a hobby
of studying yeggmen and criminals and occasionally doing a bit of the
amateur tramp act himself.

"By the way," said the friend, "do you ever hear of any 'touches' up the
river or along the Sound?"

"Sometimes," answered the boss, pricking up his ears. "Why do you ask?"

"Why, the other night," replied the friend, "I happened to be meeting my
wife up at the Grand Central about six o'clock and I saw two yeggs that
I knew taking a train out. I thought it was sort of funny. Pittsburgh
Ike and Denver Red."

"When was it?"

"Two weeks ago," said the friend.

"Thanks," returned the boss. "You must excuse me now; I've got an
important engagement."

Three hours later Pittsburgh Ike and Denver Red were in a cell at
headquarters. At six o'clock that evening the necklace had been
returned. This was a coincidence that might not occur in a hundred
years, but had the deductive detective determined the question he would
still be pondering on the comparative probability of whether the cook,
the chore man, or the hired girl was the guilty party.

A clean bit of detection on the part of an agency, and quite in the
day's work, was the comparatively recent capture of a thief who secured
three hundred and sixty thousand dollars worth of securities from a
famous banking institution in New York City by means of a very simple
device. A firm of stock brokers had borrowed from this bank about two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars for a day or two and put up the
securities as collateral. In the ordinary course of business, when the
borrower has no further use for the money, he sends up a certified check
for the amount of the loan with interest, and the bank turns over the
securities to the messenger. In this particular case a messenger arrived
with a certified check, shoved it into the cage, and took away what was
pushed out to him in return--three hundred and sixty thousand dollars in
bonds. The certification turned out to be a forgery and the securities
vanished. I do not know whether the police were consulted or not.
Sometimes in such cases the banks prefer to resort to more private
methods and, perhaps, save the necessity of making a public admission of
their stupidity. When my friend, the superintendent, was called in, the
officers of the bank were making the wildest sort of guesses as to the
identity of the master mind and hand which had deceived the cashier. He
must, they felt sure, have made the forgery with a camel's hair brush of
unrivalled fineness.

"A great artist!" said the president.

"The most skilful forger in the world!" opined another.

"We must run down all the celebrated criminals!" announced a third.

"Great artist-nothing!" remarked the boss, rubbing his thumb over the
certification which blurred at the touch. "He's no painter! Why, that's
a rubber stamp!"

What a shock for those dignified gentlemen! To think that their cashier
had been deceived by a mere, plebeian, common or garden thing of rubber!

"Good-day, gents!" said the boss, putting the check in his wallet. "I've
got to get busy with the rubber stamp makers!"

He returned to his office and detailed a dozen men to work on the East
Side and a dozen on the West Side, with orders to search out every
man in New York who manufactured rubber stamps. Before the end of the
afternoon the maker was found on the Bowery, near Houston Street. This
was his story: A couple of weeks before, a young man had come in and
ordered a certification stamp, drawing at the time a rough design
of what he wanted. The stamp, when first manufactured, had not been
satisfactory to him; and on his second visit, the customer had left a
piece of a check, carefully torn out in circular form, which showed
the certification which he desired copied. This fragment the maker
had retained, as well as a slip of paper, upon which the customer had
written the address of the place to which he wished the stamp sent--The
Young Men's Christian Association! The face of the fragment showed a
part of the maker's signature. The superintendent ran his eye over
a list of brokers and picked out the name of the firm most like the
hieroglyphics on the check. Then he telephoned over and asked to be
permitted to see their pay roll. Carefully comparing the signature
appearing thereon with the Y.M.C.A. slip, he picked his man in less than
ten minutes.

The latter was carefully trailed to his home, and thence to the Young
Men's Christian Association, after which he called on his fiancee at
her father's house. He spent the night at his own boarding place. Next
morning (Sunday) he was arrested on his way to church, and all the
securities (except some that he later returned) were discovered in his
room. More quick work! The amateur's method had been very simple. He
knew that the loan had been made and the bonds sent to the bank. So he
forged a check, certified it himself, and collected the securities. Of
course, he was a bungler and took a hundred rash chances.

A good example of the value of the accumulated information--documentary,
pictorial, and otherwise--in the possession of an agency was the capture
of Charles Wells, more generally known as Charles Fisher, alias Henry
Conrad, an old-time forger, who suddenly resumed his activities after
being released from a six-year term in England. A New York City bank had
paid on a bogus two hundred and fifty dollar check and had reported its
loss to the agency in question. The superintendent examined the check
(although Fisher had been in confinement for six years on the other
side) spotted it as his work. The next step was to find the forger. Of
course, no man who does the actual "scratching" attempts to "lay down"
the paper. That task is up to the "presenter." The cashier of the
bank identified in the agency's gallery the picture of the man who had
brought in the two hundred and fifty dollar check, and he in turn proved
to be another ex-convict well known in the business, whose whereabouts
in New York were not difficult to ascertain. He was "located" and
"trailed" and all his associates noted and followed. In due course he
"connected up" (as they say) with Fisher. Now, it is one thing to follow
a man who has no idea that he is being followed and another to trail a
man who is as suspicious and elusive as a fox. A professional criminal's
daily business is to observe whether or not he is being followed, and he
rarely if ever, makes a direct move. If he wants a drink at the saloon
across the street, he will, by preference, go out the back door, walk
around the block and dodge in the side entrance under the tail of an
ice wagon. In this case the detectives followed the presenter for days
before they reached Fisher, and when they did they had still to locate
his "plant."

The arrest in this case illustrates forcibly the chief characteristic of
successful criminals--egotism. The essential quality of daring required
in their pursuits gives them an extraordinary degree of self-confidence,
boldness, and vanity. And to vanity most of them can trace their fall.
It seems incredible that Fisher should have returned to the United
States after his discharge from prison and immediately resumed his
operations without carefully concealing his impedimenta. Yet when he was
run down in a twenty-six family apartment house, the detectives found in
his valise several thousand blank and model checks, hundreds of letters
and private papers, a work on "Modern Bank Methods," and his "ticket of
leave" from England! This man was a successful forger and because he
was successful, his pride in himself was so great that he attributed his
conviction in England to accident and really felt that he was immune on
his release.

The arrest of such a man often presents great legal difficulties which
the detectives overcome by various practical methods. Of course, no
officer without a search warrant has a right to enter a house or an
apartment. A man's house is his castle. Mayor Gaynor, when a judge, in
a famous opinion (more familiarly known in the lower world even than
the Decalogue) laid down the law unequivocally and emphatically in this
regard. Thus, in the Fisher case, the defendant having been arrested on
the street, the detectives desired to search the apartment of the family
with which he lived. They did this by first inducing the tenant to open
the door and, after satisfying themselves that they were in the right
place, ordering the occupants to get in line and "march" from one room
to another while they rummaged for evidence. "Of course, we had no right
to do it, but they didn't know we hadn't!" said the boss.

But frequently the defendant knows his rights just as well as the
police. On one occasion the same detective who arrested Fisher wanted to
take another man out of an apartment where he had been run to earth. His
mother (aged eighty-two years) put the chain on the door and politely
declined to open it. All the evidence against the forger was inside the
apartment and he was actively engaged in burning it up in the kitchen
stove. In half an hour to arrest him would have been useless! The
detectives stormed and threatened, but the old crone merely grinned at
them. She hated a "bull" as much as did her son. Fearing to take the
law into their own hands, they summoned a detective sergeant from
head-quarters, but, although he sympathized with them, he had read Mayor
Gaynor's decision and declined to take any chances. They then "appealed"
to the cop on the beat, who proved more reasonable, but although he used
all his force, he was unable to break down the door which had in the
meantime been reinforced from the inside. After about an hour, the old
lady unchained the door and invited the detectives to come in. The crook
was sitting by the window smoking a cigar and reading St. Nicholas,
while all evidence of his crime had vanished in smoke.

One more anecdote, at the expense of the deductive detective. A watchman
was murdered, the safe of a brewery blown open and the contents stolen.
Local detectives worked on the case and satisfied themselves that the
night engineer at the brewery had committed the crime. He was a quiet
and, apparently, a God-fearing man, but circumstances were conclusive
against him. In fact, he had been traced within ten minutes of the
murder on the way to the scene of the homicide. But some little link was
lacking and the brewery officials called in the agency. The first thing
the superintendent did was to look over the engineer. At first sight
he recognized him as a famous crook who had served five years for a
homicidal assault! One would think that that would have settled the
matter. But it didn't! The detective said nothing to his associates or
employers, but called on the engineer that evening and had a quiet
talk with him in which he satisfied himself that the man was entirely
innocent. The man had served his time, turned over a new leaf, and was
leading an honest, decent life. Two months later the superintendent
caused the arrest of four yeggmen, all of whom were convicted and are
now serving fifteen years each for the crime.

Thus, the reader will observe that there are just a few more
real detectives still left in the business-if you can find them.
Incidentally, they, one and all, take off their hats to Scotland Yard.
They will tell you that the Englishman may be slow (fancy an American
inspector of police wearing gray suede gloves and brewing himself a dish
of tea in his office at four o'clock), but that once he goes after a
crook he is bound to get him--it is merely a question of time. I may add
that in the opinion of the heads of the big agencies the percentage of
ability in the New York Detective Bureau is high--one of them going
so far as to claim that fifty per cent of the men have real detective
ability--that is to say "brains." That is rather a higher average than
one finds among clergymen and lawyers, yet it may be so.




CHAPTER VII. Women in the Courts


AS WITNESSES

Women appear in the criminal courts constantly as witnesses, although
less frequently as complainants and defendants. As complainants are
always witnesses, and as defendants may, and in point of fact generally
do become so, whatever generalizations are possible regarding women in
courts of law can most easily be drawn from their characteristics as
givers of testimony. Roughly speaking, women exhibit about the same
idiosyncrasies and limitations in the witness-chair as the opposite sex,
and at first thought one would be apt to say that it would be fruitless
and absurd to attempt to predicate any general principles in regard to
their testimony, but a careful study of female witnesses as a whole will
result in the inevitable conclusion that their evidence has virtues and
limitations peculiar to itself.

The ancient theory that woman was man's inferior showed itself in the
tendency to reject, or at least to regard with suspicion, her evidence
in legal matters.

"The following law," says W. M. Best, "is attributed to Moses by
Josephus: 'Let the testimony of women not be received on account of the
levity and audacity of their sex'; a law which looks apocryphal, but
which, even if genuine, could not have been of universal application....
The law of ancient Rome, though admitting their testimony in general,
refused it in certain cases. The civil canon laws of mediaeval Europe
seem to have carried the exclusion much further. Mascardus says:
'Feminis plerumque omnino non creditur, et id dumtaxat, quod sunt
feminae qua ut plurimum solent esse fraudulentre fallaces, et dolosae'
[Generally speaking, no credence at all is given to women, and for this
reason, because they are women, who are usually deceitful, untruthful,
and treacherous in the very highest degree.] And Lancelottus, in his
'Institutiones Juris Canonici,' lays it down in the most distinct
terms, that women cannot in general be witnesses, citing the language of
Virgil: 'Varium et mutabile semper femina'....

"Bruneau, although a contemporary of Madame de Sevigne, did not scruple
to write, in 1686, that the deposition of three women was only equal to
that of two men. At Berne, so late as 1821, in the Canton of Vaud, so
late as 1824, the testimony of two women was required to counterbalance
that of one man.... A virgin was entitled to greater credit than a
widow.... In the 'Canonical Institutions of Devotus,' published at
Paris in 1852, it is distinctly stated that, except in a few peculiar
instances, women are not competent witnesses in criminal cases. In
Scotland also, until the beginning of the eighteenth century, sex was
a cause of exclusion from the witness-box in the great majority of
instances."

Cockburn in his Memoirs tells of an incident during the trial of
Glengarry, in Scotland, for murder in a duel, which is, perhaps,
explicable by this extraordinary attitude: A lady of great beauty
was called as a witness and came into court heavily veiled. Before
administering the oath, Lord Eskgrove, the judge (to whom this function
belongs in Scotland), gave her this exposition of her duty:

"Young woman, you will now consider yourself as in the presence of
Almighty God and of this High Court. Lift up your veil, throw off all
your modesty, and look me in the face."

Whatever difference does exist in character between the testimony of
men and women has its root in the generally recognized diversity in the
mental processes of the two sexes. Men, it is commonly declared, rely
upon their powers of reason; women upon their intuition. Not that the
former is frequently any more accurate than the latter. But our courts
of law (at least those in English-speaking countries) are devised and
organized, perhaps unfortunately, on the principle that testimony not
apparently deduced by the syllogistic method from the observation of
relevant fact is valueless, and hence woman at the very outset is
placed at a disadvantage and her usefulness as a probative force sadly
crippled.

The good old lady who takes the witness-chair and swears that she knows
the prisoner took her purse has perhaps quite as good a basis for her
opinion and her testimony (even though she cannot give a single reason
for her belief and becomes hopelessly confused on cross-examination) as
the man who reaches the same conclusion ostensibly by virtue of having
seen the defendant near by, observed his hand reaching for the purse,
and then perceived him take to his heels. She has never been taught to
reason and has really never found it necessary, having wandered through
life by inference or, more frankly, by guesswork, until she is no
longer able to point out the simplest stages of her most ordinary mental
processes.

As the reader is already aware, the value of all honestly given
testimony depends first upon the witness's original capacity to observe
the facts; second upon his ability to remember what he has seen and not
to confuse knowledge with imagination, belief or custom, and lastly,
upon his power to express what he has, in fact, seen and remembers.

Women do not differ from men in their original capacity to observe,
which is a quality developed by the training and environment of the
individual. It is in the second class of the witness's limitations that
women as a whole are more likely to trip than men, for they are prone to
swear to circumstances as facts, of their own knowledge, simply because
they confuse what they have really observed with what they believe
did occur or should have occurred, or with what they are convinced did
happen simply because it was accustomed to happen in the past.

Perhaps the best illustration of the female habit of swearing that facts
occurred because they usually occurred, was exhibited in the
Twitchell murder trial in Philadelphia, cited in Wellman's "Art of
Cross-Examination." The defendant had killed his wife with a blackjack,
and having dragged her body into the back yard, carefully unbolted the
gate leading to the adjacent alley and, retiring to the house, went to
bed. His purpose was to create the impression that she had been murdered
by some one from outside the premises. To carry out the suggestion, he
bent a poker and left it lying near the body smeared with blood. In the
morning the servant girl found her mistress and ran shrieking into the
street.

At the trial she swore positively that she was first obliged to unbolt
the door in order to get out. Nothing could shake her testimony, and she
thus unconsciously negatived the entire value of the defendant's adroit
precautions. He was justly convicted, although upon absolutely erroneous
testimony.

The old English lawyers occasionally rejected the evidence of women
on the ground that they are "frail." But the exclusion of women as
witnesses in the old days was not for psychological reasons, nor did
it originate from a critical study of the probative value of their
testimony.

Though the conclusions to which women frequently jump may usually be
shown by careful interrogation to be founded upon observation of actual
fact, their habit of stating inferences often leads them to claim
knowledge of the impossible--"wiser in [their] own conceit than seven
men that can render a reason."

In a very recent case where a clever thief had been convicted of looting
various apartments in New York City of over eighty thousand dollars'
worth of jewelry, the female owners were summoned to identify their
property. The writer believes that in every instance these ladies were
absolutely ingenuous and intended to tell the absolute truth. Each and
every one positively identified various of the loose stones found in the
possession of the prisoner as her own. This was the case even when the
diamonds, emeralds and pearls had no distinguishing marks at all. It
was a human impossibility actually to identify any such objects, and yet
these eminently respectable and intelligent gentlewomen swore positively
that they could recognize their jewels. They drew the inference merely
that as the prisoner had stolen similar jewels from them these must be
the actual ones which they had lost, an inference very likely correct,
but valueless in a tribunal of justice.

Where their inferences are questioned, women, as a rule, are much
more ready to "swear their testimony through" than men. They are so
accustomed to act upon inference that, finding themselves unable to
substantiate their assertion by any sufficient reason, they become
irritated, "show fight," and seek refuge in prevarication. Had they not,
during their entire lives, been accustomed to mental short-cuts, they
would be spared the humiliation of seeing their evidence "stricken from
the record."

One of the ladies referred to testified as follows:

"Can you identify that diamond?"

"I am quite sure that it is mine:"

"How do you know?"

"It looks exactly like it."

"But may it not be a similar one and not your own?"

"No; it is mine."

"But how? It has no marks."

"I don't care. I know it is mine. I SWEAR IT IS!"

The good lady supposed that, unless she swore to the fact, she might
lose her jewel, which was, of course, not the case at all, as the sworn
testimony founded upon nothing but inference left her in no better
position than she was in before.

The writer regrets to say that observation would lead him to believe
that women as a rule have somewhat less regard for the spirit of their
oaths than men, and that they are more ready, if it be necessary, to
commit perjury. This may arise from the fact that women are fully aware
that their sex protects them from the same severity of cross-examination
to which men would be subjected under similar circumstances. It is today
fatal to a lawyer's case if he be not invariably gentle and courteous
with a female witness, and this is true even if she be a veritable
Sapphira.

In spite of these limitations, which, of course, affect the testimony
of almost every person, irrespective of sex, women, with the possible
exception of children, make the most remarkable witnesses to be found
in the courts. They are almost invariably quick and positive in their
answers, keenly alive to the dramatic possibilities of the situation,
and with an unerring instinct for a trap or compromising admission.

A woman will inevitably couple with a categorical answer to a question,
if in truth she can be induced to give one at all, a statement of
damaging character to her opponent. For example:

"Do you know the defendant?"

"Yes, to my cost!"

Or

"How old are you?"

"Twenty-three,--old enough to have known better than to trust him."

Forced to make an admission which would seem to hurt her position, the
explanation, instead of being left for the re-direct examination of her
own counsel, is instantly added to her answer then and there.

"Do you admit that you were on Forty-second Street at midnight?"

"Yes. But it was in response to a message sent by the defendant through
his cousin."

What is commonly known as "silent cross-examination" is generally the
most effective. The jury realize the difficulties of the situation for
the lawyer, and are not unlikely to sympathize with him, unless he makes
bold to attack the witness, when they quickly chance their attitude.

One question, and that as to the witness's means of livelihood, is often
sufficient.

"How do you support yourself?"

"I am a lady of leisure!" replies the witness (arrayed in flamboyant
colors) snappishly.

"That will do, thank you," remarks the lawyer with a smile. "You may
step down."

The writer remembers being nicely hoisted by his own petard on a similar
occasion:

"What do you do for a living?" he asked.

The witness, a rather deceptively arrayed woman, turned upon him with a
glance of contempt:

"I am a respectable married woman, with seven children," she retorted.
"I do nothing for a living except cook, wash, scrub, make beds, clean
windows, mend my children's clothes, mind the baby, teach the four
oldest their lessons, take care of my husband, and try to get enough
sleep to be up by five in the morning. I guess if some lawyers worked
as hard as I do they would have sense enough not to ask impertinent
questions."

An amusing incident is recorded of how a feminine witness turned the
laugh upon Mr. Francis L. Wellman, the noted cross-examiner. In his
book he takes the opportunity to advise his lawyer readers to "avoid the
mistake, so common among the inexperienced, of making much of trifling
discrepancies. It has been aptly said," he continues, "that 'juries
have no respect for small triumphs over a witness's self-possession or
memory!' Allow the loquacious witness to talk on; he will be sure
to involve himself in difficulties from which he can never extricate
himself. Some witnesses prove altogether too much; encourage them and
lead them by degrees into exaggerations that will conflict with the
common-sense of the jury."

Mr. Wellman is famous for following this precept himself and, with one
eye significantly cast upon the jury, is likely to lead his witness
a merry dance until the latter is finally "bogged" in a quagmire of
absurdities. Not long ago, shortly after the publication of his book,
the lawyer had occasion to cross-examine a modest-looking young woman as
to the speed of an electric car. The witness seemed conscious that she
was about to undergo a severe ordeal, and Mr. Wellman, feeling himself
complete master of the situation, began in his most winsome and
deprecating manner:

"And how fast, Miss, would you say the car was going?"

"I really could not tell exactly, Mr. Wellman."

"Would you say that it was going at ten miles an hour?"

"Oh, fully that!"

"Twenty miles an hour?"

"Yes, I should say it was going twenty miles an hour."

"Will you say it was going thirty miles an hour?" inquired Wellman with
a glance at the jury.

"Why, yes, I will say that it was."

"Will you say it was going forty?"

"Yes."

"Fifty?"

"Yes, I will say so."

"Seventy?"

"Yes."

"Eighty?"

"Yes," responded the young lady with a countenance absolutely devoid of
expression.

"A hundred?" inquired the lawyer with a thrill of eager triumph in his
voice.

There was a significant hush in the court-room Then the witness, with
a patient smile and a slight lifting of her pretty eyebrows, remarked
quietly:

"Mr. Wellman, don't you think we have carried our little joke far
enough?"

There is no witness in the world more difficult to cope with than a
shrewd old woman who apes stupidity, only to reiterate the gist of her
testimony in such incisive fashion as to leave it indelibly imprinted
on the minds of the jury. The lawyer is bound by every law of decency,
policy and manners to treat the aged dame with the utmost consideration.
He must allow her to ramble on discursively in defiance of every rule
of law and evidence in answer to the simplest question; must receive
imperturbably the opinions and speculations upon every subject of both
herself and (through her) of her neighbors; only to find when he thinks
she must be exhausted by her own volubility, that she is ready, at the
slightest opportunity, to break away again into a tangle of guesswork
and hearsay, interwoven with conclusions and ejaculation. Woe be unto
him if he has not sense enough to waive her off the stand! He might
as well try to harness a Valkyrie as to restrain a pugnacious old
Irishwoman who is intent on getting the whole business before the jury
in her own way.

In the recent case of Gustav Dinser, convicted of murder, a vigorous old
lady took the stand and testified forcibly against the accused. She
was as "smart as paint," as the saying goes, and resolutely refused to
answer any questions put to her by counsel for the defence. Instead,
she would raise her voice and make a savage onslaught upon the prisoner,
rehearsing his brutal treatment of the deceased on previous occasions,
and getting in the most damaging testimony.

"Do you say, Mrs.--" the lawyer would inquire deferentially, "that you
heard the sound of three blows?"

"Oh, thim blows!" the old lady would cry--"thim turrible blows! I could
hear the villain as he laid thim on! I could hear the poor, pitiful
groans av her, and she so sufferin'! 'Twas awful! Howly Saints,'twould
make yer blood run cowld!"

"Stop! stop!" exclaimed the lawyer.

"Ah, stop is it? Ye can't stop me till Oi've had me say to tell the
whole truth. I says to me daughter Ellen, says I: 'Th' horrid baste
is afther murtherin' the poor thing,' says I; 'run out an' git an
officer!'"

"I object to all this!" shouts the lawyer.

"Ah, ye objec', do ye?" retorts the old lady. "Shure an' ye'd have been
after objectin' if ye'd heard thim turrible blows that kilt her--the
poor, sufferin', swate crayter! I hope he gits all that's comin' to
him--bad cess to him for a blood-thirsty divil!"

The lawyer ignominiously abandoned the attack.

The writer recalls a somewhat similar instance, but one even better
exhibiting the cleverness of an old woman, which occurred in the year
1901. A man named Orlando J. Hackett, of prepossessing appearance and
manners, was on trial, charged with converting to his own use
money which had been intrusted to him for investment in realty. The
complainant was a shrewd old lady, who together with her daughter, had
had a long series of transactions with Hackett which would have entirely
confused the issue could the defence have brought them before the jury.
The whole contention of the prosecution was that Hackett had received
the money for one purpose and used it for another. During preparation
for the trial the writer had had both ladies in his office and remembers
making the remark:

"Now, Mrs. ------, don't forget that the charge here is that you
gave Mr. Hackett the money to put into real estate. Nothing else is
comparatively of much importance."

"Be sure and remember that, mother," the daughter had admonished her.

In the course of a month the case came on for trial before Recorder
Goff, in Part II of the General Sessions. Mrs. ------ gave her
testimony with great positiveness. Mr. Lewis Stuyvesant Chanler, now
Lieutenant-Governor of the State, arose to cross-examine her.

"Madam," he began courteously, "you say you gave the defendant money?"

"I told him to put it into real estate, and he said he would!" replied
Mrs. firmly.

"I did not ask you that, Mrs. ------," politely interjected Mr. Chanler.
"How much did you give him?"

"I told him to put it into real estate, and he said he would!" repeated
the old lady wearily.

"But, madam, you do not answer my question!" exclaimed Chanler. "How
much did you give him?"

"I told him to put it into real--" began the old lady again.

"Yes, yes!" cried the lawyer; "we know that! Answer the question."

"estate, and he said he would!" finished the old woman innocently.

"If your Honor please, I will excuse the witness. And I move that her
answers be stricken out!" cried Chanler savagely.

The old lady was assisted from the stand, but as she made her way
with difficulty towards the door of the court-room she could be heard
repeating stubbornly:

"I told him to put it into real estate, and he said he would!"

Almost needless to say, Hackett was convicted and sentenced to seven
years in State's prison.

To recapitulate, the quickness and positiveness of women make them
ordinarily better witnesses than men; they are vastly more difficult to
cross-examine; their sex protects them from many of the most effective
weapons of the lawyer, with the result that they are the more ready to
yield to prevarication; and, even where the possibility of complete
and unrestricted cross-examination is afforded, their tendency to
inaccurately inferential reasoning, and their elusiveness in dodging
from one conclusion to another, render the opportunity of little value.

In general, however, women's testimony differs little in quality
from that of men, all testimony being subject to the same three great
limitations irrespective of the sex of the witness, and the conclusions
set forth above are merely the result of an effort on the part of the
writer to comment somewhat upon those small differences which, under
close scrutiny, may fairly be said to exist. These differences are quite
as noticeable at the breakfast-table as in the court-room; and are
no more patent to the advocate than to the ordinary male animal whose
forehead habitually reddens when he hears the unanswerable reason which,
in default of all others, explains and glorifies the mental action of
his wife, sister or mother: "Just because!"


AS COMPLAINANTS AND DEFENDANTS

The ratio of women to men indicted and tried for crime is, roughly,
about one to ten. Could adequate statistics be procured, the proportion
of female to male complainants in criminal cases would very likely prove
to be about the same: In a very substantial proportion, therefore, of
all prosecutions for crime a woman is one of the chief actors. The law
of the land compels the female prisoner to submit the question of
her guilt or innocence to twelve individuals of the opposite sex; and
permits the female complainant to rehearse the story of her wrongs
before the same collection of colossal intellects and adamantine hearts.

The first thing the ordinary woman hastens to do if she be summoned to
appear in a court of justice is not, as might be expected, to think over
her testimony or try to recall facts obliterated or confused by time,
but to buy a new hat; and precisely the same thing is true of the female
defendant called to the bar of justice, whether it be for stealing a
pair of gloves or poisoning her lover.

Yet how far does the element of sex defeat the ends of justice? To
answer this question it is necessary to determine how far juries are
liable to favor the testimony of a woman plaintiff merely because she
is a woman, and how far sympathy for a woman arraigned as a prisoner is
likely to warp their judgment.

As to the first, it is fairly safe to say that a woman is much more
likely to win a verdict in a civil court or to persuade the jury
that the prisoner is guilty in a criminal case than a man would be in
precisely similar circumstances. In most criminal prosecutions for the
ordinary run of felonies little injustice is likely to result from this.
There is one exception, however, where juries should reach conclusions
with extreme caution, namely, where certain charges are brought by women
against members of the opposite sex.

Here the jury is apt to leap to a conclusion, rendered easy by the
attractiveness of the witness and the feeling that the defendant is a
"cur anyway," and ought to be "sent up."

The difficulty of determining, even in one's office, the true character
of a plausible woman is enhanced tenfold in the court-room, where the
lawyer is generally compelled to proceed upon the assumption that the
witness is a person of irreproachable life and antecedents. Almost any
young woman may create a favorable impression, provided her taste in
dress be not too crude, and, even when it is so, the jury are not apt to
distinguish carefully between that which cries to Heaven and that which
is merely "elegant."

When the complaining witness is a woman who has merely lost money
through the acts of the defendant, the jury are not so readily moved
to accept her story in toto as when the crime charged is of a different
character. They realize that the complainant, feeling that she has been
injured, may be inclined to color her testimony, perhaps unconsciously,
until the wrong becomes a crime.

An ordinary example of this variety of prosecution is where the witness
is a young woman from the East Side, usually a Polish or Russian Jewess,
who charges the defendant, a youth of about her own age, with stealing
her money by means of false pretences. They have been engaged to be
married, and she has turned over her small savings to him to purchase
the diamond ring and perhaps set him up in a modest business of his
own. He has then fallen in love with some other girl, has broken the
engagement, and the ring now adorns the fourth finger of her rival. Her
money is gone. She is without a dot. She hurries with her parents
and loudly vociferating friends to the Essex Market Police Court, and
secures a warrant for the defendant on the theory that he defrauded
her by "trick and device" or "false representations." Usually the only
"representation" has been a promise to marry her. Her real motive is
revenge upon her faithless fiance. In nine cases out of ten the fellow
is a cad, who has deliberately deserted her after getting her money, but
it is doubtful whether any real crime is involved.

If the judge lets the case go to the jury it is a pure gamble as to
what the result will be, and it may largely turn on the girl's physical
attractiveness. If she be pretty and demure a mixture of emotions
is aroused in the jury. "He probably did love her," say the twelve,
"because any one would be likely to do so. If he did love her, of course
he didn't falsely pretend to do so; but if he deserted a woman like that
he ought to be in jail anyway." Thus the argument that ought to acquit
in fact may convict the defendant. If the rival also is pretty, hopeless
confusion results; while if the complainant be a homely girl the jury
feels that he must have intended to swindle her anyway, as he could
never have honestly intended to marry her. Thus in any case the Lothario
is apt to pay a severe penalty for his faithlessness.

The man prosecuted by a woman, provided she cannot be persuaded to
withdraw the charge against him, is likely to get but cold consideration
for his side of the story and short shrift in the jury-room. Turn about,
if he can get a young and attractive woman to swear to his alibi or good
reputation the honest masculine citizen whom he has defrauded may very
likely have to whistle for his revenge. Many a scamp has gone free by
producing some sweetly demure maiden who faithfully swears that she
knows him to be an honest man. A blush at the psychological moment and
a wink from the lawyer is quite enough to lead the jury to believe that,
if they acquit the defendant, they will "make the young lady happy,"
whereas if he is convicted she will remain for aye a heart-broken
spinster. Like enough she may be only the merest acquaintance.

The writer is not likely to forget a distinguished lawyer's instructions
to his client who happened also to be a childhood acquaintance--as she
was about to go into court as the plaintiff in a suit for damages:

"I would fold my hands in my lap, Gwendolyn--yes, like that--and be
calm, very calm. And, Gwendolyn, above all things, be demure, Gwendolyn!
Be demure!"

Gwendolyn was the demurest of the demure, letting her eyes fall beneath
their pendant black lashes at the conclusion of each answer, and won her
case without the slightest difficulty.

The unconscious or conscious influence of women upon the intellects
of jurymen has given rise to a very prevalent impression that it is
difficult if not impossible successfully to prosecute a woman for crime.
This feeling expresses itself in general statements to the effect
that as things stand to-day a woman may commit murder with impunity.
Experience, supplemented by the official records, demonstrates, however,
that, curious as it must seem, the same sentiment aroused by a woman
supposed to have been wronged is not inspired in a jury by a woman
accused of crime. It is, indeed, true that juries are apt to be more
lenient with women than with men, but this leniency shows itself not in
acquitting them of the crimes charged against them, but of finding them
guilty in lower degrees.

Of course flagrant miscarriages of justice frequently occur, which, by
reason of their widespread publicity in the press, would seem to justify
the almost universal opinion that women are immune from the penalities
for homicide. It is also true that such miscarriages of justice are more
likely when the defendant is a woman than if he be a man.

One of these hysterical acquittals which give color to popular
impression, but which the writer believes to be an exception, was the
case of a young mother tried and acquitted for murder in the first
degree, December 22, 1904. This young woman, whose history was pathetic
in the extreme, was shown clearly by the evidence to have deliberately
taken the life of her child by giving it carbolic acid. The story was
a shocking one, yet the jury apparently never considered at all the
possibility of convicting her, but on retiring to the jury-room spent
their time in discussing how much money they should present her on her
acquittal.

No better actor ever played a part upon the court-room stage than old
"Bill" Howe. His every move and gesture was considered with reference
to its effect upon the jury, and the climax of his summing-up was always
accompanied by some dramatic exhibition calculated to arouse sympathy
for his client. Himself an adept at shedding tears at will, he seemed
able to induce them when needed in the lachrymal glands of the most
hardened culprit whom he happened to be defending.

Mr. Wellman tells the story of how he was once prosecuting a woman for
the murder of her lover, whom she had shot rather than allow him to
desert her. She was a parson's daughter who had gone wrong and there
seemed little to be said in her behalf. She sat at the bar the picture
of injured innocence, with a look of spirituality which she must have
conjured up from the storehouse of her memories of her father. Howe was
rather an exquisite so far as his personal habits were concerned, and
allowed his finger-nails to grow to an extraordinary length. He had
arranged that at the climax of his address to the jury he would turn
and, tearing away the slender hands of his client from her tear-stained
face, challenge the jury to find guilt written there. Wellman was
totally unprepared for this and a shiver ran down his spine when he saw
Howe, his face apparently surcharged with emotion, turn suddenly towards
his client and roughly thrust away her hands. As he did so he embedded
his finger-nails in her cheeks, and the girl uttered an involuntary
scream of nervous terror and pain that made the jury turn cold.

"Look, gentlemen! Look in this poor creature's face! Does she look
like a guilty woman? No! A thousand times no! Those are the tears of
innocence and shame! Send her back to her aged father to comfort his old
age! Let him clasp her in his arms and press his trembling lips to her
hollow eyes! Let him wipe away her tears and bid her sin no more!"

The jury acquitted, and Wellman, aghast, followed them downstairs to
inquire how such a thing were possible. The jurors said that they had
agreed to disclose nothing of their deliberations.

"But," explained Wellman, "you see, in a way I am your attorney, and I
want to know how to do better next time. She had offered to plead guilty
if she could get off with twenty years!"

The abashed jury slunk downstairs in silence and the secret of their
deliberations remains as yet untold.

In spite of such cases, where guilty women have been acquitted through
maudlin sentiment or in response to popular clamor, nothing could be
more erroneous than the idea that few women who are brought to the bar
of justice are made to suffer for their offences. Thus, although no
woman has suffered the death penalty in New York County in twenty years,
the average number of convictions for crime is practically the same
for women as for men in proportion to the number indicted. The last
unreversed conviction of a woman for murder in the first degree was that
of Chiara Cignarale, in May, 1887. Her sentence was commuted to life
imprisonment. Since then thirty women have been actually tried before
juries for homicide with the following results:

    Convicted of murder in first degree...........0
    Acquitted "...................................7
       "      " murder in second degree...........3
       "      " manslaughter in first degree.....10
       "      " manslaughter in seconds degree...10

     Total.......................................30


The percentage of convictions to acquittals is as follows:

            Convictions Acquittals Convictions Acquittals
                                    Per Cent    Per Cent
  1887-1907......23........7..........77..........23


It is distinctly interesting to compare this with the table showing the
results of all the homicide trials for the past eight years irrespective
of the sex of the defendants:

               Convictions Acquittals Convictions Acquittals
                                       Per Cent    Per Cent

     1900.............5.......12...........29.........71
     1901............17.......17...........50.........50
     1902............15.......11...........58.........42
     1903............24........8...........75.........25
     1904............19.......14...........58.........42
     1905............18.......13...........58.........42
     1906............21.......22...........49.........51
     1907............16.......10...........62.........38

     Total..........135......107.....Aver. 55...Aver. 45

The reader will observe that the percentage of convictions to acquittals
of women defendants averages twenty-two per cent greater than the
percentage for both sexes. A more elaborate table would show that where
the defendants are men there are a greater proportionate number
of acquittals, but more verdicts in higher degrees. A verdict of
manslaughter in the second degree in the case of a man charged with
murder is infrequent, but convictions of murder in the second degree are
exceedingly common.

The reason for the higher percentage of convictions of women is that
fewer women who commit crime are prosecuted than men, and that they are
rarely indicted unless they are clearly guilty of the degree of crime
charged against them; while practically every man who is charged with
homicide and who, it seems, may be found guilty is indicted for murder
in the first degree.

The trial of women for crime invariably arouses keen public interest,
and the dethronement of a Czar, or the assassination of an Emperor,
pales to insignificance before the prosecution of a woman for murder.
Some of this interest is fictitious and stimulated merely by the yellow
press, but a great deal of it is genuine. The writer remembers attending
a dinner of gray-headed judges and counsellors during the trial of Anna
Eliza, alias "Nan," Patterson, where one would have supposed that the
lightest subject of conversation would be not less weighty than the
constitutionality of an income tax, and finding to his astonishment that
the only topic for which they showed any zest was whether "Nan" would be
found guilty.

One of the earliest, if not the earliest, record of a woman being held
for murder is that of Agnes Archer, indicted by twelve men on April 4,
1435, sworn before the mayor and coroner to inquire as to the death
of Alice Colynbourgh. The quaint old report begins in Latin, but "the
pleadings" are set forth in the language of the day, as follows:

"Agnes Archer, is that thy name? which answered, yes.... Thou art
endyted that thou.... feloney moderiste her with a knyff fyve tymes in
the throte stekyng, throwe the wheche stekyng the saide Alys is deed....
I am not guilty of thoo dedys, ne noon of hem, God help me so.... How
wylte thou acquite the?... By God and by my neighbours of this town."

The subsequent history of Agnes is lost in obscurity, but since she had
to procure but thirty-six compurgators who were prepared to swear that
they believed her innocent, and as she was at liberty to choose these
herself from her native village of Winchelsea, it is probable that she
escaped.*



     * Cf. Thayer, as cited, supra.


Fortunately the sight of a woman, save of the very lowest class, at
the bar of justice is rare. The number of cases where women of good
environment appear as defendants in the criminal courts in the course of
a year may be numbered upon the fingers of a single hand, and, although
the number of female defendants may equal ten per cent of the total
number of males, not one-tenth of the women brought to the bar
of justice have had the benefit of an honest bringing up and good
surroundings.




CHAPTER VIII. Tricks of the Trade


"Tricks and treachery," said Benjamin Franklin, "are the practice of
fools that have not wit enough to be honest." Had the kindly philosopher
been familiar with all the exigencies of the criminal law he might have
added a qualification to this somewhat general, if indisputably moral,
maxim. Though it doubtless remains true as a guiding principle of
life that "Honesty is the best policy," it would be an unwarrantable
aspersion upon the intellectual qualities of the members of the criminal
bar to say that the tricks by virtue of which they often get their
clients off are "the practice of fools." On the contrary, observation
would seem to indicate that in many instances the wiser, or at least
the more successful, the practitioner of criminal law becomes, the more
numerous and ingenious become the "tricks" which are his stock in
trade. This must not be taken to mean that there are not high-minded and
conscientious practitioners of criminal law, many of them financially
successful, some filled with a noble humanitarian purpose, and some
drawn to their calling by a sincere enthusiasm for the vocation of the
advocate which, in these days of "business" law and commercial methods,
reaches perhaps its highest form in the criminal courts.

There are no more "tricks" practised in these tribunals than in the
civil, but they are more ingenious in conception, more lawless in
character, bolder in execution and less shamefaced in detection.

Let us not be too hard upon our brethren of the criminal branch. Truly,
their business is to "get their clients off." It is unquestionably a
generally accepted principle that it is better that ninety-nine guilty
men should escape than that one innocent man should be convicted.
However much persons of argumentative or philosophic disposition may
care to quarrel with this doctrine, they must at least admit that it
would doubtless appear to them of vital truth were they defending
some trembling client concerning whose guilt or innocence they were
themselves somewhat in doubt. "Charity believeth all things," and
the prisoner is entitled to every reasonable doubt, even from his own
lawyer. It is the lawyer's business to create such a doubt if he can,
and we must not be too censorious if, in his eagerness to raise this in
the minds of the jury, he sometimes oversteps the bounds of propriety,
appeals to popular prejudices and emotions, makes illogical deductions
from the evidence, and impugns the motives of the prosecution. The
district attorney should be able to take care of himself, handle
the evidence in logical fashion, and tear away the flimsy curtain of
sentimentality hoisted by the defence. These are hardly "tricks" at
all, but sometimes under the name of advocacy a trick is "turned" which
deserves a much harsher name.

Not long ago a celebrated case of murder was moved for trial after the
defendant's lawyer had urged him in vain to offer a plea of murder in
the second degree. A jury was summoned and, as is the usual custom in
such cases, examined separately on the "voir dire" as to their fitness
to serve. The defendant was a German, and the prosecutor succeeded
in keeping all Germans off the jury until the eleventh seat was to be
filled, when he found his peremptory challenges exhausted. Then the
lawyer for the prisoner managed to slip in a stout old Teuton,
who replied, in answer to a question as to his place of nativity,
"Schleswig-Holstein." The lawyer made a note of it, and, the box filled,
the trial proceeded with unwonted expedition.

The defendant was charged with having murdered a woman with whom he
had been intimate, and his guilt of murder in the first degree was
demonstrated upon the evidence beyond peradventure. At the conclusion of
the case, the defendant not having dared to take the stand, the lawyer
arose to address the jury in behalf of what appeared a hopeless
cause. Even the old German in the back row seemed plunged in soporific
inattention. After a few introductory remarks the lawyer raised his
voice and in heart-rending tones began:

"In the beautiful county of Schleswig-Holstein sits a woman old and
gray, waiting the message of your verdict from beyond the seas." (Number
11 opened his eyes and looked at the lawyer as if not quite sure of
what he had heard.) "There she sits" (continued the attorney), "in
Schleswig-Holstein, by her cottage window, waiting, waiting to learn
whether her boy is to be returned to her outstretched arms." (Number 11
sat up and rubbed his forehead.) "Had the woman, who so unhappily met
her death at the hands of my unfortunate client, been like those
women of Schleswig-Holstein--noble, sweet, pure, lovely women of
Schleswig-Holstein--I should have naught to say to you in his behalf."
(Number 11 leaned forward and gazed searchingly into the lawyer's face.)
"But alas, no! Schleswig-Holstein produces a virtue, a loveliness, a
nobility of its own." (Number 11 sat up and proudly expanded his chest.)

When, after about an hour or more of Schleswig-Holstein the defendant's
counsel surrendered the floor to the district attorney, the latter found
it quite impossible to secure the slightest attention from the eleventh
juror, who seemed to be spending his time in casting compassionate
glances in the direction of the prisoner. In due course the jury
retired, but had no sooner reached their room and closed the door
than the old Teuton cried, "Dot man iss not guilty!" The other eleven
wrestled with him in vain. He remained impervious to argument for
seventeen hours, declining to discuss the evidence, and muttering at
intervals, "Dot man iss not guilty!" The other eleven stood unanimously
for murder in the first degree, which was the only logical verdict that
could possibly have been returned upon the evidence.

At last, worn out with their efforts, they finally induced the old
Teuton to compromise with them on a verdict of manslaughter. Wearily
they straggled in, the old native of Schleswig-Holstein bringing up the
rear, bursting with exultation and with victory in his eye.

"Gentlemen of the jury, have you agreed upon a verdict?" inquired the
clerk.

"We have," replied the foreman.

"How say you, do you find the defendant guilty or not guilty?"

"Guilty--of manslaughter," returned the foreman feebly.

The district attorney was aghast at such a miscarriage of justice, and
the judge showed plainly by his demeanor his opinion of such a verdict.
But the old inhabitant of Schleswig-Holstein cared for this not a whit.
The old mother in Schleswig-Holstein might still clasp her son in her
arms before she died! The defendant was arraigned at the bar. Then for
the first time, and to the surprise and disgust of No. 11, he admitted
in answer to the questions of the clerk that his parents were both dead
and that he was born in Hamburg, a town for whose inhabitants the old
juryman had, like others of his compatriots, a constitutional antipathy.

The "tricks" of the trade as practised by the astute and unscrupulous
criminal lawyer vary with the stage of the case and the character of
the crime charged. They are also adapted with careful attention to the
disposition, experience and capacity of the particular district attorney
who happens to be trying the case against the defendant. An illustration
of one of these occurred during the prosecution of a bartender for
selling "spirituous liquors" without a proper license. He was defended
by an old war-horse of the criminal bar famous for his astuteness and
ability to laugh a case out of court. The assistant district attorney
who appeared against him was a young man recently appointed to office,
and who was almost overcome at the idea of trying a case against so well
known a practitioner. He had personally conducted but very few cases,
had an excessive conception of his own dignity, and dreaded nothing so
much as to appear ridiculous. Everything, except the evidence, favored
the defendant, who, however, was, beyond every doubt, guilty of the
offence charged.

The young assistant put in his case, calling his witnesses one by one,
and examining them with the most feverish anxiety lest he should forget
something. The lawyer for the defence made no cross-examination and
contented himself with smiling blandly as each witness left the stand.
The youthful prosecutor became more and more nervous. He was sure
that something was wrong, but he couldn't just make out what. At the
conclusion of the People's case the lawyer inquired, with a broad grin,
"if that was all."

The young assistant replied that it was, and that, in his opinion, it
was "quite enough."

"Let that be noted by the stenographer," remarked the lawyer. "Now, if
your Honors please," he continued, addressing the three judges of the
Special Sessions, "you all know how interested I am to see these young
lawyers growing up. I like to help 'em along--give 'em a chance--teach
'em a thing or two. I trust it may not be out of place for me to say
that I like my young friend here and think he tried his case very well.
But he has a great deal to learn. I'm always glad, as I said, to give
the boys a chance--to give 'em a little experience. I shall not put
my client upon the stand. It is not necessary. The fact is," turning
suddenly to the unfortunate assistant district attorney--"my client has
a license." He drew from his pocket a folded paper and handed it to
the paralyzed young attorney with the harsh demand: "What do you say to
that?"

The assistant took the paper in trembling fingers and perused it as well
as he could in his unnerved condition.

"Mr. District Attorney," remarked the presiding justice dryly (which did
not lessen the confusion of the young lawyer), "is this a fact? Has the
defendant a license?"

"Yes, your Honors," replied the assistant; "this paper seems to be a
license."

"Defendant discharged!" remarked the court briefly.

The prisoner stepped from the bar and rapidly disappeared though the
door of the court-room. After enough time had elapsed to give him a good
start and while another case was being called, the old lawyer leaned
over to the assistant and remarked with a chuckle

"I am always glad to give the boys a chance--help 'em along--teach 'em a
little. That license was a beer license!"


BEFORE TRIAL

To begin at the beginning, whenever a person has been arrested, charged
with crime, and has secured a criminal lawyer to defend him, the first
move of the latter is naturally to try and nip the case in the bud by
inducing the complaining witness to abandon the prosecution. In a vast
number of cases he is successful. He appeals to the charity of the
injured party, quotes a little of the Scriptures and the "Golden Rule,"
pictures the destitute condition of the defendant's family should he be
cast into prison, and the dragging of an honored name in the gutter if
he should be convicted. Few complainants have ever before appeared in a
police court, and are filled with repugnance at the rough treatment of
prisoners and the suffering which they observe upon every side. After
they have seen the prisoner emerge from the cells, pale, hollow-eyed,
bedraggled, and have beheld the tears of his wife and children as they
crowd around the husband and father, they begin to realize the horrible
consequences of a criminal prosecution and to regret that they ever took
the steps which have brought the wrong-doer where he is. The district
attorney had not yet taken up the case; the prosecution up to this point
is of a private character; there are loud promises of "restitution" and
future good behavior from the defendant, and the occasion is ripe for
the lawyer to urge the complainant to "temper justice with mercy" and
withdraw "before it be too late and the poor man be ruined forever."

If the complainant is, however, bent on bringing the defendant to
justice and remains adamantine to the arguments of the lawyer and
the tears of the defendant's family connections, it remains for the
prisoner's attorney to endeavor to get the case adjourned "until matters
can be adjusted"--to wit, restitution made if money has been stolen,
or doctors' bills paid if a head has been cracked, with perhaps another
chance of "pulling off" the complainant and his witnesses. Failing in
an attempt to secure an adjournment, two courses remain open: first, to
persuade the court that the matter is a trivial one arising out of petty
spite, is all a mistake, or that at best it is a case of "disorderly
conduct" (and thus induce the judge to "turn the case out" or inflict
some trifling punishment in the shape of a fine); or, second, if it be
clear that a real crime has been committed, to clamor for an immediate
hearing in order, if it be secured, to subject the prosecution's
witnesses to a most exhaustive cross-examination, and thus get a clear
idea of just what evidence there is against the accused.

At the conclusion of the complainant's case, if it appear reasonably
certain that the magistrate will "hold" the prisoner for the action of a
superior court, the lawyer will then "waive further examination," or,
in other words, put in no defence, preferring the certainty of having to
face a jury trial to affording in prosecution an opportunity to discover
exactly what defence will be put in and to secure evidence in advance
of the trial to rebut it. Thus it rarely happens in criminal cases of
importance that the district attorney knows what the defence is to be
until the defendant himself takes the stand, and, by "waiving further
examination" in the police court, the astute criminal attorney may
select at his leisure the defence best suited to fit in with and render
nugatory the prosecution's evidence.

The writer has frequently been told by the attorney for a defendant on
trial for crime that "the defence has not yet been decided upon."
In fact, such statements are exceedingly common. In many courts the
attitude of all parties concerned seems to be that the defendant will
put up a perjured defence (so far as his own testimony is concerned,
at any rate) as a matter of course, and that this is hardly to be taken
against him.

On the other hand, if a guilty defendant has been so badly advised as
to give his own version of the case before the magistrate in the first
instance, it requires but slight assiduity on the part of the district
attorney to secure, in the interval between the hearing and the jury
trial, ample evidence to rebut it.

As illustrating merely the fertility and resourcefulness of some
defendants (or perhaps their counsel), the writer recalls a case which
he tried in the year 1902 where the defendant, a druggist, was charged
with manslaughter in having caused the death of an infant by filling a
doctor's prescription for calomel with morphine. It so happened that two
jars containing standard pills had been standing side by side upon an
adjacent shelf, and, a prescription for morphine having come in at the
same time as that for the calomel, the druggist had carelessly filled
the morphine prescription with calomel, and the calomel prescription
with morphine. The adult for whom the morphine had been prescribed
recovered immediately under the beneficent influence of the calomel, but
the baby for whom the calomel had been ordered died from the effects
of the first morphine pill administered. All this had occurred in
1897--five years before. The remainder of the pills had disappeared.

Upon the trial (no inconsistent contention having been entered in the
police court) the prisoner's counsel introduced six separate defences,
to wit: That the prescription had been properly filled with calomel
and that the child had died from natural causes, the following being
suggested.

1. Acute gastritis.

2. Acute nephritis.

3. Cerebro-spinal meningitis.

4. Fulminating meningitis.

5. That the child had died of apomorphine, a totally distinct poison.

6. That it had received and taken calomel, but that, having eaten a
small piece of pickle shortly before, the conjunction of the vegetable
acid with the calomel had formed, in the child's stomach, a precipitate
of corrosive sublimate, from which it had died.

These were all argued with great learning. During the trial the box
containing the balance of the pills, which the defence contended were
calomel, unexpectedly turned up. It has always been one of the greatest
regrets of the writer's life that he did not then and there challenge
the defendant to eat one of the pills and thus prove the good faith of
his defence.

This was one of the very rare cases where a chemical analysis has been
conducted in open court. The chemist first tested a standard trade
morphine pill with sulphuric acid, so that the jury could personally
observe the various color reactions for themselves. He then took one of
the contested pills and subjected it to the same test. The first pill
had at once turned to a brilliant rose, but the contested pill, being
antiquated, "hung fire," as it were, for some seconds. As nothing
occurred, dismay made itself evident on the face of the prosecutor,
and for a moment he felt that all was lost. Then the five-year-old pill
slowly turned to a faint brown, changed to a yellowish red, and finally
broke into an ardent rose. The jury settled back into their seats with
an audible "Ah!" and the defendant was convicted.

Let us return, however, to that point in the proceedings where the
defendant has been "held for trial" by the magistrate. The prisoner's
counsel now endeavors to convince the district attorney that "there
is nothing in the case," and continues unremittingly to work upon the
feelings of the complainant. If he finds that his labors are likely
to be fruitless in both directions, he may now seek an opportunity to
secure permission for his client to appear before the grand jury and
explain away, if possible, the charge against him.

We will assume, however, that, in spite of the assiduity of his lawyer,
the prisoner has at last been indicted and is awaiting trial. What
can be done about it? Of course, if the case could be indefinitely
adjourned, the complainant or his chief witness might die or move
away to some other jurisdiction, and if the indictment could
be "pigeon-holed" the case might die a natural death of itself.
Indictments, however, in New York County, whatever may be the case
elsewhere, are no longer "pigeon-holed," and they cannot be adequately
"lost," since certified copies are made of each. The next step,
therefore, is to secure as long a time as possible before trial.

Usually a prisoner has nothing to lose and everything to gain by delay,
and the excuses offered for adjournment are often ingenious in the
extreme. The writer knows one criminal attorney who, if driven to the
wall in the matter of excuses, will always serenely announce the death
of a near relative and the obligation devolving upon him to attend the
funeral. Another, as a last resort, regularly is attacked in open court
by severe cramps in the stomach. If the court insists on the trial
proceeding, he invariably recovers. Of course, there are many legitimate
reasons for adjourning cases which the prosecution is powerless to
combat.

The most effective method invoked to secure delay, and one which it
is practically useless for the district attorney to oppose, is an
application "to take testimony" upon commission in some distant place.
Here again it must be borne in mind that such applications are often
legitimate and proper and should be granted in simple justice to the
defendant. Although this right to take the testimony of absent witnesses
is confined in New York State to the defendant and does not extend to
the prosecution, and is undoubtedly often the subject of much abuse, it
not infrequently is the cause of saving an innocent man.

An example of this was the case of William H. Ellis, recently brought
into the public eye through his connection with the treaty between
the United States Government and King Menelik of Abyssinia. Ellis was
accused in 1901 by a young woman of apparently excellent antecedents
and character of a serious crime. Prior to his indictment a colored man
employed in his office (the alleged scene of the crime) disappeared.
When the case was moved for trial, Ellis, through his attorneys, moved
for a commission to take the testimony of this absent, but clearly
material, witness in one of the remote States of Mexico--a proceeding
which would require a journey of some two weeks on muleback, beyond
the railway terminus. The district attorney, in view of the peculiarly
opportune disappearance of this person from the jurisdiction,
strenuously opposed the application and hinted at collusion between
Ellis and the witness. The application, however, was granted, and a
delay of over a month ensued. During that time evidence was procured by
the counsel of the prisoner showing conclusively that the complaining
witness was mentally unsound and had made similar and groundless charges
against others. The indictment was at once dismissed.

But such delays are not always so righteously employed. There is a story
told of a case where a notorious character was charged with the unusual
crime of "mayhem"--biting off another man's finger. The defendant's
counsel secured adjournment after adjournment--no one knew why. At last
the case was moved for trial and the prosecution put in its evidence,
clearly showing the guilt of the prisoner. At the conclusion of the
People's testimony, the lawyer for the defendant arose and harshly
stigmatized the story of the complainant as a "pack of lies."

"I will prove to you in a moment, gentlemen," exclaimed he to the jury,
"how absurd is this charge against my innocent client. Take the stand!"

The prisoner arose and walked to the witnesschair.

"Open your mouth!" shouted the lawyer.

The defendant did so. He had not a tooth in his head. The delay had been
advantageously employed.

The importance of mere delay to a guilty defendant cannot well be
overestimated. "You never can tell what may happen to knock a case on
the head." For this reason a sufficiently paid and properly equipped
counsel will run the whole gamut of criminal procedure, and:

1. Demur to the indictment.

2. Move for an inspection of the minutes of the proceedings before the
grand jury.

3. Move to dismiss the indictment for lack of sufficient evidence before
that body.

4. Move for a commission to take testimony.

5. Move for a change of venue.

6. Secure, where possible, a writ of habeas corpus and a stay of
proceedings from some federal judge on the ground that his client is
confined without due process of law.

All these steps he will take seriatim, and some cases have been
delayed for as much as two years by merely invoking "legitimate" legal
processes. In point of fact it is quite possible for any defendant
absolutely to prevent an immediate trial provided he has the services of
vigilant counsel, for these are not the only proceedings of which he can
avail himself.

A totally distinct method is for the defendant to secure bail, and,
after securing as many adjournments as possible, simply flee the
jurisdiction. He will then remain away until the case is hopelessly
stale, or he no longer fears prosecution.

In default of all else he may go "insane" just before the case is moved
for trial. This habit of the criminal rich when brought to book for
their misdeeds is too well known to require comment. All that is
necessary is for a sufficient number of "expert" alienists to declare
it to be their opinion that the defendant is mentally incapable of
understanding the proceedings against him or of preparing his defence,
and he is shifted off to a "sanitarium" until some new sensation
occupies the public mind and his offences are partially forgotten.

In this way justice is often thwarted and the law cheated of its victim,
but unless fortune favors him, sooner or later the indicted man must
return for trial and submit the charge against him to a jury. But if
this happens, even if he be guilty, all hope need not be lost. There are
still "tricks of the trade" which may save him from the clutches of the
law.

AT THE TRIAL

What can be done when at last the prisoner who has fought presistently
for adjournment has been forced to face the witnesses against him and
submit the evidence to a jury of peers? Let us assume further that
he has been "out on bail," with plenty of opportunity to prepare his
defence and lay his plans for escape.

When the case is finally called and the defendant takes his seat at the
bar after a lapse of anywhere from six months to a year or more after
his arrest, the first question for the district attorney to investigate
is whether or no the person presenting himself for trial be in point
of fact the individual mentioned in the indictment. This is often
a difficult matter to determine. "Ringers"--particularly in the
magistrates' courts--are by no means unknown. Sometimes they appear even
in the higher courts. If the defendant be an ex-convict or a well-known
crook, his photograph and measurements will speedily remove all doubt
upon the subject, but if he be a foreigner (particularly a Pole, Italian
or a Chinaman), or even merely one of the homogeneous inhabitants of
the densely-populated East Side of New York, it is sometimes a puzzling
problem. "Mock Duck," the celebrated Highbinder of Chinatown, who was
set free after two lengthy trials for murder, was charged not long ago
with a second assassination. He was pointed out to the police by various
Chinamen, arrested and brought into the Criminal Courts building for
identification, but for a long time it was a matter of uncertainty
whether friends of his (masquerading as enemies) had not surrendered a
substitute. Luckily the assistant district attorney who had prosecuted
this wily and dangerous Celestial in the first instance was able to
identify him.

Many years ago, during the days of Fernando Wood, a connection of his
was reputed to be the power behind the "policy" business in New York
City--the predecessor of the notorious Al Adams. A "runner" belonging
to the system having been arrested and policy slips having been found
in his possession, the reigning Policy King retained a lawyer of eminent
respectability to see what could be done about it. The defendant was a
particularly valuable man in the business and one for whom his employer
desired to do everything in his power. The lawyer advised the defendant
to plead guilty, provided the judge could be induced to let him off with
a fine, which the policy King agreed to pay. Accordingly, the lawyer
visited the judge in his chambers and the latter practically promised
to inflict only a fine in case the defendant, whom we will call, out
of consideration for his memory, "Johnny Dough," should plead guilty.
Unfortunately for this very satisfactory arrangement, the judge, now
long since deceased, was afflicted with a serious mental trouble which
occasionally manifested itself in peculiar losses of memory. When
"Johnny Dough," the Policy King's favorite, was arraigned at the bar
and, in answer to the clerk's interrogation, stated that he withdrew his
plea of "not guilty" and now stood ready to plead "guilty," the judge,
to the surprise and consternation of the lawyer, the defendant, and the
latter's assembled friends, turned upon him and exclaimed:

"Ha! So you plead guilty, do you? Well, I sentence you to the
penitentiary for one year, you miserable scoundrel!"

Utterly overwhelmed, "Johnny Dough!" was led away, while his lawyer and
relatives retired to the corridor to express their opinion of the court.
About three months later the lawyer, who had heard nothing further
concerning the case, happened to be in the office of the district
attorney, when the latter looked up with a smile and inquired:

"Well, how's your client-Mr. Dough?"

"Safe on the Island, I suppose," replied the lawyer,

"Not a bit of it," returned the district attorney. "He never went
there."

"What do you mean?" inquired the lawyer. "I heard him sentenced to a
year myself!"

"I can't help that," said the district attorney. "The other day a
workingman went down to the Island to see his old friend 'Johnny Dough.'
There was only one 'Johnny Dough' on the lists, but when he was produced
the visitor exclaimed: 'That Johnny Dough! That ain't him at all, at
all!' The visitor departed in disgust. We instituted an investigation
and found that the man at the Island was a 'ringer.'"

"You don't say!" cried the lawyer.

"Yes," continued the district attorney. "But that is not the best part
of it. You see, the 'ringer' says he was to get two hundred dollars per
month for each month of Dough's sentence which he served. The prison
authorities have refused to keep him any longer, and now he is suing
them for damages, and is trying to get a writ of mandamus to compel them
to take him back and let him serve out the rest of the sentence!"

Probably the most successful instance on record of making use of a
dummy occurred in the early stages of the now famous Morse-Dodge divorce
tangle. Dodge had been the first husband of Mrs. Morse, and from him
she had secured a divorce. A proceeding to effect the annulment of her
second marriage had been begun on the ground that Dodge had never been
legally served with the papers in the original divorce case--in other
words, to establish the fact that she was still, in spite of her
marriage to Morse, the wife of Dodge. Dodge appeared in New York and
swore that he had never been served with any papers. A well-known and
reputable lawyer, on the other hand, Mr. Sweetser, was prepared to swear
that he had served them personally upon Dodge himself. The matter was
sent by the court to a referee. At the hour set for the hearing in
the referee's office, Messrs. Hummel and Steinhardt arrived early, in
company with a third person, and took their seats with their backs to a
window on one side of the table, at the head of which sat the referee,
and opposite ex-Judge Fursman, attorney for Mrs. Morse. Mr. Sweetser was
late. Presently he appeared, entered the office hurriedly, bowed to
the referee, apologized for being tardy, greeted Messrs. Steinhardt and
Hummel, and then, turning to their companion, exclaimed: "How do you do,
Mr. Dodge?" It was not Dodge at all, but an acquaintance of one of Howe
& Hummel's office force who had been asked to accommodate them. Nothing
had been said, no representations had been made, and Sweetser had
voluntarily walked into a trap.

The attempt to induce witnesses to identify "dummies" is frequently
made by both sides in criminal cases, and under certain circumstances
is generally regarded as professional. Of course, in such instances no
false suggestions are made, the witness himself being relied upon to
"drop the fall." In case he does identify the wrong person, he has, of
course, invalidated his entire testimony.

Not in one case out of five hundred, however, is any attempt made
to substitute a "dummy" for the real defendant, the reason being,
presumably, the prejudice innocent people have against going to prison
even for a large reward. The question resolves itself, therefore, into
how to get the client off when he is actually on trial. First, how can
the sympathies of the jury be enlisted at the very start? Weeping wives
and wailing infants are a drug on the market. It is a friendless man
indeed, even if he be a bachelor, who cannot procure for the purposes of
his trial the services of a temporary wife and miscellaneous collection
of children. Not that he need swear that they are his! They are
merely lined up along a bench well to the front of the court-room--the
imagination of the juryman does the rest.

A defendant's counsel always endeavors to impress the jury with the idea
that all he wants is a fair, open trial--and that he has nothing in the
world to conceal. This usually takes the form of a loud announcement
that he is willing "to take the first twelve men who enter the box."
Inasmuch as the defence needs only to secure the vote of one juryman to
procure a disagreement, this offer is a comparatively safe one for the
defendant to make, since the prosecutor, who must secure unanimity on
the part of the jury (at least in New York State), can afford to take no
chances of letting an incompetent or otherwise unfit talesman slip into
the box. Caution requires him to examine the jury in every important
case, and frequently this ruse on the part of the defendant makes it
appear as if the State had less confidence in its case than the defence.
This trick was invariably used by the late William F. Howe in all
homicide cases where he appeared for the defence.

The next step is to slip some juryman into the box who is likely for any
one of a thousand reasons to lean toward the defence--as, for example,
one who is of the same religion, nationality or even name as the
defendant. The writer once tried a case where the defendant was a Hebrew
named Bauman, charged with perjury. Mr. Abraham Levy was the counsel for
the defendant. Having left an associate to select the jury the writer
returned to the courtroom to find that his friend had chosen for foreman
a Hebrew named Abraham Levy. Needless to say, a disagreement of the jury
was the almost inevitable result. The same lawyer not many years ago
defended a client named Abraham Levy. In like manner he managed to get
an Abraham Levy on the jury, and on that occasion succeeded in getting
his client off scot-free.

No method is too far-fetched to be made use of on the chance of
"catching" some stray talesman. In a case defended by Ambrose Hal.
Purdy, where the deceased had been wantonly stabbed to death by a
blood-thirsty Italian shortly after the assassination of President
McKinley, the defence was interposed that a quarrel had arisen between
the two men owing to the fact that the deceased had loudly proclaimed
anarchistic doctrines and openly gloried in the death of the President,
that the defendant had expostulated with him, whereupon the deceased had
violently attacked the prisoner, who had killed him in self-defence.

The whole thing was so thin as to deceive nobody, but Mr. Purdy, as
each talesman took the witness-chair to be examined on the voir dire,
solemnly asked each one:

"Pardon me for asking such a question at this time--it is only my duty
to my unfortunate client that impels me to it--but have you any sympathy
with anarchy or with assassination?"

The talesman, of course, inevitably replied in the negative.

"Thank you, sir," Purdy would continue: "In that event you are entirely
acceptable!"

Not long ago two shrewd Irish attorneys were engaged in defending a
client charged with an atrocious murder. The defendant had the most
Hebraic cast of countenance imaginable, and a beard that reached to
his waist. Practically the only question which these lawyers put to the
different talesmen during the selection of the jury was, "Have you any
prejudice against the defendant on account of his race?" In due course
they succeeded in getting several Hebrews upon the jury who managed in
the jury-room to argue the verdict down from murder to manslaughter in
the second degree. As the defendant was being taken across the bridge to
the Tombs he fell on his knees and offered up a heartfelt prayer such as
could only have emanated from the lips of a devout Roman Catholic.

Lawyers frequently secure the good-will of jurors (which may last
throughout the trial and show itself in the verdict) by some happy
remark during the early stages of the case. During the Clancy murder
trial each side exhausted its thirty peremptory challenges and also the
entire panel of jurors in filling the box. At this stage of the case the
foreman became ill and had to be excused. No jurors were left except one
who had been excused by mutual consent for some trifling reason, and
who out of curiosity had remained in court. He rejoiced in the name of
Stone. Both sides then agreed to accept him as foreman provided he was
still willing to serve, and this proving to be the case he triumphantly
made his way towards the box. As he did so, the defendant's counsel
remarked: "The Stone which the builders refused is become the head Stone
of the corner." The good-will generated by this meagre jest stood him
later in excellent stead.

In default of any other defence, some criminal attorneys have been known
to seek to excite sympathy for their helpless clients by appearing in
court so intoxicated as to be manifestly unable to take care of the
defendant's interests, and prisoners have frequently been acquitted
simply by virtue of their lawyer's obvious incapacity. The attitude
of the jury in such cases seems to be that the defendant has not had a
"fair show" and so should be acquitted anyway. Of course, this appeals
to the juryman's sympathies and he overlooks the fact that by his action
the prosecution is given no "show" at all.

Generally speaking, the advice credited to Mr. Lincoln, as being given
by him to a young attorney who was about to defend a presumably guilty
client, is religiously followed by all criminal practitioners:

"Well, my boy, if you've got a good case, stick to the evidence; if
you've got a weak one, go for the People's witnesses; but--if you've got
no case at all, hammer the district attorney!"

As a rule, however, criminal lawyers are not in a position to "hammer"
the prosecuting officer, but endeavor instead to suggest by innuendo or
even open declaration his bias and unfairness.

"Be fair, Mr.--!" is the continual cry. "Try to be fair!"

The defendant, whether he be an ex-convict or thirty-year-old
professional thief, is always "this poor boy," and, as he is not
compelled by law to testify, and as his failure to do so must not be
weighed against him by the jury, he frequently walks out of court a free
man, because the jury believe from the lawyer's remarks that he is in
fact a mere youthful offender of hitherto good reputation and deserves
another chance.

By all odds the greatest abuse in criminal trials lies in the open
disregard of professional ethics on the part of lawyers who deliberately
supply of themselves, in their opening and closing addresses to the
jury, what incompetent bits of evidence, true or false, they have not
been able to establish by their witnesses. There is no complete cure for
this, for even if the judge rebukes the lawyer and directs the jury to
disregard what he has said as "not being in the evidence," the damage
has been done, the statement still lingering in the jury's mind without
any opportunity on the part of the prosecutor to disprove it. There is
no antidote for such jury-poison. A shyster lawyer need but to keep his
client off the stand and he can saturate the jury's mind with any
facts concerning the defendant's respectability and history which
his imagination is powerful enough to supply. On such occasions an
ex-convict with no relatives may become a "noble fellow, who, rather
than have his family name tainted by being connected with a criminal
trial, is willing to risk even conviction"--"a veteran of the glorious
war which knocked the shackles from the slave"--"the father of nine
children"--"a man hounded by the police." The district attorney may
shout himself hoarse, the judge may pound his gavel in righteous
indignation, the lawyer may apologize because in the zeal with which
he feels inspired for his client's cause he perhaps (which only makes
matters worse) has overstepped the mark--but some juryman may suppose
that, after all, the prisoner is a hero or nine times a father.

There is one notorious attorney who poses as a philanthropist and who
invariably promises the jury that if they acquit his client he will
personally give him employment. If he has kept half of his promises
he must by this time have several hundred clerks, gardeners, coachmen,
choremen and valets.

In like manner attorneys of this feather will deliberately state to the
jury that if the defendant had taken the stand he would have testified
thus and so; or that if certain witnesses who have not appeared (and who
perhaps in reality do not exist at all) had testified they would
have established various facts. Such lawyers should be locked up or
disbarred; courts are powerless to negative entirely their dishonesty in
individual cases.

Clever counsel, of course, habitually make use of all sorts of appeals
to sympathy and prejudice. In one case in New York in which James W.
Osborne appeared as prosecutor the defendant wore a G.A.R. button. His
lawyer managed to get a veteran on the jury. Mr. Osborne is a native of
North Carolina. The defendant's counsel, to use his own words, "worked
the war for all it was worth," and the defendant lived, bled and died
for his country and over and over again. In summing up the case, the
attorney addressed himself particularly to the veteran on the back row,
and, after referring to numerous imaginary engagements, exclaimed: "Why,
gentlemen, my client was pouring out his life blood upon the field
of battle when the ancestors of Mr. Osborne were raising their hands
against the flag!" For once Mr. Osborne had no adequate words to reply.

By far the most effective and dangerous "trick" employed by guilty
defendants is the deliberate shouldering of the entire blame by one of
two persons who are indicted together for a single offence. A common
example of this is where two men are caught at the same time bearing
away between them the spoil of their crime and are jointly indicted
for "criminally receiving stolen property." Both, probably, are "side
partners," equally guilty, and have burglarized some house or store in
each other's company. They maybe old pals and often have served time
together. They agree to demand separate trials, and that whoever is
convicted first shall assume the entire responsibility. Accordingly, A.
is tried and, in spite of his asseveration that he is innocent and that
the "stuff" was given him by a strange man, who paid him a dollar to
transport it to a certain place, is properly convicted.* The bargain
holds. B.'s case is moved for trial and he claims never to have seen
A. in his life before the night in question, and that he volunteered to
help the latter carry a bundle which seemed to be too heavy for him. He
calls A., who testifies that this is so--that B., whom he did not know
from Adam, tendered his services and that he availed himself of the
offer. The jury are usually prone to acquit, as the weight of evidence
is clearly with the defendant.


     * The defence that the accused innocently received the stolen property
into his possession was a familiar one even in 1697, as appears by the
following record taken from the Minutes of the Sessions. It would seem
that it was even then received with some incredulity.

CITY & COUNTY OF NEW YORK: ss:

At a Meeting of the Justices of the Peace for the said City & County at
the City Hall of the said City on Thursday the 10th day of June Anno Dom
1697.

PRESENT.                William Morrott \   Esquires
                James Graham    /      quorum

               Jacobus Cortlandt \  Esquires
               Grandt Schuylor    }     Justices
               Leonard Lowie     /  of the Peace

Jacobus Cortlandt, Esq., one of his Majestys justices of the peace for
ye said City and County Informed the Kings justices that a peace of
Linnen Ticking was taken out of his Shop this Morning. That he was
informed a Negro Slave Named Joe was seen to take the same whereupon the
said Jacobus Van Cortlandt Pursued the said, Joe and apprehended him and
found the said peice of ticking in his custody and had the said Negro
Joe penned in the cage, upon which the said Negro man being brought
before the said Justices said he did not take the said ticking out of
the Shop window but that a Boy gave itt to him, but upon Examination of
Sundry other Evidence itt Manifestly Appeareth to the said Justices that
the said Negro man Named Joe, did steal the said piece of linnen ticking
out of the Shop Window of the said Jacobus Van Cortlandt and thereupon
doe order the punishment of the said Negro as follows vigt. That the
said Negro man Slave Named Joe shall be forthwith by the Common whipper
of the City or some of the Sheriffs officers art the Cage be stripped
Naked from the Middle upwards and then and there shall be tyed to the
tayle of a Cart and being soe stripped and tyed shah be Drove Round the
City and Receive upon his naked body art the Corner of each Street nine
lashes until he return to the place from whence he sett out and that he
afterwards Stand Committed to the Sheriffs custody till he pay his fees.


Many changes are rung upon this device. There is said to have been a
case in which the defendant was convicted of murder in the first degree
and sentenced to be executed. It was one of circumstantial evidence and
the verdict was the result of hours of deliberation on the part of the
jury. The prisoner had stoutly denied knowing anything of the homicide.
Shortly before the date set for the execution, another man turned up who
admitted that he had committed the crime and made the fullest sort of
a confession. A new trial was thereupon granted by the Appellate Court,
and the convict, on the application of the prosecuting attorney, was
discharged and quickly made himself scarce. It then developed that apart
from the prisoner's own confession there was practically nothing
to connect him with the crime. Under a statute making such evidence
obligatory in order to render a confession sufficient for a conviction,
the prisoner had to be discharged.

In the case of Mabel Parker, a young woman of twenty, charged with
the forgery of a large number of checks, many of them for substantial
amounts, her husband made an almost successful attempt to procure her
acquittal by means of a new variation of the old game. Mrs. Parker,
after her husband had been arrested for passing one of the bogus checks,
had been duped by a detective into believing that the latter was a
fellow criminal who was interested in securing Parker's release. In
due course she took this supposed friend into her confidence, made a
complete confession, and illustrated her skill by impromptu copies of
her forgeries from memory upon a sheet of pad paper. This the detective
secured and then arrested her. She was indicted for forging the name
Alice Kauser to a check upon the Lincoln National Bank. On her trial
she denied having done so, and claimed that the detective had found the
sheet containing her supposed handwriting in her husband's desk, and
that she had written none of the alleged copies upon it. The door of the
courtroom then opened, and James Parker was led to the bar and pleaded
guilty to the forgery of the check in question. (For the benefit of the
layman it should be explained that as a rule indictments for forgery
also contain a count for "uttering.") He then took the stand, admitted
that he had not only uttered but had also written the check, and swore
that it was his handwriting which, appeared on the pad.

The prosecutor was nonplussed. If he should ask the witness to prove
his capacity to forge such a check from memory on the witness-stand, the
latter, as he had ample time to practise the signature while in prison,
would probably succeed in doing so. If, on the other hand, he should not
ask him to write the name, the defendant's counsel would argue to the
jury that he was afraid to do so. The district attorney therefore took
the bull by the horns and challenged Parker to make from memory a copy
of the signature, and, much as he had suspected, the witness produced
a very good one. An acquittal seemed certain, and the prosecutor was
at his wit's end to devise a means to meet this practical demonstration
that the husband was in fact the forger. At last it was suggested to him
that it would be comparatively easy to memorize such a signature, and
acting on this hint he found that after half an hour's practice he was
able to make almost as good a forgery as Parker. When therefore it came
time for him to address the jury he pointed out the fact that Parker's
performance on the witness-stand really established nothing at all--that
any one could forge such a signature from memory after but a few
minutes' practice.

"To prove to you how easily this can be done," said he, "I will
volunteer to write a better Kauser signature than Parker did."

He thereupon seized a pen and began to demonstrate his ability to do so.
Mrs. Parker, seeing the force of this ocular demonstration, grasped her
counsel's arm and cried out: "For God's sake, don't let him do it!" The
lawyer objected, the objection was sustained, but the case was saved.
Why, the jury argued, should the lawyer object unless the making of such
a forgery were in fact an easy matter?

In desperate cases, desperate men will take desperate chances. The
traditional instance where the lawyer, defending a client charged with
causing the death of another by administering poisoned cake, met the
evidence of the prosecution's experts with the remark: "This is my
answer to their testimony!" and calmly ate the balance of the cake, is
too familiar to warrant detailed repetition. The jury retired to the
jury-room and the lawyer to his office, where a stomach pump quickly put
him out of danger. The jury is supposed to have acquitted.

Such are some of the tricks of the legal trade as practised in its
criminal branch. Most of them are unsuccessful and serve only to relieve
the gray monotony of the courts. When they achieve their object they add
to the interest of the profession and teach the prosecutor a lesson by
which, perhaps, he may profit in the future.




CHAPTER IX. What Fosters Crime


To lack of regard for law is mainly due the existence of crime, for a
perfect respect for law would involve entire obedience to it. Yet crime
continues and from time to time breaks forth to such an extent as
to give ground for a popular impression that it is increasing out
of proportion to our growth as a nation. Now, while it may be fairly
questioned whether there is any actual increase of crime in the United
States, and while, on the contrary, observation would seem to show
an actual decrease, not only in crimes of violence, but in all major
crimes, there nevertheless exists to-day a widespread contempt for the
criminal law which, if it has not already stimulated a general increase
of criminal activity, is likely to do so in the future. This contempt
for the law is founded not only upon actual conditions, but also upon
belief in conditions erroneously supposed to exist, which is fostered by
current literature and by the sensational press.

Thus, as has already been pointed out, while it is popularly believed
that women are almost never convicted of crime, and particularly of
homicide, the fact is, at least in New York County, that a much greater
proportion of women charged with murder are convicted than of men
charged with the same offence. To read the newspapers one would suppose
that the mere fact that the defendant was a female instantly paralyzed
the minds of the jury and reduced them to a state of imbecility. The
inevitable result of this must be to encourage lawlessness among the
lower orders of women and to lead them to look upon arrest as a mere
formality without ultimate significance. The writer recalls trying for
murder a negress who had shot her lover not long after the discharge of
a notorious female defendant in a recent spectacular trial in New York.
When asked why she had killed him she replied:

"Oh, Nan Patterson did it and got off."

This is not offered as a reflection upon the failure of the jury
to reach a verdict in the Patterson case, but as an illuminating
illustration of the concrete and immediate effect of all actual or
supposed failures of justice.

A belief that the course of criminal justice is slow and uncertain, that
the chances are all in favor of the defendant, and that he has but
to resort to technicalities to secure not only indefinite delay but
generally ultimate freedom, breeds an indifference amounting almost to
arrogance among law-breakers, powerful and otherwise, and a painful yet
hopeless conviction among honest men that nothing can prevent the wicked
from flourishing. Honesty seems no longer even a good policy, and
the young business man resorts to sharp practices to get ahead of his
unscrupulous competitor. In some localities the uncertainty and delay
attendant upon the execution of the law is the alleged and maybe
the actual, cause of the community crime of lynching. Even where the
administration of justice is seen at its best many people who have been
wronged believe that there is so little likelihood that the offender
will after all be punished that the cheapest and easiest course is to
let the matter drop. All this gives aid and comfort to the powers of
darkness.

The widespread impression as to the uncertainty of the law is not
entirely a misapprehension. "We have long since passed the period when
it is possible to punish an innocent man. We are now struggling with the
problem whether it is any longer possible to punish the guilty." It is
a melancholy fact that at the present time "penal statutes and procedure
tend more to defeat and retard the ends of justice than to protect the
rights of the accused."

The subject of criminal-law reform is too extensive to be discussed
here even superficially, but historically the explanation of existing
conditions is simple enough. The present overgrown state of the criminal
law is the direct result of our exaggerated regard for personal liberty,
coupled with a wholesale adoption of the technicalities of English law
invented when only such technicalities could stand between the minor
offender and the barbarous punishments of a bygone age. We forget that
the community is composed of individuals, and we tend to disregard its
interests for those of any particular individual who happens to be a
prisoner at the bar. We revolted from England and incidentally from her
system of administering the criminal law, by which the defendant could
have no voice at his own trial, where practically every crime was
punishable with death, and where only the Crown could produce and
examine witnesses. Every one will have to agree that the English system
was very harsh and very unfair indeed. To-day it is better than ours,
simply because its errors have been systematically and wisely corrected,
without diminution in the national respect for law. When we devised our
own system we adopted those humane expedients for evading the law which
were only justified by the existing penalties attached to convictions
for crime,--and then discarded the penalties. We were through with
tyrants once and for all. The Crown had always been opposed to the
defendant and the Crown was a tyrant. We naturally turned with sympathy
towards the prisoner.

We gave him the right of appeal on all matters of law through all the
courts of our States, and even into the courts of the United States,
while we allowed the People no right of appeal at all. If the prisoner
was convicted he could go on and test the case all along the line,--if
he was acquitted the People had to rest satisfied. We stopped the mouth
of the judge and made it illegal for him to "sum up" the case or discuss
the facts to any extent. We clipped the wings of the prosecutor and
allowed him less latitude of expression than an English judge. Then we
gazed on the work of our intellects and said it was good. If an ignorant
jury acquitted a murderer under the eyes of a gagged and helpless judge,
we said that it was all right and that it was better that ninety-nine
guilty men should escape than that one innocent man should be convicted.
Yes, better for whom? If another murderer, about whose guilt the highest
court in one of the States said there was no possible doubt, secured
three new trials and was finally acquitted on the fourth, it merely
demonstrated how perfectly we safeguarded the rights of the individual.

The result is that we have unnecessarily fettered ourselves, have
furnished a multitude of technical avenues of escape to wrong-doers,
and have created a popular contempt for courts of justice, which shows
itself in the sentimental and careless verdicts of juries, in a lack
of public spirit, and in an indisposition to prosecute wrong-doers. In
addition, the impression sought to be conveyed by the yellow press
that our judiciary is corrupt and that money can buy anything--even
justice--leads the jury in many cases to feel that their presence is
merely a formal concession to an archaic procedure and that their oaths
have no real significance.

The community, the "People," have a sufficiently hard task to secure
justice at any criminal trial. On the one hand is the abstract
proposition that the law has been violated, on the other sits a human
being, ofttimes contrite, always an object of pity. He is presumed
innocent, he is to be given the benefit of every reasonable doubt. He
has the right to make his own powerful appeal to the jury and to have
the services of the best lawyer he can secure to sway their emotions
and their sympathies. If the prosecutor resorts to eloquence he is
stigmatized as "over-zealous" and as a "persecutor." If a plainly guilty
defendant be acquitted, not the trampled ideal of justice, but the
vision of a liberated prisoner rejoicing in his freedom hovers in the
talesman's dreams.

So far so good; we can afford to stand by a system which in the long run
has served us fairly well. But an occasional evil, an evil which when
it occurs is productive of great harm and serves to give color to the
popular opinion of criminal law, begins only when the lawyers have had
their opportunity for elocution. At the conclusion of the charge
the defendant's attorney proceeds to put the judge through what is
familiarly known as "a course of sprouts." He makes twenty or thirty
"requests to charge the jury" on the most abstract propositions of law
which his fertile mind can devise,--relevant or irrelevant, applicable
or inapplicable to the facts,--and the judge is compelled to decide
from the bench, without opportunity for reflection, questions which the
attorney has labored upon, perchance, for weeks. If he guesses wrong,
the lawyer "excepts" and the case may be reversed on appeal. This is not
a test of the defendant's guilt or innocence, but a test of the abstract
learning and quickness of the presiding judge.

It is generally believed that appellate courts are prone to reverse
criminal cases on purely technical grounds. Whether this belief be well
founded or ill, its wide acceptance as fact is fertile in bringing the
law into disrepute.* Justice to be effective must be not only sure but
swift. An "iron hand" cannot always compensate for a "leaden heel".



     *Cf. "Criminal Law Reform," G.W. Alger, "The Outlook," June, 1907. Also
article having same title in "Moral Overstrain," by same author.
See also, by Hon. C.F. Amidon, "The Quest for Error and the doing of
Justice," 40 American Law Rev. 681, and article on same subject in "The
Outlook" for June, 1906.


It is probably true that in some of the States such a tendency exists
and may result in making the administration of justice a laughing stock,
but it is far from being so in States of the character of New York and
Massachusetts. The Appellate Division, First Department, and Court of
Appeals in New York are distinctly opposed to reversing criminal cases
on technical grounds and are prone to disregard trivial error where
the guilt of the defendant is clear. The writer can recall no recent
criminal case where the district attorney's office has felt aggrieved at
the action of the higher courts, and on the contrary believes that
their action is generally based on broad principles of public policy and
common-sense.

During the year 1905 the district attorney of New York County defended
forty-seven appeals from convictions in criminal cases in the Appellate
Division. Of these convictions only three were reversed. He defended
eighteen in the Court of Appeals, of which only two were reversed. One
of the writer's associates computed that he had secured, during a four
years' term of office, twenty-nine convictions in which appeals had been
taken. Of these but two were reversed, one of them immediately resulting
in the defendant's re-conviction for the same crime. The other is still
pending and the defendant awaiting his trial. Certainly there is little
in the actual figures to give color to the impression that the criminal
profits by mere technicalities on appeal,--at least in New York State.

In nine cases out of ten the reversal of a conviction in a criminal case
is due to the carelessness or inefficiency of the prosecuting officer or
trial judge and not to any inadequacy in our methods of procedure.
Yet the tenth case, the case where the criminal does beat the law by a
technicality, does more harm than can easily be estimated. That is the
one case everybody knows about, the one the papers descant upon, the one
that cheers the heart of the grafter and every criminal who can afford
to pay a lawyer.

Yet the evil influence of the reversal of a conviction on appeal,
however much it is to be deprecated, is as nothing compared with a
deliberate acquittal of a guilty defendant by a reckless, sentimental,
or lawless jury. Few can appreciate as does a prosecutor the actual,
practical and immediate effect of such a spectacle upon those who
witness it.

Two men were seen to enter an empty dwelling-house in the dead of night.
The alarm was given by a watchman near by, and a young police officer,
who had been but seven months on the force, bravely entered the black
and deserted building, searched it from roof to cellar, and found the
marauders locked in one of the rooms. He called upon them to open,
received no reply, yet without hesitation and without knowing what the
consequences to himself might be, smashed in the door and apprehended
the two men. One was found with a large bundle of skeleton keys in his
pocket and several candles, while a partially consumed candle lay
upon the floor. In the police court they pleaded guilty to a charge of
burglary, and were promptly indicted by the grand jury.

At the trial they claimed to have gone into the house to sleep, said
they had found the bunch of keys on the stairs, denied having the
candles at all or that they were in a room on the top story, and
asserted that they were in the entrance hall when arrested.

The story told by the defendants was so utterly ridiculous that one of
the two could not control a grin while giving his version of it on the
witness stand. The writer, who prosecuted the case, regarded the trial
as a mere formality and hardly felt that it was necessary to sum up the
evidence at all.

Imagine his surprise when an intelligent-looking jury acquitted both the
defendants after practically no deliberation. Both had offered to plead
guilty to a slightly lower degree of crime before the case was moved for
trial.

These two defendants, who were neither insane nor degenerates, consorted
with others in Bowery hotels and saloons,--incubators of crime. What
effect could such a performance have upon them and their friends save to
inculcate a belief that they were licensed to commit as many burglaries
as they chose? They had a practical demonstration that the law was "no
good" and the system a failure. If they could beat a case in which they
had already pleaded guilty, what could they not do where the evidence
was less obvious? They were henceforth immune. Who shall say how many
embryonic law-breakers took courage at the story and started upon an
experimental attempt at crime?

The news of such an acquittal must instantly have been carried to the
Tombs, where every other guilty prisoner took heart and prepared anew
his defence. Those about to plead guilty and throw themselves upon
the mercy of the court abandoned their honest purpose and devised some
perjury instead. Criminals almost persuaded that honesty was the best
policy changed their minds. The barometer of crime swung its needle from
"stormy" to "fair."

But apart from the law-breakers consider the effect of such a
miscarriage of justice upon a young, honest and zealous officer. First,
all his good work, his bravery, his conscientious effort at safeguarding
the sleeping public had been disregarded, tossed aside with a sneer,
and had gone for naught. The jury had stamped his story as a lie and
stigmatized him, by their action, as a perjurer. They had chosen two
professional criminals as better men. His whole conduct of the case
instead of being commended as meritorious had resulted in a solemn
public declaration that he was not worthy of credence and that he had
attempted wilfully to railroad to State's prison two innocent men. In
other words, that he ought to be there himself. What was the use of
trying to do good work any longer? He might just as well loiter in
an area on a barrel and smoke a furtive cigar when he ought to be
"on post." Perhaps he might better "stand in" with those who would
inevitably be preferred to him by a jury of their peers.

What must have been the effect on the court officers, the witnesses, the
defendants out on bail, the complainants, the spectators? That the whole
business was nonsense and rot! That the jury system was ridiculous. That
the jurymen were either crooks or fools. That the only people who were
not insulted and sneered at were the lawbreakers themselves. That if two
such rogues were to be set free all the other jailbirds might as well
be let go. That an honest man could whistle for his justice and might
better straightway put on his hat and go home. That the only way to
punish a criminal was to punish him yourself--kill him if you got the
chance or get the crowd to lynch him. That if a thief stole from you
the shrewdest thing to do was to induce him as a set-off to give you the
proceeds of his next thieving. That it was humiliating to live in a town
where a self-confessed rascal could snap his fingers at the law and go
unwhipped of justice.

The jury's action must have been due either to a wilful disregard of
their oath or an entire misconception of it. Assuming that the jury
deliberately declined to obey the law, the whole twelve elected
to become, and thereby did become, lawbreakers. They disqualified
themselves forever as talesmen. No prosecutor in his senses would move
a case before a jury which numbered any one of them. They had arraigned
themselves upon the side, and under the standard, of crime. They became
accessories after the fact. If on the other hand they misconceived the
purpose for which they were there the performance was a shocking example
of what is possible under present conditions.

Just as there are three general classes of wrongs, so there are three
general and varyingly effective forms of restraint against their
perpetration. First there is the moral control exerted by what is
ordinarily called conscience, secondly there is the restraint which
arises out of the apprehension that the commission of a tort will be
followed by a judgment for damages in a civil court, and lastly there
is the restraint imposed by the criminal law. All these play their part,
separately or in conjunction. For some men conscience is a sufficient
barrier to crime or to those acts which, while equally reprehensible,
are not technically criminal; for others the possibility of pecuniary
loss is enough to keep them in the straight and narrow way; but for a
large proportion of the community the fear of criminal prosecution,
with implied disgrace and ignominy, forfeiture of citizenship, and
confinement in a common jail is about the only conclusive reason for
doing unto others as they would the others should do unto them. Were
the criminal law done away with in our present state of civilization,
religion, ethics and civil procedure would be absolutely inefficacious
to prevent anarchy. It is as imperative to the ordinary citizen to know
that if he steals he will be locked up as it is for the child to know
that if he puts his hand into the fire it will be burned. The acquittal
of every thief breeds another, and the unpunished murder is an incentive
for a dozen similar homicides.

Crimes are either deliberate or the result of accident or impulse. The
last class may rise to a high degree of enormity, such as manslaughter,
but these crimes are rarely possible of restraint. The perpetrator
does not stop to consider, even if he be sober enough to think at all,
whether his act be moral, whether it will entail any civil liability, or
what will be its consequences, if it be a crime. So far as such acts
are concerned those who commit them are hardly criminals in the ordinary
sense, and no influence in the world is able to prevent them.

The question is how far these different kinds of restraint operate upon
the community as a whole in the prevention of deliberate crime. Clearly
the fear of pecuniary loss through actions brought to judgment in the
civil courts is practically nil. Most persons who set out to commit
crime have no bank account, the absence of one being generally what
leads them into a criminal career.

The writer has no intention of attempting to discuss or estimate the
efficacy of religion or ethics as restraining influences. A certain
limited proportion of the community would not commit crime under any
circumstances. It is enough for them that the act is forbidden by the
State even if it be not really wrong from their own personal point of
view. Side by side with these very good people are a very large number
who wear just as fashionable clothing, have the same friends, attend
the same churches, but who would commit almost any crime so long as they
were sure of not being caught. If we had no criminal law we should soon
discover who were the hypocrites.

But for an overwhelming majority of the community something more
practical than either religion, ethics, or philosophy is necessary to
keep them in order. They must be convinced that the transgressor will
surely be punished,--not some time, not next year or the year after, but
now. Not, moreover, that his way will be merely hard; but that he will
be put in stripes and made to break stones.

Hence the necessity for a vigorous and adequate criminal law and
procedure which shall command the respect and loyalty of the community,
administered by a fearless judiciary who will hold jurors to a rigid and
conscientious obedience to their oath.

There is nothing sacred about an archaic criminal procedure which in
some respects is less devised for the protection of the community than
for the exculpation of the guilty. The portals of liberty would not
fall down or the framers of the constitution turn in their graves if the
peremptory challenges allowed to both sides in the selection of a jury
were reduced to a reasonable number, or if persons found guilty of crime
after due process of law were compelled to stay in jail until their
appeals were decided, instead of walking the streets free as air under
a certificate of "reasonable doubt" issued by some judge who personally
knew nothing of the actual trial of the case. As things stand to-day, a
thief caught in the very act of picking a pocket in the night-time may
challenge arbitrarily the twenty most intelligent talesmen called to sit
as jurors in his case. Does such a practice make for justice? It is
even possible that the sacred bird of liberty would not scream if eleven
jurors, instead of twelve, were permitted to convict a defendant or set
him free, while the question of how far the right of appeal in criminal
cases might properly be limited or, in default of such limitation, how
far under certain conditions it might be correspondingly extended to the
community, is by no means purely academic.* It is also conceivable
that some means might be found to do away with the interminable
technicalities which can now be interposed on behalf of the accused to
prevent trials or the infliction of sentence after conviction.



     * "Limitation of the Right of Appeal in Criminal Cases," by Nathan A.
Smythe, 17 Harvard Law Rev. 317 (1905).


Yet these considerations are of slight moment in contrast to that most
crying of all present abuses,--the domination of the court-room by the
press.* It is no fiction to say that in many cases the actual trial is
conducted in the columns of yellow journals and the defendant acquitted
or convicted purely in accordance with an "editorial policy." Judges,
jurors, and attorneys are caricatured and flouted. There is no evidence,
how ever incompetent, improper, or prejudicial to either side, excluded
by the judge in a court of criminal justice, that is not deliberately
thrust under the noses of the jury in flaring letters of red or purple
the moment they leave the court-room. The judge may charge one way in
accordance with the law of the land, while the editor charges the same
jury in double-leaded paragraphs with what "unwritten" law may best
suit the owner of his conscience and his pen. "Contempt of court" in
its original significance is something known today only to the reader of
text books.**



     *Cf. "Sensational Journalism and the Law," in "Moral Overstrain," by
G.W. Alger.



     **By the New York Penal Code section 143, an editor is only guilty of
contempt of court (a misdemeanor) if he publishes "a false or grossly
inaccurate report" of its proceedings. The most insidious, dangerous,
offensive and prejudicial matter spread broadcast by the daily press
does not relate to actual trials at all, but to matters entirely
outside the record, such as what certain witnesses of either side could
establish were they available, the "real" past and character of the
defendant, etc. The New York Courts, under the present statute, are
powerless to prevent this abuse. In Massachusetts half a dozen of our
principal editors and "special writers" would have been locked up long
ago to the betterment of the community and to the increase of respect
for our courts of justice.

Each State has its own particular problem to face, but ultimately the
question is a national one. Lack of respect for law is characteristic
of the American people as a whole. Until we acquire a vastly increased
sense of civic duty we should not complain that crime is increasing
or the law ineffective. It would be a most excellent thing for an
association of our leading citizens to interest itself in criminal-law
reform and demand and secure the passage of new and effective
legislation, but it would accomplish little if its individual members
continued to evade jury service and left their most important duty to
those least qualified by education or experience to perform.* It would
serve some of this class of reformers right, if one day, when after a
life-time of evasion, they perchance came to be tried by a jury of their
peers, they should find that among their twelve judges there was not one
who could read or write the English language with accuracy and that all
were ready to convict anybody because he lived in a brown-stone front.



     *"The Citizen and the Jury," in "Moral Overstrain," by G.W. Alger.


Merchants, who in return for a larger possible restitution habitually
compound felonies by tacitly agreeing not to prosecute those who have
defrauded them, have no right to complain because juries acquit the
offenders whom they finally decide it to be worth their while to pursue.
The voter who has not the courage to insist that hypocritical laws
should be wiped from the statute books should express no surprise when
juries refuse to convict those who violate them. The man who perjures
himself to escape his taxes has no right to expect that his fellow
citizens are going to place a higher value upon an oath than he.




CHAPTER X. Insanity and the Law


Harry Kendall Thaw shot and killed Stanford White on the 25th day of
June, 1905. Although most of the Coroner's jury which first sat upon
the case considered him irrational, he was committed to the Tombs and,
having been indicted for murder, remained there over six months pending
his trial. During that time it was a matter of common knowledge that his
defence was to be that he was insane at the time of the shooting, but as
under the New York law it is not necessary specifically to enter a plea
of insanity to the indictment in order to take advantage of that defence
(which may be proven under the general plea of "not guilty"), there was
nothing officially on record to indicate this purpose. Neither was it
possible for the District Attorney to secure any evidence of Thaw's
mental condition, since he positively refused either to talk to the
prosecutor's medical representatives or to allow himself to be examined
by them. Mr. Jerome therefore was compelled to enter upon an elaborate
and expensive preparation of the case, not only upon its merits, but
upon the possible question of the criminal irresponsibility of the
defendant.

The case was moved in January, 1906, and the defence thereupon proceeded
to introduce a limited amount of testimony tending to show that Thaw was
insane when he did the shooting. While much of this evidence commended
itself but little to either the prosecutor or the jury, it was
sufficient to raise grave doubt as to whether the accused was a fit
subject for trial. The District Attorney's experts united in the opinion
that, while he knew that he was doing wrong when he shot White, he was,
nevertheless, the victim of a hopeless progressive form of insanity
called dementia praecox. In the midst of the trial, therefore, Mr.
Jerome moved for a commission to examine into the question of how far
Thaw was capable of understanding the nature of the proceedings against
him and consulting with counsel, and frankly expressed his personal
opinion in open court that Thaw was no more a proper subject for trial
than a baby. A commission was appointed which reported the prisoner was
sane enough to be tried, and the case then proceeded at great length
with the surprising result that, in spite of the District Attorney's
earlier declaration that he believed Thaw to be insane, the jury
disagreed as to his criminal responsibility, a substantial number voting
for conviction. Of course, logically, they would have been obliged
either to acquit entirely on the ground of insanity or convict of murder
in the first degree, but several voted for murder in the second degree.

A year now elapsed, during which equally elaborate preparations were
made for a second trial. The State had already spent some $25,000, and
yet its experts had never had the slightest opportunity to examine or
interrogate the defendant, for the latter had not taken the stand at the
first trial. The District Attorney still remained on record as having
declared Thaw to be insane, and his own experts were committed to the
same proposition, yet his official duty compelled him to prosecute the
defendant a second time. The first prosecution had occupied months and
delayed the trial of hundreds of other prisoners, and the next bid fair
to the do same. But at this second trial the defence introduced
enough testimony within two days to satisfy the public at large of the
unbalanced mental condition of the defendant from boyhood.

After a comparatively short period of deliberation the jury acquitted
the prisoner "on the ground of insanity," which may have meant either
one of two things: (a) that they had a reasonable doubt in their own
minds that Thew knew that he was doing wrong when he committed the
murder--something hard for the layman to believe, or (b) that, realizing
that he was undoubtedly the victim of mental disease, they refused to
follow the strict legal test.

Nearly two years had elapsed since the homicide; over a hundred thousand
dollars had been spent upon the case; every corner of the community had
been deluged with detailed accounts of unspeakable filth and depravity;
the moral tone of society had been depressed; and the only element which
had profited by this whole lamentable and unnecessary proceeding had
been the sensational press. Yet the sole reason for it all was that
the law of the land in respect to insane persons accused of crime was
hopelessly out of date.

The question of how far persons who are victims of diseased mind shall
be held criminally responsible for their acts has vexed judges, jurors,
doctors, and lawyers for the last hundred years. During that time, in
spite of the fact that the law has lagged far behind science in the
march of progress, we have blundered along expecting our juries to reach
substantial justice by dealing with each individual accused as most
appeals to their enlightened common sense.

And the fact that they have obeyed their common sense rather than the
law is the only reason why our present antiquated and unsatisfactory
test of who shall be and who shall not be held "responsible" in the
eyes of the law remains untouched upon the statute-books. Because its
inadequacy is so apparent, and because no experienced person seriously
expects juries to apply it consistently, it fairly deserves first place
in any discussion of present problems.

Thanks to human sympathy, the law governing insanity has had
comparatively few victims, but the fact remains that more than one
irresponsible insane man has swung miserably from the scaffold. But
"hard cases" do more than "make bad law," they make lawlessness. A
statute systematically violated is worse than no statute at all, and
exactly in so far as we secure a sort of justice by evading the law as
it stands, we make a laughing-stock of our procedure.

The law is, simply, that any person is to be held criminally responsible
for a deed unless he was at the time laboring under such a defect of
reason as not to know the nature and quality of his act and that it was
wrong.

This doctrine first took concrete form in 1843, when, after a person
named McNaughten, who had shot and killed a certain Mr. Drummond
under an insane delusion that the latter was Sir Robert Peel, had been
acquitted, there was such popular uneasiness over the question of what
constituted criminal responsibility that the House of Lords submitted
four questions to the fifteen judges of England asking for an opinion
on the law governing responsibility for offences committed by persons
afflicted with certain forms of insanity. It is unnecessary to set
forth at length these questions, but it is enough to say that the judges
formulated the foregoing rule as containing the issue which should
be submitted to the jury in such cases.*


     * The questions propounded to the judges and their answers are here
given:


Question 1.--"What is the law respecting alleged crimes committed
by persons afflicted with insane delusion in respect of one or more
particular subjects or persons, as, for instance, where, at the time
of the commission of the alleged crime, the accused knew he was acting
contrary to law, but did the act complained of with a view, under the
influence of insane delusion, of redressing or revenging some supposed
grievance or injury, or of producing some supposed public benefit?

Answer 1.-"Assuming that your lordships' inquiries are confined to those
persons who labor under such partial delusions only, and are not in
other respects insane, we are of opinion that, notwithstanding the
accused did the act complained of with a view, under the influence of
insane delusion, of redressing or revenging some supposed grievance
or injury, or of producing some public benefit, he is, nevertheless,
punishable, according to the nature of the crime committed, if he knew
at the time of committing such crime that he was acting contrary to law,
by which expression we understand your lordships to mean the law of the
land.

Question 4:--"If a person under an insane delusion as to existing facts
commits an offence in consequence thereof, is he thereby excused?

Answer 4.--"The answer must of course depend on the nature of the
delusion; but, making the same assumption as we did before, namely, that
he labors under such partial delusion only, and is not in other respects
insane, we think he must be considered in the same situation as to
responsibility as if the facts with respect to which the delusions
exist were real. For example, if under the influence of his delusion
he supposes another man to be in the act of attempting to take away his
life, and kills the man, as he supposes in self-defence, he would
be exempt from punishment. If his delusion was that the deceased had
inflicted a serious injury to his character and fortune, and he
killed him in revenge for such supposed injury, he would be liable to
punishment.

Question 2.--"What are the proper questions to be submitted to the jury
when a person, afflicted with insane delusions respecting one or more
particular subjects or persons, is charged with the commission of a
crime (murder, for instance), and insanity is set up as a defence?

Question 3.--"In what terms ought the question to be left to the jury as
to the prisoner's state of mind when the act was committed?

Answers 2 and 3.--"As these two questions appear to us to be more
conveniently answered together, we submit our opinion to be that the
jurors ought to be told, in all cases, that every man is presumed to be
sane, and to possess a sufficient degree of reason to be responsible
for his crimes, until the contrary be proved to their satisfaction;
and that, to establish a defence on the ground of insanity it must be
clearly proved that at the time of committing the act the accused was
laboring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as not
to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or, if he
did know it, that he did not know he was doing what was wrong." (The
remainder of the answer goes on to discuss the usual way the question
is put to the jury.)

Now, with that commendable reverence for judicial utterance which is so
characteristic of the English nation, and is so conspicuously absent
in our own country, it was assumed until recently that this solemn
pronunciamento was the last word on the question of criminal
responsibility and settled the matter once and forever. Barristers and
legislators did not trouble themselves particularly over the fact that
in 1843 the study of mental disease was in its infancy, and judges,
including those of England, probably knew even less about the subject
than they do now. In 1843 it was supposed that insanity, save of the
sort that was obviously maniacal, necessitated "delusions," and unless a
man had these delusions no one regarded him as insane. In the words of a
certain well-known judge:

"The true criterion, the true test of the absence or presence of
insanity, I take to be the absence or presence of what, used in
a certain sense of it, is comprisable in a single term, namely,
delusion.... In short, I look on delusion .... and insanity to be
almost, if not altogether, convertible terms."*



     * Dew vs. Clark.


This in a certain broad sense, probably not intended by the judge who
made the statement, is nearly true, but, unfortunately, is not entirely
so.

The dense ignorance surrounding mental disease and the barbarous
treatment of the insane within a century are facts familiar to
everybody. Lunatics were supposed to be afflicted with demons or devils
which took possession of them as retribution for their sins, and
in addition to the hopelessly or maniacally insane, medical science
recognized only a so-called "partial" or delusionary insanity. Today it
would be regarded about as comprehensive to relate all mental diseases
to the old-fashioned "delusion" as to regard as insane only those who
frothed at the mouth.

But the particular individual out of whose case in 1843 arose the rule
that is in 1908 applied to all defendants indiscriminately was the
victim of a clearly defined insane delusion, and the four questions
answered by the judges of England relate only to persons who are
"afflicted with insane delusions in respect to one or more particular
subjects or persons." Nothing is said about insane persons without
delusions, or about persons with general delusions, and the judges limit
their answers even further by making them apply "to those persons who
labor under such partial delusion only and are not in other respects
insane"--a medical impossibility.

Modern authorities agree that a man cannot have insane delusions and not
be in other respects insane, for it is mental derangement which is the
cause of the delusion.

In the first place, therefore, a fundamental conception of the judges
in answering the questions was probably fallacious, and in the second,
although the test they offered was distinctly limited to persons
"afflicted with insane delusions," it has ever since been applied to all
insane persons irrespective of their symptoms.

Finally, whether the judges knew anything about insanity or not, and
whether in their answers they weighed their words very carefully or not,
the test as they laid it down is by no means clear from a medical or
even legal point of view.

Was the accused laboring under such a defect of reason as not to know
the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or not to know that it
was wrong? What did these judges mean by know?

What does the reader mean by know? What does the ordinary juryman mean
by it?

We are left in doubt as to whether the word should be given, as justice
Stephens contended it should be, a very broad and liberal interpretation
such as "able to judge calmly and reasonably of the moral or legal
character of a proposed action,"* or a limited and qualified one. There
are all grades and degrees of "knowledge," and it is more than probable
that there is a state of mind which I have heard an astute expert call
upon the witness stand "an insane knowledge," and equally obvious that
there may be "imperfect" nor "incomplete knowledge," where the victim
sees "through a glass darkly." Certainly it seems far from fair to
interpret the test of responsibility to cover a condition where the
accused may have had a hazy or dream-like realization that his act was
technically contrary to the law, and even more dangerous to make it
exclude one who was simply unable to "judge calmly and reasonably" of
his proposed action, a doctrine which could almost be invoked by any one
who committed homicide in a state of anger.



     *"General View of the Criminal Law," p. 80.


Ordinarily the word is not defined at all and the befuddled juryman is
left to his own devices in determining what significance he shall attach
not only to this word but to the test as a whole.

An equally ambiguous term is the word "wrong." The judges made no
attempt to define it in 1843, and it has been variously interpreted ever
since. Now it may mean "contrary to the dictates of conscience" or, as
it is usually construed, "contrary to the law of the land"--and exactly
what it means may make a great difference to the accused on trial. If
the defendant thinks that God has directed him to kill a wicked man, he
may know that such an act will not only be contrary to law, but also in
opposition to the moral sense of the community as a whole, and yet he
may believe that it is his conscientious duty to take life. In the case
of Hadfield, who deliberately fired at George III in order to be hung,
the defendant believed himself to be the Lord Jesus Christ, and that
only by so doing could the world be saved. Applying the legal test and
translating the word "wrong" as contrary to the common morality of the
community wherein he resided or contrary to law, Hadfield ought to have
achieved his object and been given death upon the scaffold instead of
being clapped, as he was, into a lunatic asylum.

On the other hand, if the word "wrong" is judicially interpreted, it
would seem to be given an elasticity which would invite inevitable
confusion as well as abuse.

Moreover, the test in question takes no cognizance of persons who have
no power of control. The law of New York and most of the states does not
recognize "irresistible impulses," but it should admit the medical fact
that there are persons who, through no fault of their own, are born
practically without any inhibitory capacity whatever, and that there are
others whose control has been so weakened, through accident or disease,
as to render them morally irresponsible,--the so-called psychopathic
inferiors.

Most of us are only too familiar with the state of a person just
falling under the influence of an anesthetic, when all the senses seem
supernaturally acute, the reasoning powers are active and unimpaired,
and the patient is convinced that he can do as he wills, whereas, in
reality, he says and does things which later on seem impossible in their
absurdity. Such a condition is equally possible to the victim of mental
disease, where the knowledge of right and wrong has no real relevancy.

The test of irresponsibility as defined by law is hopelessly inadequate,
judged by present medical knowledge. There is no longer any pretence
that a perception of the nature and quality of an act or that it is
wrong or right is conclusive of the actual insanity of a particular
accused. In a recent murder case a distinguished alienist, testifying
for the prosecution, admitted that over seventy per cent. of the
patients under his treatment, all of whom he regarded as insane and
irresponsible, knew what they were doing and could distinguish right
from wrong.

Countless attempts have been made to reconcile this obvious anachronism
with justice and modern knowledge, but always without success, and
courts have wriggled hard in their efforts to make the test adequate
to the particular cases which they have been trying, but only with the
result of hopelessly confounding the decisions.

But, however it is construed, the test as laid down in 1843 is
insufficient in 1908. Medical science has marched on with giant strides,
while the law, so far as this subject is concerned, has never progressed
at all. It is no longer possible to determine mental responsibility by
any such artificial rule as that given by the judges to the Lords in
McNaughten's case, and which juries are supposed to apply in the courts
of today. I say "supposed," for juries do not apply it, and the reason
is simple enough--you cannot expect a juryman of intelligence to follow
a doctrine of law which he instinctively feels to be crude and which he
knows is arbitrarily applied.

No juryman believes himself capable of successfully analyzing a
prisoner's past mental condition, and he is apt to suspect that, however
sincere the experts on either side may appear, their opinions may be
even less definite than the terms in which they are expressed. The
spectacle of an equal number of intellectual-looking gentlemen, all
using good English and all wearing clean linen, reaching diametrically
opposite conclusions on precisely the same facts, is calculated to fill
the well-intentioned juror with distrust. Painful as it is to record the
fact, juries are sometimes almost as sceptical in regard to doctors as
they always are in regard to lawyers.

The usual effect of the expert testimony on one side is to neutralize
that on the other, for there is no practical way for the jury to
distinguish between experts, since the foolish ones generally look as
learned as the wise ones. The result is hopeless confusion on the part
of the juryman, an inclination to "throw it all out," and a resort to
other testimony to help him out of his difficulty. Of course he has no
individual way of telling whether the defendant "knew right from wrong,"
whatever that may mean, and so the ultimate test that he applies is
apt to be whether or not the defendant is really "queer," "nutty" or
"bughouse," or some other equally intelligible equivalent far "medically
insane."

The unfortunate consequence is that there is so general and growing a
scepticism about the plea of insanity, entirely apart from its actual
merits, that it is difficult in ordinary cases, whatever the jurors may
think or say in regard to the matter, to secure twelve men who will give
the defence fair consideration at the outset.

This is manifest in frequent expressions from talesmen such as: "I think
the defence of insanity is played out," or "I believe everybody is a
little insane, anyhow" (very popular and regarded by jurymen as witty),
or "Well, I have an idea that when a fellow can't cook up any other
defence he claims to be insane."

The result is a rather paradoxical situation: The attitude of the
ordinary jury in a homicide case, where the defence of insanity is
interposed, is usually at the outset one of distrust, and their impulse
is to brush the claim aside. This tendency is strengthened by the legal
presumption, which the prosecutor invariably calls to their attention,
that the defendant is sane. Every expert who has testified for the
defence in the ordinary "knock down and drag out" homicide case must
have felt with the prisoner's attorneys, that it was "up to them" not so
much to create a doubt of the defendant's sanity as to prove that he was
insane, if they expected consideration from the jury.

Now let us assume that the defence is meritorious and that the
prisoner's experts have created a favorable impression. Let us go even
further and assume that they have generated a reasonable doubt in the
mind of the jury as to the defendant's responsibility at the time he
committed the offence. What generally occurs? Not, as one would suppose,
an acquittal, but, in nine cases out of ten, a conviction in a lower
degree.

The only usual result of an honest claim of irresponsibility on the
ground of insanity is to lead the jury to reduce the grade of the
offence from murder in the first, entailing the death penalty, to murder
in the second degree. The jury have no intention of "taking the chance"
involved in turning the man loose on the community and their minds are
filled with the predominating fact that a human being has been killed.
They have an idea that it is as easy to get "sworn out" of a lunatic
asylum as they suppose it is to get "sworn into" one, and they know that
if the prisoner is found to be insane when sent to State's prison he
will be transferred elsewhere. They, therefore, as a rule, waste little
time upon the question of how far the defendant was irresponsible within
the legal definition when he committed the deed, but convict him
"on general principles," trusting the prison officials to remedy any
possible injustice. The jury in such cases ignore the law and decline
either to acquit or to convict in accordance with the test. Their action
becomes rather that of a lay commission condemning the prisoner to hard
labor for life on the ground that he is medically insane.

Assuming that the jury take the defence seriously, there is only one
class of cases where, in the writer's opinion, they follow the legal
test as laid down by the court--that is to say, in cases of extreme
brutality. Here they hold the prisoner to the letter of the law, and
the more abhorrent the crime (even where its nature might indicate to
a physician that the accused was the victim of some sort of mania) the
less likely they are to acquit. The writer has prosecuted perhaps a
dozen homicide and other cases where the defence was insanity. In his
own experience he has known of no acquittal. In several instances the
defendants were undoubtedly insane, but, strictly speaking, probably
vaguely knew the nature and quality of their acts and that they were
wrong. In a few of these the juries convicted of murder in the first
degree because the circumstances surrounding the homicides were so
brutal that the harshness of the technical doctrine they were required
to apply was overshadowed in their minds by their horror of the act
itself. In other cases, where either the accused appeared obviously
abnormal as he sat at the bar of justice, or the details of the crime
were less abhorrent, they convicted of murder in the second degree in
accordance with the reasoning set forth in the foregoing paragraph. The
writer seriously advances the suggestion that the more the brutality of
a homicide indicates mental derangement the less chance the defendant
has to secure an acquittal upon the plea of insanity.

And this leads us to that increasingly large body of cases where
the usual scepticism of the jury in regard to such defences is
counterbalanced by some real or imaginary element of sympathy. In cities
like New York, where the jury system is seen at its very best, where the
statistics show seventy per cent. of convictions by verdict for the year
1907, and where the sentiment of the community is against the invocation
of any law supposedly higher than that of the State, our talesmen are
unwilling to condone homicide or to act as self-constituted pardoning
bodies, for they know that an obviously lawless verdict will bring
down upon them the censure of the public and the press. This is perhaps
demonstrated by the fact that in New York County a higher percentage of
women are convicted of homicide than of men.

But the plea of insanity, with its vague test of responsibility, whose
terms the juryman may construe for himself (or which his fellow-jurors
may construe for him) offers an unlimited and fertile field for the
"reasonable" doubt and an easy excuse for the conscientious talesman who
wants to acquit if he can. Juries take the little stock in irresistible
impulses and emotional or temporary insanity save as a cloak to cover an
unrighteous acquittal.

In no other class of cases does "luck" play so large a part in the final
disposition of the prisoner. A jury is quite as likely to send an
insane man to the electric chair as to acquit a defendant who is fully
responsible for his crime.

To recapitulate from the writer's experience:

(1) The ordinary juror tends to be sceptical as to the good faith of the
defence of insanity.

(2) When once this distrust is removed by honest evidence on the part of
the defence, he usually declines to follow the legal test as laid down
by the court on the general theory that any one but an idiot or a maniac
has some knowledge of what he is doing and whether it is right or wrong.

(3) He applies the strict legal test only in cases of extreme brutality.

(4) In all other cases he follows the medical rather than the legal
test, but instead of acquitting the accused on account of his medical
irresponsibility, merely convicts in a lower degree.

The following deductions may also fairly be made from observation:

(1) That the present legal test for criminal responsibility is
admittedly vague and inadequate, affording great opportunity for
divergent expert testimony and a readily availed of excuse for the
arbitrary and sentimental actions of juries, to which is largely due
the distrust prevailing of the claim of insanity when interposed as a
defence to crime.

(2) That expert medical testimony in such cases is largely discounted by
the layman.

(3) That in no class of cases are the verdicts of jurors so apt to be
influenced solely by emotion and prejudice, or to be guided less by the
law as laid down by the court.

(4) That a new definition of criminal responsibility is necessary, based
upon present knowledge of mental disease and its causes.

(5) Lastly, that, as whatever definition may be adopted will inevitably
be difficult of application by an untutored lay jury, our procedure
should be so amended that they may be relieved wherever possible of a
task sufficiently difficult for even the most experienced and expert
alienists.

A classification of the different forms of insanity, based upon its
causes to which the case of any particular accused might be relegated,
such as has recently been urged by a distinguished young neurologist,
would not, with a few exceptions, assist us in determining his
responsibility. It would be easy to say then, as now, that lunatics or
maniacs should not be held responsible for their acts, but we should be
left where we are at present in regard to all those shadowy cases where
the accused had insane, incomplete or imperfect knowledge of what he was
doing. It would be ridiculous, for example, to lay down a general rule
that no person suffering from hysterical insanity should be punished
for his acts. Yet, even so, such a classification would instantly
remedy that anachronism in our present law which refuses to recognize
as irresponsible those born without power to control their emotions--the
psychopathic inferiors of science, and the real victims of dementia
praecox.

Of course, if the insanity under which the defendant labors bears no
relation to or connection with the deed for which he is on trial, there
would logically be no reason why his insanity on other subjects should
be any defence to his crime. For example, there is the well-known case
of the Harvard professor who was apparently sane on all other matters,
yet believed himself to be possessed of glass legs. Had this man in
wanton anger struck and killed another, his "glass leg" delusion could
not logically have availed him. If, however, he had struck and killed
one who he believed was going to shatter his legs it might have been
important. The illustration is clear enough, but its application
probably involves a mistaken premise. If he thought he had glass legs
his mind was undoubtedly deranged--whether enough or not enough to
constitute him irresponsible or beyond the effect of penal discipline
might be a difficult question. The generally accepted doctrine is, that
if a man has a delusion concerning something, which if actually existing
as he believed it to be would be no excuse for his committing the
criminal act, he is responsible and liable to punishment; but, as Bishop
well says:

"This branch of the doctrine should be cautiously received; for delusion
of any kind is strongly indicative of a generally diseased mind."

The new test to determine responsibility will recognize, as does the
law of Germany, that there can be no criminal act where the free
determination of the will is excluded by disease, and that the capacity
to distinguish between right and wrong is inconclusive. It may
perhaps have to take a general form, leaving it to a lay, or a mixed
lay-and-expert jury to say merely whether the accused had a disease
of the mind of a type recognized by science, and whether the alleged
criminal act was of such a character as would naturally flow from that
type of insanity, in which case it would seem obviously just to regard
the defendant as partially irresponsible, and perhaps entirely so.
Possibly the practical needs of the moment might be met by permitting
such a jury to determine whether the defendant had such a knowledge of
the wrongful nature and consequences of his act and such a control over
his will as to be a proper subject of punishment.* This would require
the jury to find that the defendant had some knowledge of right and
wrong and the power to choose between them. In any event, to render
the accused entirely irresponsible, his act should arise out of and
be caused solely by the diseased condition of his mind. The law, while
asserting the responsibility of many insane people, should recognize
"partial" responsibility as well.



     *See State vs. Richards, 1873, Conn.


The reader may feel that little after all would be gained, but he will
observe that at any rate such a test, however imperfect, would permit
juries to do lawfully that which they now do by violating their oaths.
The writer believes that the best concrete test yet formulated and
applied by any court is that laid down in Parsons vs. The State of
Alabama (81 Ala., 577):


"1. Was the defendant at the time of the commission of the alleged
crime, as matter of fact, afflicted with a disease of the mind, so as to
be either idiotic, or otherwise insane?

"2. If such be the case, did he know right from wrong as applied to the
particular act in question? If he did not have such knowledge, he is not
legally responsible.

"3. If he did have such knowledge, he may nevertheless not be legally
responsible if the two following conditions concur:

"(1) If, by reason of the duress of such mental disease, he had so far
lost the power to choose between the right and wrong, and to avoid doing
the act in question, as that his free agency was at the time destroyed.

"(2) And if, at the same time, the alleged crime was so connected with
such mental disease, in the relation of cause and effect, as to have
been the product of it solely."


But whatever modification in the present test of criminal responsibility
is adopted, there must come an equally, if not even more important,
reform in the procedure in insanity cases, which to-day is as cumbersome
and out of date as the law itself. As things stand now in New York and
most other jurisdictions there are no adequate means open to the State
to find out the actual present or past mental condition of the defendant
until the trial itself, and ofttimes not even then.

In New York, in cases like Thaw's, the accused, while fully intending
to interpose the defence of insanity (which he is now permitted to do
simply under the general plea of "not guilty") may not only conceal the
fact until the trial, but may likewise successfully block every effort
of the authorities to examine him and find out his present mental
condition. He may thus keep it out of the power of the District Attorney
to secure the facts upon which to move for a commission to determine
whether or not he ought to be in an insane asylum or is a fit subject
for trial, and at the same time prevent the prosecutor from obtaining
any evidence through direct medical observation by which to meet the
claim, which may be "sprung" suddenly upon him later at the trial, that
the defendant was irresponsible.

In order that this may be clearly understood by the reader he should
fully appreciate the distinction between (1) the claim on the part of an
accused that he is at present insane, and for that reason should not be
either tried or punished for his alleged offence, and (2) the defence
that he was (irrespective of his present mental condition) insane within
the legal definition of irresponsibility at the time he committed it. No
person who is incapable of understanding the nature of the proceedings
against him or of consulting with counsel and preparing his defence can
be placed on trial at all, or, if already on trial, can continue to be
tried, and if a defendant "appears to the court to be insane," the judge
may appoint a commission to examine him and report as to his present
condition. This may be done upon the application either of the State of
the accused through his counsel.

It was such a commission to determine the accused's present mental
condition that District Attorney Jerome, upon the basis of the evidence
introduced by the defence, applied for and secured during the first
trial of Harry K. Thaw. The commission reported that Thaw was sane
enough to be tried and the court then proceeded with the original case
for the purpose of allowing the jury to say whether he knew the nature
and quality of his act and that it was wrong when he shot and killed
White.

This was a totally distinct proceeding from the interposition of the
DEFENCE that the accused was irresponsible when he committed the crime
charged against him and was not inconsistent with it.

Now supposing that the Commission had reported that Thaw was insane at
the time of examination and not a fit subject for trial, but, on
the contrary, ought to be confined in an insane asylum, the District
Attorney would have spent some twenty odd thousand dollars and a year's
time of one or more of his assistants in fruitless preparation. Yet, as
the law stands on the books to-day in New York, there is no adequate
way for the prosecution to find out whether this enormous expenditure of
time or money is necessary or not, for it cannot compel the defendant
to submit either to a physical or mental examination. To do so has been
held to be a violation of his constitutional rights and equivalent to
compelling him to give evidence against himself.

Thus when Thaw came to the bar at his first trial the State had never
had any opportunity, through an examination by its physicians, to learn
what his present condition was or past mental condition had been. The
accused, on the other hand, had had over six months to prepare his
defence and had fully availed himself of the time to submit to the most
exhaustive examinations on the part of his own experts. The defendant's
physicians came to court brimming with facts to which they could
testify; while the State's experts had only the barren opportunity for
determining the defendant's condition afforded by observing him daily in
the court room and hearing what Thaw's own doctors claimed that they
had discovered. There was no chance to rebut anything which the latter
alleged that they had observed, and their testimony, save in so far as
it was inconsistent or contradictory in itself, remained irrefutable.

There is probably no procedure which would be held constitutional
whereby a compulsory examination of the accused could be had upon the
mere application of the prosecuting authorities; but as a commission may
generally be appointed at any time after an accused has been indicted
if he "appears" to the court to be "insane," and as it is usually within
the power of the District Attorney where such is the case to bring
sufficient evidence of it to the attention of the court before the
prisoner is brought to trial, little time is actually lost and justice
is rarely defeated except in those cases (such as Thaw's) where an
attempt is to be made to prove the accused insane at the time of the
alleged crime although sane at the time of trial. Even here it would be
the simplest thing in the world to remedy the difficulty and the proper
legal steps in all jurisdictions should be taken immediately.

The two chief objects of such reforms should be, first, to relieve the
ordinary jury in as many cases as possible from the necessity of passing
upon the delicate issue of a defendant's mental condition at a previous
time, and second, where this may not be avoided, to make their task as
easy as possible by providing (a) a more scientific and definite test of
legal responsibility and (b) an opportunity for adequate examination of
defendants availing themselves of this defence.

This last and most practical reform can be easily secured by a slight
alteration in the New York Code of Criminal Procedure, which already
provides both for the entering of the specific plea of insanity and
for the introduction of the defence and the proof of insanity under the
general plea of "not guilty." At present the defendant has his choice
of openly announcing or of concealing until the trial his intention of
claiming that he was insane and so irresponsible for his crime. This is
an advantage the results of which were probably not fully contemplated
by the Legislature, and one to which an accused has no fair claim.

Fortunately, in the same section of the Code (658), which provides
that the court may appoint a Commission to inquire into the sanity of
a defendant at the time of his trial, there exists another provision,
hitherto little noticed, that:

"When a defendant PLEADS INSANITY, as prescribed in Section 336, the
court in which the indictment is pending, instead of proceeding with the
trial of the indictment, may appoint a commission of not more than three
disinterested persons to examine him and report to the court as to his
insanity at the time of the commission of the crime."

If a defendant intends to prove himself irresponsible for his offence,
why should he not be compelled to enter a specific plea to that effect?
Once he has entered that plea, the law as it stands just quoted will do
the rest. No reason has been brought to the attention of the writer why
the admission of any evidence upon the defendant's trial tending to show
that he was mentally irresponsible at the time of committing the crime
should not be made contingent upon the defence of insanity having been
specifically pleaded either at the time of his arraignment or later by
substitution for or in conjunction with the plea of "not guilty." This
would deprive him of no constitutional right whatever. There is no legal
necessity of permitting an accused to prove insanity under a general
answer of "not guilty." Then upon his own plea that he had been insane
he could instantly be committed to some place of observation where a
permanent medical board of inquiry could be given full opportunity to
examine him and study his case with a view to determining his present
and past mental condition. He would still have in prospect his regular
jury trial, but if this board found him at the present time insane,
the court could immediately commit him to an asylum pending recovery,
precisely as under the present procedure, while if they found him sane
at the present time, but reported that, in their opinion (whatever test,
"medical" or "legal," they might have applied), he was irresponsible
at the time he committed the crime, it is unlikely that any prosecutor
would bring him to trial. If, however, they reported that he was not
only sane, but had been sane at the time of his crime, it is probable
that any proposed defence of insanity would be abandoned, while if it
was still urged by the accused, the opinion of such a board would carry
far greater weight at the ultimate trial of the case than the individual
opinions of experts retained and paid by either side for that particular
occasion only, and having had only a comparatively limited opportunity
for examination. At any rate, if the court called in the services of
such a board of medical judges to assist as amici curie in determining
the defendant's condition, while their opinion would not be conclusive
upon the jury, it would at least do away with the present lamentable
necessity of learned men answering "yes" or "no" to a hypothetical
question fifty thousand words long, when the most superficial personal
examination of the accused would settle the matter definitely in
their minds. Such a procedure is in general use in Germany and other
continental countries, and is likewise substantially followed in
Massachusetts, Maine, Vermont, and New Hampshire.*



     * Another equally efficacious means of dealing with the matter would
be to substitute, upon a defendant's plea of insanity, a full jury of
experts--like any "special" jury--for the ordinary petit jury.


There is good reason to hope that we may soon see in all the states
adequate provision for preliminary examination upon the plea of
insanity, and a new test of criminal responsibility consistent with
humanity and modern medical knowledge. Even then, although murderers
who indulge in popular crime will probably be acquitted on the ground of
insanity, we shall at least be spared the melancholy spectacle of juries
arbitrarily committing feeble-minded persons charged with homicide to
imprisonment at hard labor for life, and in a large measure do away with
the present unedifying exhibition of two groups of hostile experts, each
interpreting an archaic and inadequate test of criminal responsibility
in his own particular way, and each conscientiously able to reach a
diametrically opposite conclusion upon precisely the same facts.




CHAPTER XI. The Mala Vita in America


There are a million and a half of Italians in the United States, of whom
nearly six hundred thousand reside in New York City--more than in Rome
itself. Naples alone of all the cities of Italy has so large an Italian
population; while Boston has one hundred thousand, Philadelphia one
hundred thousand, San Francisco seventy thousand, New Orleans seventy
thousand, Chicago sixty thousand, Denver twenty-five thousand, Pittsburg
twenty-five thousand, Baltimore twenty thousand, and there are extensive
colonies, often numbering as many as ten thousand, in several other
cities.

So vast a foreign-born population is bound to contain elements of both
strength and weakness. The north Italians are molto simpatici to the
American character, and many of their national traits are singularly
like our own, for they are honest, thrifty, industrious, law-abiding and
good-natured. The Italians from the extreme south of the peninsula have
fewer of these qualities, and are apt to be ignorant, lazy, destitute,
and superstitious. A considerable percentage, especially of those from
the cities, are criminal. Even for a long time after landing in America,
the Calabrians and Sicilians often exhibit a lack of enlightenment more
characteristic of the Middle Ages than of the twentieth century.

At home they have lived in a tumble-down stone hut about fifteen feet
square, half open to the sky (its only saving quality); in one corner
the entire family sleeping in a promiscuous pile on a bed of leaves; in
another a domestic zoo consisting of half a dozen hens, a cock, a goat,
and a donkey. They neither read, think, nor exchange ideas. The sight of
a uniform means to them either a tax-gatherer, a compulsory enlistment
in the army, or an arrest, and at its appearance the man will run
and the wife and children turn into stone. They are stubborn and
distrustful. They are the same as they were a thousand or more years
gone by.

When the writer was acting as an assistant prosecutor in New York
County, a young Italian, barely twenty years of age, was brought to
the bar charged with assault with intent to kill. The complainant was a
withered Sicilian woman who claimed to be his wife. Both spoke an almost
unintelligible dialect. The case on its face was simple enough. An
officer testified that on a Sunday morning in Mulberry Bend Park, at
a distance of about fifty feet from where he was standing, he saw the
defendant, who had been walking peaceably with the complaining witness,
suddenly draw a long and deadly looking knife and proceed to slash her
about the head and arms. It had taken the officer but a moment or two to
seize the defendant from behind and disarm him, but in the meantime he
had inflicted some eleven wounds upon her body. No explanation had been
offered for this terrible assault, and the complainant had appeared
involuntarily before the Grand jury and afterward had to be kept in the
House of Detention as a hostile witness. The woman, who appeared to be
about fifty years old, was sworn, and on being questioned stated that
she had been married to the defendant in Sicily three years before.
She declined to admit that he had attacked or harmed her in any way,
constantly mumbling: "He is my husband. Do not punish him!"

The defendant, however, seemed eager to get on the stand and to tell
his story; nor did the introduction of the knife in evidence or the
exhibition of the woman's wounds embarrass him in the slightest degree.
His manner was that of a man who had only to explain to be entirely
exonerated from blame. He nodded at the jury and the judge, and scowled
at the complainant, who was speedily conducted to a place where no harm
could possibly come to her. When at last he was sworn, he could hardly
restrain himself into coherency.

"Yes--that woman forced me to marry her!" he testified in substance.
"But in the eyes of God I am not her husband, for she bewitched me! Else
would I have married an old crone who could not have borne me children?
When her spells weakened I left her and came to America. Here I met
the woman I love,--Rosina,--and as I had been bewitched into the other
marriage, we lived together as man and wife for two years. Then one day
a friend told me that the old woman had followed me over the sea and was
going to throw her spells upon me again. But I did not inform Rosina of
these things. The next evening she told me that an old woman had been
to the house and asked for me. For days my first wife lurked in the
neighborhood, beseeching me to come back to her. But I told her that in
the eyes of God she was not my wife. Then, in revenge, she cast the evil
eye upon the child--sul bambino--and for six weeks it ailed and then
died. Again the witch asked me to go with her, and again I refused. This
time she cast her evil eye upon my wife--and Rosina grew pale and sick
and took to her bed. There was only one thing to do, you understand. I
resolved to slay her, just as you--giudici--would have done. I bought
a carving-knife and sharpened it, and asked her to walk with me to
the park, and I would have killed her had not the police prevented me.
Wherefore, O giudici! I pray you to recall her and permit me to kill her
or to decree that she be hung!"

This case illustrates the depths of ignorance and superstition that
are occasionally to be found among Italian peasant immigrants. Another
actual experience may demonstrate the mediaeval treachery of which the
Sicilian Mafiuso is capable, and how little his manners or ideals have
progressed in the last five hundred years or so.

A photographer and his wife, both from Palermo, came to New York and
rented a comfortable home with which was connected a "studio." In the
course of time a young man--a Mafiuso from Palermo--was engaged as an
assistant, and promptly fell in love with the photographer's wife. She
was tired of her husband, and together they plotted the latter's murder.
After various plans had been considered and rejected, they determined on
poison, and the assistant procured enough cyanide of mercury to kill a
hundred photographers, and turned it over to his mistress to administer
to the victim in his "Marsala." But at the last moment her hand lost
its courage and she weakly sewed the poison up for future use inside the
ticking of the feather bolster on the marital bed.

This was not at all to the liking of her lover, who thereupon took
matters into his own hands, by hiring another Mafiuso to remove the
photographer with a knife-thrust through the heart. In order that the
assassin might have a favorable opportunity to effect his object, the
assistant, who posed as a devoted friend of his employer, invited the
couple to a Christmas festival at his own apartment. Here they all spent
an animated and friendly evening together, drinking toasts and singing
Christmas carols, and toward midnight the party broke up with mutual
protestations of regard. If the writer remembers accurately, the
evidence was that the two men embraced and kissed each other. After
a series of farewells the photographer started home. It was a clear
moonlight night with the streets covered with a glistening fall of snow.
The wife, singing a song, walked arm in arm with her husband until they
came to a corner where a jutting wall cast a deep shadow across the
sidewalk. At this point she stepped a little ahead of him, and at the
same moment the hired assassin slipped up behind the victim and drove
his knife into his back. The wife shrieked. The husband staggered and
fell, and the "bravo" fled.

The police arrived, and so did an ambulance, which removed the
hysterical wife and the transfixed victim to a hospital. Luckily the
ambulance surgeon did not remove the knife, and his failure to do so
saved the life of the photographer, who in consequence practically lost
no blood and whose cortex was skilfully hooked up by a dextrous surgeon.
In a month he was out. In another the police had caught the would-be
murderer and he was soon convicted and sentenced to State prison, under
a contract with the assistant to be paid two hundred and fifty dollars
for each year he had to serve. Evidently the lover and his mistress
concluded that the photographer bore a charmed life, for they made no
further homicidal attempts.

So much for the story as an illustration of the mediaeval character of
some of our Sicilian immigrants. For the satisfaction of the reader's
taste for the romantic and picturesque it should be added, however, that
the matter did not end here. The convict, having served several years,
found that the photographer's assistant was not keeping his part of the
contract, as a result of which the assassin's wife and children were
suffering for lack of food and clothing. He made repeated but fruitless
attempts to compel the party of the first part to pay up, and finally,
in despair, wrote to the District Attorney of New York County that he
could, if he would, a tale unfold that would harrow up almost anybody's
soul. Mr. Jerome therefore, on the gamble of getting something worth
while, sent Detective Russo to Auburn to interview the prisoner. That is
how the whole story came to be known. The case was put in the writer's
hands, and an indictment for the very unusual crime of attempted murder
(there are only one or two such cases on record in New York State) was
speedily found against the photographer's assistant. At the trial the
lover saw his mistress compelled to turn State's evidence against him to
save herself. She testified to the Christmas carols and the cyanide of
mercury.

"Did you ever remove this terrible poison from the bolster?" demanded
the defendant's counsel in a sneering tone.

"No," answered the woman.

"Have you ever changed the bolster?" he persisted.

"No."

"Then it's there yet?"

"I-I think so," falteringly.

"I demand that this incredible yarn be investigated!" cried the lawyer.
"I ask that the court send for the bolster and cut it open here in the
presence of the jury."

The writer had no choice but to accede to this request, and the bolster
was hunted down and brought into court. With some anxiety both sides
watched while the lining was slit with a penknife. A few feathers
fluttered to the floor as the fingers of the witness felt inside
and came in contact with the poison. The assistant was convicted of
attempted murder on the convict's testimony, and sentenced to Sing Sing
for twenty-five years. That was the end of the second lesson.

About a month afterward the defendant's counsel made a motion for a new
trial on the ground that the convict now admitted his testimony to have
been wholly false, and produced an affidavit from the assassin to that
effect. Naturally so startling an allegation demanded investigation.
Yes, insisted the "bravo," it was all made up, a "camorra"--not a word
of truth in it, and he had invented the whole thing in order to get a
vacation from State prison and a free ride to New York. However, the
court denied the motion. The writer procured a new indictment against
the assassin--this time for perjury--and he was sentenced to another
additional term in prison. What induced this sudden and extraordinary
change of mind on his part can only be surmised.

These two cases are extreme examples of the mediaevalism that to a
considerable degree prevails in New York City, probably in Chicago and
Boston, and wherever there is an excessive south Italian population.

The conditions under which a large number of Italians live in this
country are favorable not only to the continuance of ignorance, but to
the development of disease and crime. Naples is bad enough, no doubt.
The people there are poverty-stricken and homeless. But in New York City
they are worse than homeless. It is better far to sleep under the stars
than in a stuffy room with ten or twelve other persons. Let the reader
climb the stairs of some of the tenements in Elizabeth Street, or go
through those in Union Street, Brooklyn, and he will get firsthand
evidence. This is generally true of the lower class of Italians
throughout the United States, whether in the city or country. They live
under worse conditions than at home. You may go through the railroad
camps and see twenty men sleeping together in a one-room built of
lath, tar-paper, and clay. The writer knows of one Italian laborer in
Massachusetts who slept in a floorless mud hovel about six feet
square, with one hole to go in and out by and another in the roof
for ventilation--in order to save $1.75 per month. All honor to him!
Garibaldi was of just such stuff, only he suffered in a better cause. In
Naples the young folks are out all day in the sun. Here they are
indoors all the year round. For the consequences of this change see
Dr. Peccorini's article in the 'Forum' for January, 1911, on the
tuberculosis that soon develops among Italians who abroad were
accustomed to live in the country but here are forced to exist in
tenements.

Now, for historic reasons, these south Italians hate and distrust all
governmental control and despise any appeal to the ordinary tribunals of
justice to assert a right or to remedy a wrong. It has been justly said
by a celebrated Italian writer that, in effect, there is some instinct
for civil war in the heart of every Italian. The insufferable tyranny
of the Bourbon dynasty made every outlaw dear to the hearts of the
oppressed people of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Even if he robbed
them, they felt that he was the lesser of two evils, and sheltered
him from the authorities. Out of this feeling grew the "Omerta," which
paralyzes the arm of justice both in Naples and Sicily. The late Marion
Crawford thus summed up the Sicilian code of honor:

According to this code, a man who appeals to the law against his fellow
man is not only a fool but a coward, and he who cannot take care of
himself without the protection of the police is both.... It is reckoned
as cowardly to betray an offender to justice, even though the offence be
against one's self, as it would be not to avenge an injury by violence.
It is regarded as dastardly and contemptible in a wounded man to betray
the name of his assailant, because if he recovers he must naturally
expect to take vengeance himself. A rhymed Sicilian proverb sums up this
principle, the supposed speaker being one who has been stabbed. "If I
live, I will kill thee," it says; "if I die, I forgive thee!"

Any one who has had anything to do with the administration of criminal
justice in a city with a large Italian population must have found
himself constantly hampered by precisely this same "Omerta." The south
Italian feels obliged to conceal the name of the assassin and very
likely his person, though he himself be but an accidental witness of the
crime; and, while the writer knows of no instance in New York City
where an innocent man has gone to prison himself rather than betray a
criminal, Signor Cutera, formerly chief of police in Palermo, states
that there have been many cases in Sicily where men have suffered long
terms of penal servitude and even have died in prison rather than give
information to the police.

In point of fact, however, the "Omerta" is not confined to Italians. It
is a common attribute of all who are opposed to authority of any kind,
including small boys and criminals, and with the latter arises no more
from a half chivalrous loyalty to their fellows than it does from hatred
of the police and a uniform desire to block their efforts (even if
a personal adversary should go unpunished in consequence), fear that
complaint made or assistance given to the authorities will result in
vengeance being taken upon the complainant by some comrade or relative
of the accused, distrust of the ability of the police to do anything
anyway, disgust at the delay involved, and lastly, if not chiefly, the
realization that as a witness in a court of justice the informer as a
professional criminal would have little or no standing or credence, and
in addition would, under cross-examination, be compelled to lay bare the
secrets of his unsavory past, perhaps resulting indirectly in a term
in prison for himself.* Thus may be accounted for much of the supposed
"romantic, if misguided, chivalry" of the south Italian. It is common
both to him and to the Bowery tough. The writer knew personally a
professional crook who was twice almost shot to pieces in Chatham
Square, New York City, and who persistently declined, even on his dying
bed, to give a hint of the identity of his assassins, announcing that if
he got well he "would attend to that little matter himself." Much of the
romance surrounding crime and criminals, on examination, "fades into
the light of common day"--the obvious product not of idealism, but of
well-calculated self-interest.



     * Much more likely in Italy than in the United States.


As illustrating the backwardness of our Italian fellow-citizens in
coming forward when the criminality of one of their countrymen is
at stake, the last three cases of kidnapping in New York City may be
mentioned.

About a year and a half ago the little boy of Dr. Scimeca, of 2 Prince
Street, New York, was taken from his home. From outside sources the
police heard that the child had been stolen, but, although he was
receiving constant letters and telephonic communications from the
kidnappers, Dr. Scimeca would not give them any information. It is known
on pretty good authority that the sum of $10,000 was at first demanded
as a ransom, and was lowered by degrees to $5,000, $2,500, and finally
to $1,700. Dr. Scimeca at last made terms with the kidnappers, and was
told to go one evening to City Park, where he is said to have handed
$1,700 to a stranger. The child was found wandering aimlessly in the
streets next day, after a detention of nearly three months.

The second case was that of Vincenzo Sabello, a grocer of 386 Broome
Street, who lost his little boy on August 26, 1911. After thirty days he
reported the matter to the police, but shortly after tried to throw them
off the track by saying that he had been mistaken, that the boy had not
been kidnapped, and that he wished no assistance. Finally he ordered
the detectives out of his place. About a month later the child was
recovered, but not, according to reliable information, until Mr. Sabello
had handed over $2,500.

Pending the recovery of the Sabello boy, a third child was stolen from
the top floor of a house at 119 Elizabeth Street. The father, Leonardo
Quartiano, reported the disappearance, and in answer to questions stated
that he had received no letters or telephone messages. "Why should I?"
he inquired, with uplifted hands and the most guileless demeanor. "I am
poor! I am a humble fishmonger." In point of fact, Quartiano at the time
had a pocketful of blackmail letters, and after four weeks paid a good
ransom and got back his boy.

It is impossible to estimate correctly the number of Italian criminals
in America or their influence upon our police statistics; but in several
classes of crime the Italians furnish from fifteen to fifty per cent of
those convicted. In murder, assault with intent to kill, blackmail,
and extortion they head the list, as well as in certain other offences
unnecessary to describe more fully but prevalent in Naples and the
South.

Joseph Petrosino, the able and fearless officer of New York police
who was murdered in Palermo while in the service of the country of
his adoption, was, while he lived, our greatest guaranty of protection
against the Italian criminal. But Petrosino is gone. The fear of him no
longer will deter Italian ex-convicts from seeking asylum in the United
States. He once told the writer that there were five thousand Italian
ex-convicts in New York City alone, of whom he knew a large proportion
by sight and name.* Signor Ferrero, the noted historian, is reported
to have stated, on his recent visit to America, that there were thirty
thousand Italian criminals in New York City. Whatever their actual
number, there are quite enough at all events.


     *Petrosino is a national hero in Italy, where he was known as "Il
Sherlock Holmes d'Italia"--"the Italian Sherlock Holmes." Many novels in
which he figures as the central character have a wide circulation there.


By far the greater portion of these criminals, whether ex-convicts or
novices, are the products or byproducts of the influence of the two
great secret societies of southern Italy. These societies and the
unorganized criminal propensity and atmosphere which they generate, are
known as the "Mala Vita."

The Mafia, a purely Sicilian product, exerts a much more obvious
influence in America than the Camorra, since the Mafia is powerful all
over Sicily, while the Camorra is practically confined to the city of
Naples and its environs. The Sicilians in America vastly outnumber the
Neapolitans. Thus in New York City for every one Camorrist you will find
seven or eight Mafiusi. But they are all essentially of a piece, and
the artificial distinction between them in Italy disappears entirely in
America.

Historically the Mafia burst from a soil fertilized by the blood of
martyred patriots, and represented the revolt of the people against all
forms of the tyrannous government of the Bourbons; but the fact remains
that, whatever its origin, the Mafia to-day is a criminal organization,
having, like the Camorra, for its ultimate object blackmail and
extortion. Its lower ranks are recruited from the scum of Palermo,
who, combining extraordinary physical courage with the lowest type of
viciousness, generally live by the same means that supports the East
Side "cadet" in New York City, and who end either in prison or on the
dissecting-table, or gradually develop into real Mafiusi and perhaps
gain some influence.

It is, in addition, an ultra-successful criminal political machine,
which, under cover of a pseudoprinciple, deals in petty crime, wholesale
blackmail, political jobbery, and the sale of elections, and may fairly
be compared to the lowest types of politico-criminal clubs or societies
in New York City. In Palmero it is made up of "gangs" of toughs and
criminals, not unlike the Camorrist gangs of Naples, but without their
organization, and is kept together by personal allegiance to some
leader. Such a leader is almost always under the patronage of a "boss"
in New York or a 'padrone' in Italy, who uses his influence to protect
the members of the gang when in legal difficulties and find them jobs
when out of work and in need of funds. Thus the "boss" can rely on the
gang's assistance in elections in return for favors at other times. Such
gangs may act in harmony or be in open hostility or conflict with one
another, but all are united as against the police, and exhibit much the
same sort of "Omerta" in Chatham Square as in Palermo. The difference
between the Mafia and Camorra and the "gangs" of New York City lies in
the fact that the latter are so much less numerous and powerful, and
bribery and corruption so much less prevalent, that they can exert no
practical influence in politics outside the Board of Aldermen, whereas
the Italian societies of the Mala Vita exert an influence everywhere--in
the Chamber of Deputies, the Cabinet, and even closer to the King. In
fact, political corruption has been and still is of a character in Italy
luckily unknown in America--not in the amounts of money paid over (which
are large enough), but in the calm and matter-of-fact attitude adopted
toward the subject in Parliament and elsewhere.

The overwhelming majority of Italian criminals in this country come from
Sicily, Calabria, Naples, and its environs. They have lived, most
of their lives, upon the ignorance, fear, and superstitions of their
fellow-countrymen. They know that so long as they confine their criminal
operations to Italians of the lower class they need have little terror
of the law, since, if need be, their victims will harbor them from the
police and perjure themselves in their defence. For the ignorant Italian
brings to this country with him the same attitude toward government
and the same distrust of the law that characterized him and his
fellow-townsmen at home, the same Omerta that makes it so difficult
to convict any Italian of a serious offence. The Italian crook is
quick-witted and soon grasps the legal situation. He finds his fellow
countrymen prospering, for they are generally a hard-working and thrifty
lot, and he proceeds to levy tribute on them just as he did in Naples or
Palermo. If they refuse his demands, stabbing or bomb-throwing show that
he has lost none of his ferocity. Where they are of the most ignorant
type he threatens them with the "evil eye," the "curse of God," or even
with sorceries. The number of Italians who can be thus terrorized is
astonishing. Of course, the mere possibility of such things argues a
state of mediaevalism. But mere mediaevalism would be comparatively
unimportant did it not supply the principal element favorable to the
growth of the Mala Vita, apprehended with so much dread by many of the
citizens of the United States.

Now, what are the phases of the Mala Vita--the Camorra, the Black Hand,
the Mafia--which are to-day observable in the United States and which
may reasonably be anticipated in the future?

In the first place, it may be safely said that of the Camorra in its
historic sense--the Camorra of the ritual, of the "Capo in Testa" and
"Capo in Trino," highly organized with a self-perpetuating body of
officers acting under a supreme head--there is no trace. Indeed, as has
already been explained, this phase of the Camorra, save in the prisons,
is practically over, even in Naples. But of the Mala Vita there is
evidence enough.

Every large city, where people exist under unwholesome conditions, has
some such phenomenon. In Palermo we have the traditional Mafia--a state
of mind, if you will, ineradicable and all-pervasive. Naples festers
with the Camorra as with a venereal disease, its whole body politic
infected with it, so that its very breath is foul and its moral eyesight
astigmatized. In Paris we find the Apache, abortive offspring of
prostitution and brutality, the twin brother of the Camorrista. In New
York there are the "gangs," composed of pimps, thugs, cheap thieves, and
hangers-on of criminals, which rise and wane in power according to the
honesty and efficiency of the police, and who, from time to time, hold
much the same relations to police captains and inspectors as the various
gangs of the Neapolitan Camorra do to commissaries and delegati of the
"Public Safety." Corresponding to these, we have the "Black Hand" gangs
among the Italian population of our largest cities. Sometimes the two
coalesce, so that in the second generation we occasionally find an
Italian, like Paul Kelly, leading a gang composed of other Italians,
Irish-Americans, and "tough guys" of all nationalities. But the genuine
Black Hander (the real Camorrist or "Mafiuoso") works alone or with two
or three of his fellow-countrymen.

Curiously enough, there is a society of criminal young men in New York
City who are almost the exact counterpart of the Apaches of Paris. They
are known by the euphonious name of "Waps" or "Jacks." These are young
Italian-Americans who allow themselves to be supported by one or two
women, almost never of their own race. These pimps affect a peculiar
cut of hair, and dress with half-turned-up velvet collar, not unlike
the old-time Camorrist, and have manners and customs of their own. They
frequent the lowest order of dance-halls, and are easily known by their
picturesque styles of dancing, of which the most popular is yclept the
"Nigger." They form one variety of the many "gangs" that infest the
city, are as quick to flash a knife as the Apaches, and, as a cult by
themselves, form an interesting sociological study.

The majority of the followers of the Mala Vita--the Black Handers--are
not actually of Italian birth, but belong to the second generation. As
children they avoid school, later haunt "pool" parlors and saloons, and
soon become infected with a desire for "easy money," which makes them
glad to follow the lead of some experienced capo maestra. To them he is
a sort of demi-god, and they readily become his clients in crime, taking
their wages in experience or whatever part of the proceeds he doles out
to them. Usually the "boss" tells them nothing of the inner workings of
his plots. They are merely instructed to deliver a letter or to blow
up a tenement. The same name is used by the Black Hander to-day for
his "assistant" or "apprentice" who actually commits a crime as that by
which he was known under the Bourbons in 1820. In those early days the
second-grade member of the Camorra was known as a picciotto. To-day the
apprentice or "helper" of the Black Hander is termed a picciott' in the
clipped dialect of the South. But the picciotto of New York is never
raised to the grade of Camorrista, since the organization of the Camorra
has never been transferred to this country. Instead he becomes in course
of time a sort of bully or bad man on his own hook, a criminal "swell,"
who does no manual labor, rarely commits a crime with his own hands, and
lives by his brain. Such a one was Micelli Palliozzi, arrested for the
kidnapping of the Scimeca and Sabello children mentioned above--a dandy
who did nothing but swagger around the Italian quarter.

Generally each capo maestra works for himself with his own handful of
followers, who may or may not enjoy his confidence, and each gang has
its own territory, held sacred by the others. The leaders all know each
other, but never trespass upon the others' preserves, and rarely attempt
to blackmail or terrorize any one but Italians. They gather around them
associates from their own part of Italy, or the sons of men whom they
have known at home. Thus for a long time Costabili was leader of the
Calabrian Camorra in New York, and held undisputed sway of the territory
south of Houston Street as far as Canal Street and from Broadway to the
East River. On September 15, last, Costabili was caught with a bomb in
his hand, and he is now doing a three-year bit up the river. Sic transit
gloria mundi!

The Italian criminal and his American offspring have a sincere contempt
for American criminal law. They are used by experience or tradition
to arbitrary police methods and prosecutions unhampered by Anglo-Saxon
rules of evidence. When the Italian crook is actually brought to the
bar of justice at home, that he will "go" is generally a foregone
conclusion. There need be no complainant in Italy. The government is
the whole thing there. But, in America, if the criminal can "reach" the
complaining witness or "call him off" he has nothing to worry about.
This he knows he can easily do through the terror of the Camorra.
And thus he knows that the chances he takes are comparatively small,
including that of conviction if he is ever tried by a jury of his
American peers, who are loath to find a man guilty whose language and
motives they are unable to understand. All this the young Camorrist is
perfectly aware of and gambles on.

One of the unique phenomena of the Mala Vita in America is the class of
Italians who are known as "men of honor." These are native Italians who
have been convicted of crime in their own country and have either
made their escape or served their terms. Some of these may have been
counterfeiters at home. They come to America either as stokers, sailors,
stewards, or stowaways, and, while they can not get passports, it is
surprising how lax the authorities are in permitting their escape. The
spirit of the Italian law is willing enough, but its fleshly enforcement
is curiously weak. Those who have money enough manage to reach France or
Holland and come over first or second-class. The main fact is that they
get here--law or no law. Once they arrive in America, they realize their
opportunities and actually start in to turn over a new leaf. They work
hard; they become honest. They may have been Camorrists or Mafiusi at
home, but they are so no longer. They are "on the level," and stay so;
only--they are "men of honor." And what is the meaning of that? Simply
that they keep their mouths, eyes, and ears shut so far as the Mala
Vita is concerned. They are not against it. They might even assist it
passively. Many of these erstwhile criminals pay through the nose for
respectability--the Camorrist after his kind, the Mafius' after his
kind. Sometimes the banker who is paying to a Camorrist is blackmailed
by a Mafius'. He straightway complains to his own bad man, who goes to
the "butter-in" and says in effect: "Here! What are you doing? Don't you
know So-and-So is under my protection?"

"Oh!" answers the Mafius'. "Is he? Well, if that is so, I'll leave him
alone--as long as he is paying for protection by somebody."

The reader will observe how the silence of "the man of honor" is not
remotely associated with the Omerta. As a rule, however, the "men of
honor" form a privileged and negatively righteous class, and are let
strictly alone by virtue of their evil past.

The number of south Italians who now occupy positions of respectability
in New York and who have criminal records on the other side would
astound even their compatriots. Even several well-known business men,
bankers, journalists, and others have been convicted of something or
other in Italy. Occasionally they have been sent to jail; more often
they have been convicted in their absence--condannati in contumacia--and
dare not return to their native land. Sometimes the offences have been
serious, others have been merely technical. At least one popular Italian
banker in New York has been convicted of murder--but the matter was
arranged at home so that he treats it in a humourous vein. Two other
bankers are fugitives from justice, and at least one editor.

To-day most of these men are really respectable citizens. Of course some
of them are a bad lot, but they are known and avoided. Yet the fact that
even the better class of Italians in New York are thoroughly familiar
with the phenomena surrounding the Mala Vita is favorable to the
spread of a certain amount of Camorrist activity. There are a number of
influential bosses, or capi maestra, who are ready to undertake almost
any kind of a job for from twenty dollars up, or on a percentage. Here
is an illustration.

A well-known Italian importer in New York City was owed the sum of three
thousand dollars by an other Italian, to whom he had loaned the money
without security and who had abused his confidence. Finding that the
debtor intended to cheat him out of the money, although he could easily
have raised the amount of the debt had he so wished, the importer sent
for a Camorrist and told him the story.

"You shall be paid," said the Camorrist.

Two weeks later the importer was summoned to a cellar on Mott Street.
The Camorrist conducted him down the stairs and opened the door.
A candle-end flaring on a barrel showed the room crowded with
rough-looking Italians and the debtor crouching in a corner. The
Camorrist motioned to the terrified victim to seat himself by the
barrel. No word was spoken and amid deathly silence the man obeyed. At
last the Camorrist turned to the importer and said:

"This man owes you three thousand dollars, I believe."

The importer nodded.

"Pay what you justly owe," ordered the Camorrist.

Slowly the reluctant debtor produced a roll of bills and counted them
out upon the barrel-head. At five hundred he stopped and looked at the
Camorrist.

"Go on!" directed the latter.

So the other, with beads of sweat on his brow, continued until he
reached the two thousand-dollar mark. Here the bills seemed exhausted.
The importer by this time began to feel a certain reticence about his
part in the matter--there might be some widows and orphans somewhere.
The bad man looked inquiringly at him, and the importer mumbled
something to the effect that he "would let it go at that." But the bad
man misunderstood what his client had said and ordered the bankrupt to
proceed. So he did proceed to pull out another thousand dollars from an
inside pocket and add it to the pile on the barrel-head.

The Camorrist nodded, picked up the money, recounted it, and removed
three hundred dollars, handing the rest to the importer.

"I have deducted the camorra," said he.

The bravos formed a line along the cellar to the door, and, as the
importer passed on his way out, each removed his hat and wished him
a buona sera. That importer certainly will never contribute toward a
society for the purpose of eradicating the "Black Hand" from the city of
New York. He says it is the greatest thing he knows.

But the genuine Camorrist or Mafius' would be highly indignant at being
called a "Black Hander." His is an ancient and honorable profession;
he is no common criminal, but a "man peculiarly sensitive in matters
of honor," who for a consideration will see that others keep their
honorable agreements.

The writer has received authoritative reports of three instances of
extortion which are probably prototypes of many other varieties. The
first is interesting because it shows a Mafius' plying his regular
business and coming here for that precise purpose. There is a large
wholesale lemon trade in New York City, and various growers in Italy
compete for it. Not long past, a well-dressed Italian of good appearance
and address rented an office in the World Building.

His name on the door bore the suffix "Agent." He was, indeed, a most
effective one, and he secured practically all the lemon business among
the Italians for his principals, for he was a famous capo ma mafia, and
his customers knew that if they did not buy from the growers under his
"protection" that something might, and very probably would, happen to
their families in or near Palermo. At any rate, few of them took any
chances in the matter, and his trip to America was a financial success.

In much the same way a notorious crook named Lupo forced all the retail
Italian grocers to buy from him, although his prices were considerably
higher than those of his competitors.

Even Americans have not been slow to avail themselves of Camorrist
methods. There is a sewing machine company which sells its machines to
Italian families on the instalment plan. A regular agent solicits the
orders, places the machines, and collects the initial dollar; but the
moment a subscriber in Mulberry Street falls in arrears his or her name
is placed on a black list, which is turned over by this enterprising
business house to a "collector," who is none other than the leading
Camorrist, "bad man," or Black Hander of the neighborhood. A knock on
the door from his fist, followed by the connotative expression on his
face, results almost uniformly in immediate payment of all that is due.
Needless to say, he gets his camorra--a good one--on the money that
otherwise might never be obtained.

It is probable that we should have this kind of thing among the Italians
in America even if the Neapolitan Camorra and the Sicilian Mafia had
never existed, for it is the precise kind of crime that seems to be
spontaneously generated among a suspicious, ignorant, and superstitious
people. The Italian is keenly alive to the dramatic, sensational, and
picturesque; he loves to intrigue, and will imagine plots against him
when none exists. If an Italian is late for a business engagement the
man with whom he has his appointment will be convinced that there is
some conspiracy afoot, even if his friend has merely been delayed by a
block on the subway. Thus, he is a good subject for any wily lago that
happens along. The Italians in America are the most thrifty of all our
immigrant citizens. In five years their deposits in the banks of New
York State amounted to over one hundred million dollars. The local
Italian crooks avail themselves of the universal fear of the vendetta,
and let it be generally known that trouble will visit the banker or
importer who does not "come across" handsomely. In most cases these
Black Handers are ex-convicts with a pretty general reputation as
"bad men." It is not necessary for them to phrase their demands. The
tradesman who is honored with a morning call from one of this gentry
does not need to be told the object of the visit. The mere presence of
the fellow is a threat; and if it is not acceded to, the front of the
building will probably be blown out by a dynamite bomb in the course of
the next six weeks--whenever the gang of which the bad man is the leader
can get around to it. And the bad man may perhaps have a still badder
man who is preying upon HIM. Very often one of these leaders or bosses
will run two or three groups, all operating at the same time. They meet
in the back rooms of saloons behind locked doors, under pretence of
wishing to play a game of zecchinetta unmolested, or in the gloaming
in the middle of a city park or undeveloped property on the outskirts.
There the different members of the gang get their orders and stations,
and perhaps a few dollars advance wages. It is naturally quite
impossible to guess the number of successful and unsuccessful attempts
at blackmail among Italians, as the amount of undiscovered crime
throughout the country at large is incomputable. No word of it
comes from the lips of the victims, who are in mortal terror of the
vendetta--of meeting some casual stranger on the street who will
significantly draw the forefinger of his right hand across his throat.

There is rather more chance to find and convict a kidnapper than a
bomb-thrower, so that, as a means of extortion, child-snatching is less
popular than the mere demand for the victim's money or his life. On
the other hand it is probably much more effective in accomplishing its
result. But America will not stand for kidnapping, and, although
the latter occurs occasionally, the number of cases is insignificant
compared with those in which dynamite is the chief factor. In 1908,
there were forty-four bomb outrages reported in New York City. There
were seventy arrests and nine convictions. During the present year
(1911) there have been about sixty bomb cases, but there have been none
since September 8, since Detective Carrao captured Rizzi, a picciott',
in the act of lighting a bomb in the hallway of a tenement house.

This case of Rizzi is an enlightening one for the student of social
conditions in New York, for Rizzi was no Orsini, not even a Guy Fawks,
nor yet was he an outlaw in his own name. He was simply a picciott'
(pronounced "pish-ot") who did what he was told in order that some other
man who did know why might carry out a threat to blow up somebody who
had refused to be blackmailed. It is practically impossible to get
inside the complicated emotions and motives that lead a man to become an
understudy in dynamiting. Rizzi probably got well paid; at any rate,
he was constantly demonstrating his fitness "to do big things in a big
way," and be received into the small company of the elect--to go forth
and blackmail on his own hook and hire some other picciott' to set off
the bombs.

Whoever the capo maestra that Rizzi worked for, he was not only
a deep-dyed villain, but a brainy one. The gang hired a store and
pretended to be engaged in the milk business. They carried the bombs in
the steel trays holding the milk bottles and cans, and, in the costume
of peaceful vendors of the lacteal fluid, they entered the tenements and
did their damage to such as failed to pay them tribute. The manner of
his capture was dramatic. A real milkman for whom Rizzi had worked
in the past was marked out for slaughter. He had been blown up twice
already. While he slept his wife heard some one moving in the hall.
Looking out through a small window, she saw the ex-employee fumble
with something and then turn out the gas on the landing. Her husband,
awakened by her exit and return, asked sleepily what the matter was.

"I saw Rizzi out in the hall," she answered. "It was funny-he put out
the light!"

In a moment the milkman was out of bed and gazing, with his wife, into
the street. They saw Rizzi come down with his tray and pass out of
sight. So did a couple of Italian detectives from Headquarters who had
been following him and now, at his very heels, watched him enter another
tenement, take a bomb from his tray, and ignite a time fuse. They caught
him with the thing alight in his hand. Meanwhile the other bomb had gone
off and blown up the milkman's tenement.

There is some ancient history in regard to these matters which ought
to be retold in the light of modern knowledge; for example, the case
of Patti, the Sicilian banker. He had a prosperous institution in which
were deposited the earnings of many Italians, poor and wealthy. Lupo's
gang got after him and demanded a large sum for "protection." But Patti
had a disinclination to give up, and refused. At the time his refusal
was attributed to high civic ideals, and he was lauded as a hero.
Anyhow, he defied the Mafia, laid in a stock of revolvers and rifles,
and rallied his friends around him. But the news got abroad that Lupo
was after Patti, and there was a run on Patti's bank. It was a big
run, and some of the depositors gesticulated and threatened--for Patti
couldn't pay it all out in a minute. Then there was some kind of a row,
and Patti and his friends (claiming that the Mafia had arrived) opened
fire, killing one man and wounding others. The newspapers praised Patti
for a brave and stalwart citizen. Maybe he was. After the smoke had
cleared away, however, he disappeared with all his depositors' money,
and now it has been discovered that the man he killed was a depositor
and not a Black Hander. The police are still looking for him.

This case seems a fairly good illustration of the endless opportunity
for wrong-doing possible in a state of society where extortion is
permitted to exist--where the laws are not enforced--where there is a
"higher" sanction than the code. Whether Patti was a good or a bad man,
he might easily have killed an enemy in revenge and got off scot-free on
the mere claim that the other was blackmailing him; just as an American
in some parts of our country can kill almost anybody and rely on being
acquitted by a jury, provided he is willing to swear that the deceased
had made improper advances to his wife.

The prevention of kidnapping, bomb-throwing, and the other allied
manifestations of the Black Hand depends entirely upon the activity
of the police--particularly the Italian detectives, who should form an
inevitable part of the force in every large city. The fact of the matter
is that we never dreamed of a real "Italian peril" (or, more accurately,
a real "Sicilian peril") until about the year 1900. Then we woke up to
what was going on--it had already gone a good way--and started in to put
an end to it. Petrosino did put an end to much of it, and at the present
time it is largely sporadic. Yet there will always be a halo about the
heads of the real Camorrists and Mafiusi--the Alfanos and the Rapis--in
the eyes of their simple-minded countrymen in the United States.

Occasionally one of these big guns arrives at an American port of entry,
coming first-class via Havre or Liverpool, having made his exit from
Italy without a passport. Then the Camorrists of New York and Brooklyn
get busy for a month or so, raising money for the boys at home and
knowing that they will reap their reward if ever they go back. The
popular method of collecting is for the principal capo maestra, or
temporary boss of Mulberry Street, to "give" a banquet at which all
"friends" must be present--at five dollars per head. No one cares to be
conspicuous by reason of his absence, and the hero returns to Italy with
a large-sized draft on Naples or Palermo.

Meanwhile the criminal driven out of his own country has but to secure
transportation to New York to find himself in a rich field for his
activities; and once he has landed and observed the demoralization often
existing from political or other reasons in our local forces of police
and our uncertain methods of administering justice (particularly where
the defendant is a foreigner), he rapidly becomes convinced that America
is not only the country of liberty but of license--to commit crime.

Most Italian crooks come to the United States not merely some time or
other, but at intervals. Practically all of the Camorrist defendants on
trial at Viterbo have been in the United States, and all will be here
soon again, after their discharge, unless steps are taken to keep them
out. Luckily, it is a fact that so much has been written in American
newspapers and periodicals in the past few years about the danger of the
Black Hand and the criminals from south Italy that the authorities on
the other side have allowed a rumor to be circulated that the climate of
South America is peculiarly adapted to persons whose lungs have become
weakened from confinement in prison. In fact, at the present time
more Italian criminals seek asylum in the Argentine than in the United
States. Theoretically, of course, as no convict can procure a passport,
none of them leave Italy at all--but that is one of the humors of
diplomacy. The approved method among the continental countries of Europe
of getting rid of their criminals is to induce them to "move on." A lot
of them keep "moving on" until they land in America.

Of course, the police should be able to cope with the Black Hand
problem, and, with a free use of Italian detectives who speak the
dialects and know their quarry, we may gradually, in the course of
fifteen years or so, see the entire disappearance of this particular
criminal phenomenon. But an ounce of prevention is worth--several tons
of cure. Petrosino claimed--not boastfully--that he could, with proper
deportation laws behind him, exterminate the Black Hand throughout the
United States in three months.

But, as far as the future is concerned, a solution of the problem
exists--a solution so simple that only a statesman could explain why
it has not been adopted long years ago. The statutes in force at Ellis
Island permit the exclusion of immigrants who have been guilty of crimes
involving moral turpitude in their native land, but do not provide for
the compulsory production of the applicants' "penal certificate" under
penalty of deportation. Every Italian emigrant is obliged to secure
a certified document from the police authorities of his native place,
giving his entire criminal record or showing that he has had none, and
without it he can not obtain a passport. For several years efforts
have been made to insert in our immigration laws a provision that every
immigrant from a country issuing such a certificate must produce
it before he can be sure of admission to the United States. If this
proposed law should be passed by Congress the exclusion of Italian
criminals would be almost automatic. But if it or some similar
provisions fails to become law, it is not too much to say that we may
well anticipate a Camorra of some sort in every locality in our country
having a large Italian population. Yet government moves slowly, and
action halts while diplomacy sagely shakes its head over the official
cigarette.

A bill amending the present law to this effect has received the
enthusiastic approval of the immigration authorities and of the
President. At first the Italian officials here and abroad expressed
themselves as heartily in sympathy with this proposed addition to
the excluded classes; but, once the bill was drawn and submitted to
Congress, some of these same officials entered violent protests against
it, on the ground that such a provision discriminated unfairly against
Italy and the other countries issuing such certificates. The result of
this has been to delay all action on the bill which is now being held in
committee. Meanwhile the Black Hander is arriving almost daily, and we
have no adequate laws to keep him out.




Produced by Kathy H., David Moynihan, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE LIFE, CRIME, AND CAPTURE

OF

JOHN WILKES BOOTH,

WITH A FULL SKETCH OF THE

Conspiracy of which he was the Leader,

AND THE

PURSUIT, TRIAL AND EXECUTION OF HIS ACCOMPLICES.


BY GEORGE ALFRED TOWNSEND,

A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT.




[Illustration: THE LIFE, CRIME, AND CAPTURE OF John Wilkes Booth AND THE
PURSUIT, TRIAL AND EXECUTION OF HIS ACCOMPLICES.]




EXPLANATORY.

One year ago the writer of the letters which follow, visited the Battle
Field of Waterloo. In looking over many relics of the combat preserved
in the Museum there, he was particularly interested in the files of
journals contemporary with the action. These contained the Duke of
Wellington's first despatch announcing the victory, the reports of the
subordinate commanders, and the current gossip as to the episodes and
hazards of the day.

The time will come when remarkable incidents of these our times will be
a staple of as great curiosity as the issue of Waterloo. It is an
incident without a precedent on this side of the globe, and never to be
repeated.

Assassination has made its last effort to become indigenous here. The
public sentiment of Loyalist and Rebel has denounced it: the world has
remarked it with uplifted hands and words of execration. Therefore, as
long as history shall hold good, the murder of the President will be a
theme for poesy, romance and tragedy. We who live in this consecrated
time keep the sacred souvenirs of Mr. Lincoln's death in our possession;
and the best of these are the news letters descriptive of his
apotheosis, and the fate of the conspirators who slew him.

I represented the _World_ newspaper at Washington during the whole of
those exciting weeks, and wrote their occurrences fresh from the mouths
of the actors. Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1865,

By DICK & FITZGERALD,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the
Southern District of New York.




PREFATORY.

It has seemed fitting to Messrs. DICK & FITZGERALD to reproduce the
_World_ letters, as a keepsake for the many who received them kindly.
The Sketches appended were conscientiously written, and whatever
embellishments they may seem to have grew out of the stirring
events,--not out of my fancy.

Subsequent investigation has confirmed the veracity even of their
speculations. I have arranged them, but have not altered them; if they
represent nothing else, they do carry with them the fever and spirit of
the time. But they do not assume to be literal history: We live too
close to the events related to decide positively upon them. As a
brochure of the day,--nothing more,--I give these Sketches of a
Correspondent to the public.

G. A. T.




THE LIFE, CRIME, AND CAPTURE

OF

JOHN WILKES BOOTH.




LETTER I.

THE MURDER.


Washington, April 17.

Some very deliberate and extraordinary movements were made by a handsome
and extremely well-dressed young man in the city of Washington last
Friday. At about half-past eleven o'clock A. M., this person, whose name
is J. Wilkes Booth, by profession an actor, and recently engaged in oil
speculations, sauntered into Ford's Theater, on Tenth, between E and F
streets, and exchanged greetings with the man at the box-office. In the
conversation which ensued, the ticket agent informed Booth that a box
was taken for Mr. Lincoln and General Grant, who were expected to visit
the theater, and contribute to the benefit of Miss Laura Keene, and
satisfy the curiosity of a large audience. Mr. Booth went away with a
jest, and a lightly-spoken "Good afternoon." Strolling down to
Pumphreys' stable, on C street, in the rear of the National Hotel, he
engaged a saddle horse, a high-strung, fast, beautiful bay mare, telling
Mr. Pumphreys that he should call for her in the middle of the
afternoon.

From here he went to the Kirkwood Hotel, on the corner of Pennsylvania
avenue and Twelfth street, where, calling for a card and a sheet of
notepaper, he sat down and wrote upon the first as follows:

_For Mr. Andrew Johnson_:--

I don't wish to disturb you; are you at home?

J. W. Booth.

To this message, which was sent up by the obliging clerk, Mr. Johnson
responded that he was very busily engaged. Mr. Booth smiled, and turning
to his sheet of note-paper, wrote on it. The fact, if fact it is, that
he had been disappointed in not obtaining an examination of the
Vice-President's apartment and a knowledge of the Vice-President's
probable whereabouts the ensuing evening, in no way affected his
composure. The note, the contents of which are unknown, was signed and
sealed within a few moments. Booth arose, bowed to an acquaintance, and
passed into the street. His elegant person was seen on the avenue a few
minutes, and was withdrawn into the Metropolitan Hotel.

At 4 P. M., he again appeared at Pumphreys' livery stable, mounted the
mare he had engaged, rode leisurely up F street, turned into an alley
between Ninth And Tenth streets, and thence into an alley reloading to
the rear of Ford's Theater, which fronts on Tenth street, between E and
F streets. Here he alighted and deposited the mare in a small stable off
the alley, which he had hired sometime before for the accommodation of a
saddle-horse which he had recently sold. Mr. Booth soon afterward
retired from the stable, and is supposed to have refreshed himself at a
neighboring bar-room.

At 8 o'clock the same evening, President Lincoln and Speaker Colfax sat
together in a private room at the White House, pleasantly conversing.
General Grant, with whom the President had engaged to attend Ford's
Theater that evening, had left with his wife for Burlington, New-Jersey,
in the 6 o'clock train. After this departure Mr. Lincoln rather
reluctantly determined to keep his part of the engagement, rather than
to disappoint his friends and the audience. Mrs. Lincoln, entering the
room and turning to Mr. Colfax, said, in a half laughing, half serious
way, "Well, Mr. Lincoln, are you going to the theater with me or not?"
"I suppose I shall have to go, Colfax," said the President, and the
Speaker took his leave in company with Major Rathbone, of the
Provost-Marshal General's office, who escorted Miss Harris, daughter of
Senator Harris, of New York. Mr. and Mrs. Lincoln reached Ford's Theater
at twenty minutes before 9 o'clock.

The house was filled in every part with a large and brilliantly attired
audience. As the presidential party ascended the stairs, and passed
behind the dress circle to the entrance of the private box reserved for
them, the whole assemblage, having in mind the recent Union victories,
arose, cheered, waving hats and handkerchiefs, and manifesting every
other accustomed sign of enthusiasm. The President, last to enter the
box, turned before doing so, and bowed a courteous acknowledgment of his
reception--At the moment of the President's arrival, Mr. Hawks, one of
the actors, performing the well-known part of Dundreary, had exclaimed:
"This reminds me of a story, as Mr. Lincoln says." The audience forced
him, after the interruption, to tell the story over again. It evidently
pleased Mr. Lincoln, who turned laughingly to his wife and made a remark
which was not overheard.

[Illustration: Scene of the Assassination.

_X_ President's Position. _A_ The course of the Assassin after the
Murder. _BB_ Movable partition not in use on the night of the
Assassination. _D_ Door through which the Assassin looked in taking aim.
_C_ Closed door through which pistol ball was fired.]


The box in which the President sat consisted of two boxes turned into
one, the middle partition being removed, as on all occasions when a
state party visited the theater. The box was on a level with the dress
circle; about twelve feet above the stage. There were two entrances--the
door nearest to the wall having been closed and locked; the door nearest
the balustrades of the dress circle, and at right angles with it, being
open and left open, after the visitors had entered. The interior was
carpeted, lined with crimson paper, and furnished with a sofa covered
with crimson velvet, three arm chairs similarly covered, and six
cane-bottomed chairs. Festoons of flags hung before the front of the box
against a background of lace.

President Lincoln took one of the arm-chairs and seated himself in the
front of the box, in the angle nearest the audience, where, partially
screened from observation, he had the best view of what was transpiring
on the stage. Mrs. Lincoln sat next to him, and Miss Harris in the
opposite angle nearest the stage. Major Rathbone sat just behind Mrs.
Lincoln and Miss Harris. These four were the only persons in the box.

The play proceeded, although "Our American Cousin," without Mr. Sothern,
has, since that gentleman's departure from this country, been justly
esteemed a very dull affair. The audience at Ford's, including Mrs.
Lincoln, seemed to enjoy it very much. The worthy wife of the President
leaned forward, her hand upon her husband's knee, watching every scene
in the drama with amused attention. Even across the President's face at
intervals swept a smile, robbing it of its habitual sadness.

About the beginning of the second act, the mare, standing in the stable
in the rear of the theater, was disturbed in the midst of her meal by
the entrance of the young man who had quitted her in the afternoon. It
is presumed that she was saddled and bridled with exquisite care.

Having completed these preparations, Mr. Booth entered the theater by
the stage door; summoned one of the scene shifters, Mr. John Spangler,
emerged through the same door with that individual, leaving the door
open, and left the mare in his hands to be held until he (Booth) should
return. Booth who was even more fashionably and richly dressed than
usual, walked thence around to the front of the theater, and went in.
Ascending to the dress circle, he stood for a little time gazing around
upon the audience and occasionally upon the stage in his usual graceful
manner. He was subsequently observed by Mr. Ford, the proprietor of the
theater, to be slowly elbowing his way through the crowd that packed the
rear of the dress circle toward the right side, at the extremity of
which was the box where Mr. and Mrs. Lincoln and their companions were
seated. Mr. Ford casually noticed this as a slightly extraordinary
symptom of interest on the part of an actor so familiar with the routine
of the theater and the play.

The curtain had arisen on the third act, _Mrs. Mountchessington_ and
_Asa Trenchard_ were exchanging vivacious stupidities, when a young man,
so precisely resembling the one described as J. Wilkes Booth that be is
asserted to be the same, appeared before the open door of the
President's box, and prepared to enter.

The servant who attended Mr. Lincoln said politely, "this is the
President's box, sir, no one is permitted to enter." "I am a senator,"
responded the person, "Mr. Lincoln has sent for me." The attendant gave
way, and the young man passed into the box.

As he appeared at the door, taking a quick, comprehensive glance at the
interior, Major Rathbone arose. "Are you aware, sir," he said,
courteously, "upon whom you are intruding? This is the President's box,
and no one is admitted." The intruder answered not a word. Fastening his
eyes upon Mr. Lincoln, who had half turned his head to ascertain what
caused the disturbance, he stepped quickly back without the door.

Without this door there was an eyehole, bored it is presumed on the
afternoon of the crime, while the theater was deserted by all save a few
mechanics. Glancing through this orifice, John Wilkes Booth espied in a
moment the precise position of the President; he wore upon his wrinkling
face the pleasant embryo of an honest smile, forgetting in the mimic
scene the splendid successes of our arms for which he was responsible,
and the history he had filled so well.

The cheerful interior was lost to J. Wilkes Booth. He did not catch the
spirit of the delighted audience, of the flaming lamps flinging
illumination upon the domestic foreground and the gaily set stage. He
only cast one furtive glance upon the man he was to slay, and thrusting
one hand in his bosom, another in his skirt pocket, drew forth
simultaneously his deadly weapons. His right palm grasped a Derringer
pistol, his left a dirk.

Then, at a stride, he passed the threshold again, levelled his arm at
the President and bent the trigger.

A keen quick report and a puff of white smoke,--a close smell of powder
and the rush of a dark, imperfectly outlined figure,--and the
President's head dropped upon his shoulders: the ball was in his brain.

[Illustration: Map. The Theatre and its Surroundings.

_A_ Public School. _B_ Herndon House. _C_ Only vacant lot communicating
with the Alley. _D_ Only alley outlet to F street. _E_ Bank. _X_
Restaurant. _G_ Newspaper Office. _H_ Model House. _I_ House to which
the President was taken. _K_ Alley through which the Murderer escaped.]

The movements of the assassin were from henceforth quick as the
lightning, he dropped his pistol on the floor, and drawing a
bowie-knife, struck Major Rathbone, who opposed him, ripping through his
coat from the shoulder down, and inflicting a severe flesh wound in his
arm. He leaped then upon the velvet covered balustrade at the front of
the box, between Mrs. Lincoln and Miss Harris, and, parting with both
hands the flags that drooped on either side, dropped to the stage
beneath. Arising and turning full upon the audience, with the knife
lifted in his right hand above his head, he shouted "_Sic, semper
tyrannis_--Virginia is avenged!" Another instant he had fled across the
stage and behind the scenes. Colonel J. B. Stewart, the only person in
the audience who seemed to comprehend the deed he had committed, climbed
from his seat near the orchestra to the stage, and followed close
behind. The assassin was too fleet and too desperate, that fury
incarnate, meeting Mr. Withers, the leader of the orchestra, just behind
the scenes, had stricken him aside with a blow that fortunately was not
a wound; overturning Miss Jenny Gourlay, an actress, who came next in
his path, he gained, without further hindrance, the back door previously
left open at the rear of the theater; rushed through it; leaped upon the
horse held by Mr. Spangler, and without vouchsafing that person a word
of information, rode out through the alley leading into F street, and
thence rapidly away. His horse's hoofs might almost have been heard amid
the silence that for a few seconds dwelt in the interior of the theater.

[Illustration: _A_ Miss Laura Keene's Position. _D_ Movable partition
wall not in place on Friday. _P_ Position of the President. _X_ Flats.
_B_ Dark Passage-way--Position of Sentry. _E_ Exit, or Stage Door. _MM_
Entrance to Box. _CCC_ Entrance to Dress Circle, _H_ Position of Booth's
Horse.]

Then Mrs. Lincoln screamed, Miss Harris cried for water, and the full
ghastly truth broke upon all--"The President is murdered!" The scene
that ensued was as tumultuous and terrible as one of Dante's pictures of
hell. Some women fainted, others uttered piercing shrieks, and cries for
vengeance and unmeaning shouts for help burst from the mouths of men.
Miss Laura Keene, the actress, proved herself in this awful time as
equal to sustain a part in real tragedy as to interpret that of the
stage. Pausing one moment before the footlights to entreat the audience
to be calm, she ascended the stairs in the rear of Mr. Lincoln's box,
entered it, took the dying President's head in her lap, bathed it with
the water she had brought, and endeavoured to force some of the liquid
through the insensible lips. The locality of the wound was at first
supposed to be in the breast. It was not until after the neck and
shoulders had been bared and no mark discovered, that the dress of Miss
Keene, stained with blood, revealed where the ball had penetrated.

This moment gave the most impressive episode in the history of the
Continent.

The Chief Magistrate of thirty, millions of people--beloved, honored,
revered,--lay in the pent up closet of a play-house, dabbling with his
sacred blood the robes of an actress.

As soon as the confusion and crowd was partially overcome, the form of
the President was conveyed from the theater to the residence of Mr.
Peterson, on the opposite side of Tenth street. Here upon a bed, in a
little hastily prepared chamber, it was laid and attended by
Surgeon-General Barnes and other physicians, speedily summoned.

In the meanwhile the news spread through the capital, as if borne on
tongues of flame. Senator Sumner, hearing at his residence, of the
affair took a carriage and drove at a gallop to the White House, when he
heard where it had taken place, to find Robert Lincoln and other members
of the household still unaware of it. Both drove to Ford's Theater, and
were soon at the President's bedside. Secretary Stanton and the other
members of the cabinet were at hand almost as soon. A vast crowd,
surging up Pennsylvania avenue toward Willard's Hotel, cried, "The
President is shot!" "President Lincoln is murdered." Another crowd
sweeping down the avenue met the first with the tidings, "Secretary
Seward has been assassinated in bed." Instantly a wild apprehension of
an organized conspiracy and of other murders took possession of the
people. The shout "to arms!" was mingled with the expressions of sorrow
and rage that everywhere filled the air. "Where is General Grant?" or
"where is Secretary Stanton!" "Where are the rest of the cabinet?" broke
from thousands of lips. A conflagration of fire is not half so terrible
as was the conflagration of passion that rolled through the streets and
houses of Washington on that awful night.

The attempt on the life of Secretary Seward was perhaps as daring, if
not so dramatic, as the assassination of the President. At 9:20 o'clock
a man, tall, athletic, and dressed in light coloured clothes, alighted
from a horse in front of Mr. Seward's residence in Madison place, where
the secretary was lying, very feeble from his recent injuries. The
house, a solid three-story brick building, was formerly the old
Washington Club-house. Leaving his horse standing, the stranger rang at
the door, and informed the servant who admitted him that he desired to
see Mr. Seward. The servant responded that Mr. Seward was very ill, and
that no visitors were admitted. "But I am a messenger from Dr. Verdi,
Mr. Seward's physician; I have a prescription which I must deliver to
him myself." The servant still demurring, the stranger, without further
parley, pushed him aside and ascended the stairs. Moving to the right,
he proceeded towards Mr. Seward's room, and was about to enter it, when
Mr. Frederick Seward appeared from an opposite doorway and demanded his
business. He responded in the same manner as to the servant below, but
being met with a refusal, suddenly closed the controversy by striking
Mr. Seward a severe and perhaps mortal blow across the forehead with the
butt of a pistol. As the first victim fell, Major Seward, another and
younger son of the secretary, emerged from his father's room. Without a
word the man drew a knife and struck the major several blows with it,
rushing into the chamber as he did so; then, after dealing the nurse a
horrible wound across the bowels, he sprang to the bed upon which the
secretary lay, stabbing him once in the face and neck. Mr. Seward arose
convulsively and fell from the bed to the floor. Turning and brandishing
his knife anew, the assassin fled from the room, cleared the prostrate
form of Frederick Seward in the hall, descended the stairs in three
leaps, and was out of the door and upon his horse in an instant. It is
stated by a person who saw him mount that, although he leaped upon his
horse with most unseemly haste, he trotted away around the corner of the
block with circumspect deliberation.

Around both the house on Tenth street and the residence of Secretary
Seward, as the fact of both tragedies became generally known, crowds
soon gathered so vast and tumultuous that military guards scarcely
sufficed to keep them from the doors.

The room to which the President had been conveyed is on the first floor,
at the end of the hall. It is only fifteen feet square, with a Brussels
carpet, papered with brown, and hung with a lithograph of Rosa Bonheur's
"Horse Fair," an engraved copy of Herring's "Village Blacksmith," and
two smaller ones, of "The Stable" and "The Barn Yard," from the same
artist. A table and bureau, spread with crotchet work, eight chairs and
the bed, were all the furniture. Upon this bed, a low walnut
four-poster, lay the dying President; the blood oozing from the
frightful wound in his head and staining the pillow. All that the
medical skill of half a dozen accomplished surgeons could do had been
done to prolong a life evidently ebbing from a mortal hurt.

Secretary Stanton, just arrived from the bedside of Mr. Seward, asked
Surgeon-General Barnes what was Mr. Lincoln's condition. "I fear, Mr.
Stanton, that there is no hope." "O, no, general; no, no;" and the man,
of all others, apparently strange to tears, sank down beside the bed,
the hot, bitter evidences of an awful sorrow trickling through his
fingers to the floor. Senator Sumner sat on the opposite side of the
bed, holding one of the President's hands in his own, and sobbing with
kindred grief. Secretary Welles stood at the foot of the bed, his face
hidden, his frame shaken with emotion. General Halleck, Attorney-General
Speed, Postmaster-General Dennison, M. B. Field, Assistant Secretary of
the Treasury, Judge Otto, General Meigs, and others, visited the chamber
at times, and then retired. Mrs. Lincoln--but there is no need to speak
of her. Mrs. Senator Dixon soon arrived, and remained with her through
the night. All through the night, while the horror-stricken crowds
outside swept and gathered along the streets, while the military and
police were patrolling and weaving a cordon around the city; while men
were arming and asking each other, "What victim next?" while the
telegraph was sending the news from city to city over the continent, and
while the two assassins were speeding unharmed upon fleet horses far
away--his chosen friends watched about the death-bed of the highest of
the nation. Occasionally Dr. Gurley, pastor of the church where Mr.
Lincoln habitually attended, knelt down in prayer. Occasionally Mrs.
Lincoln and her sons, entered, to find no hope and to go back to
ceaseless weeping. Members of the cabinet, senators, representatives,
generals, and others, took turns at the bedside. Chief-Justice Chase
remained until a late hour, and returned in the morning. Secretary
McCulloch remained a constant watcher until 5 A. M. Not a gleam of
consciousness shone across the visage of the President up to his
death--a quiet, peaceful death at last--which came at twenty-two minutes
past seven A. M. Around the bedside at this time were Secretaries
Stanton, Welles, Usher, Attorney-General Speed, Postmaster-General
Dennison, M. B. Field, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, Judge Otto,
Assistant Secretary of the Interior, General Halleck, General Meigs,
Senator Sumner, F. R. Andrews, of New-York, General Todd, of Dacotah,
John Hay, private secretary, Governor Oglesby, of Illinois, General
Farnsworth, Mrs. and Miss Kenny, Miss Harris, Captain Robert Lincoln,
son of the President, and Drs. E. W. Abbott, R. K. Stone, C. D. Gatch,
Neal Hall, and Leiberman. Rev. Dr. Gurley, after the event, knelt with
all around in prayer, and then, entering the adjoining room where were
gathered Mrs. Lincoln, Captain Robert Lincoln, Mr. John Hay, and others,
prayed again. Soon after 9 o'clock the remains were placed in a
temporary coffin and conveyed to the White House under a small escort.

In Secretary Seward's chamber, a similar although not so solemn a scene
prevailed; between that chamber and the one occupied by President
Lincoln, visitors alternated to and fro through the night. It had been
early ascertained that the wounds of the secretary were not likely to
prove mortal. A wire instrument, to relieve the pain which he suffered
from previous injuries, prevented the knife of the assassin from
striking too deep. Mr. Frederick Seward's injuries were more serious.
His forehead was broken in by the blow from, the pistol, and up to this
hour he has remained perfectly unconscious. The operation of trepanning
the skull has been performed, but little hope is had of his recovery.
Major Seward will get well. Mr. Hansell's condition is somewhat
doubtful.

Secretary Seward, who cannot speak, was not informed of the
assassination of the President, and the injury of his son, until
yesterday. He had been worrying as to why Mr. Lincoln did not visit him.
"Why does'nt the President come to see me?" he asked with his pencil.
"Where is Frederick--what is the matter with him?" Perceiving the
nervous excitement which these doubts occasioned, a consultation was
had, at which it was finally determined that it would be best to let the
secretary know the worst. Secretary Stanton was chosen to tell him.
Sitting down beside Mr. Seward's bed, yesterday afternoon, he therefore
related to him a full account of the whole affair. Mr. Seward was so
surprised and shocked that he raised one hand involuntarily, and
groaned. Such is the condition of affairs at this stage of the terror.
The pursuit of the assassins has commenced; the town is full of wild and
baseless rumors; much that is said is stirring, little is reliable. I
tell it to you as I get it, but fancy is more prolific than truth: be
patient! [Footnote: The facts above had been collected by Mr. Jerome B.
Stillion, before my arrival in Washington: the arrangement of them is my
own.]




LETTER II.

THE OBSEQUIES IN WASHINGTON.


Washington, April 19, (Evening).

The most significant and most creditable celebration ever held in
Washington has just transpired. A good ruler has been followed from his
home to the Capitol by a grand cortege, worthy of the memory and of the
nation's power. As description must do injustice to the extent of the
display, so must criticism fail to sufficiently commend its perfect
tastefulness, Rarely has a Republican assemblage been so orderly. The
funeral of Mr. Lincoln is something to be remembered for a _cycle_. It
caps all eulogy upon his life and services, and was, without exception,
the most representative, spontaneous, and remarkable testimonial ever
rendered to the remains of an American citizen.

The night before the funeral showed the probable character of the
cortege. At Willard's alone four hundred applications by telegraph for
beds were refused. As many as six thousand persons spent Tuesday night
in the streets, in depots and in outbuildings. The population of the
city this morning was not far short of a hundred thousand, and of these
as many at thirty thousand walked in procession with Mr. Lincoln's
ashes.

All orders of folks were at hand. The country adjacent sent in
hay-wagons, donkey-carts, dearborns. All who could slip away from the
army came to town, and every attainable section of the Union forwarded
mourners. At no time in his life had Mr. Lincoln so many to throng about
him as in this hour, when he is powerless to do any one a service. For
once in history, office-seekers were disinterested, and contractors and
hangers-on human. These came, for this time only, to the capital of the
republic without an axe to grind or a curiosity to subserve; respect and
grief were all their motive. This day was shown that the great public
heart beats unselfish and reverent, even after a dynasty of plunder and
war.

The arrangements for the funeral were made by Mr. Harrington,
Assistant-Secretary of the Treasury, who was beset by applicants for
tickets. The number of these were reduced to six hundred, the clergy
getting sixty and the press twenty. I was among the first to pass the
White House guards and enter the building.

Its freestone columns were draped in black, and all the windows were
funereal. The ancient reception-room was half closed, and the famous
East room, which is approached by a spacious hall, had been reserved for
the obsequies. There are none present here but a few silent attendants
of the late owner of the republican palace. Deeply ensconced in the
white satin stuffing of his coffin, the President lies like one asleep.
The broad, high, beautiful room is like the varnished interior of a
vault. The frescoed ceiling wears the national shield, some pointed
vases filled with flowers and fruit, and three emblazonings of gilt
pendant from which are shrouded chandeliers. A purplish gray is the
prevailing tint of the ceiling. The cornice is silver white, set off by
a velvet crimson. The wall paper is gold and red, broken by eight lofty
mirrors, which are chastely margined with black and faced with fleece.

Their imperfect surfaces reflect the lofty catafalque, an open canopy of
solemn alapaca, lined with tasteful satin of creamish lead, looped at
the curving roof and dropping to the four corners in half transparent
tapestry. Beneath the roof, the half light shines upon a stage of fresh
and fragrant flowers, up-bearing a long, high coffin. White lace of pure
silver pendant from the border throws a mild shimmer upon the solid
silver tracery hinges and emblazonings. A cross of lilies stands at the
head, an anchor of roses at the foot. The lid is drawn back to show the
face and bosom, and on the coffin top are heather, precious flowers, and
sprigs of green. This catafalque, or in plain words, this coffin set
upon a platform and canopied, has around it a sufficient space of
Brussels carpet, and on three sides of this there are raised steps
covered with black, on which the honored visitors are to stand.

The fourth side is bare, save of a single row of chairs some twenty in
number, on which the reporters are to sit. The odor of the room is fresh
and healthy; the shade is solemn, without being oppressive. All is rich,
simple, and spacious, and in such sort as any king might wish to lie.
Approach and look at the dead man.

Death has fastened into his frozen face all the character and
idiosyncrasy of life. He has not changed one line of his grave,
grotesque countenance, nor smoothed out a single feature. The hue is
rather bloodless and leaden; but he was alway sallow. The dark eyebrows
seem abruptly arched; the beard, which will grow no more, is shaved
close, save the tuft at the short small chin. The mouth is shut, like
that of one who had put the foot down firm, and so are the eyes, which
look as calm as slumber. The collar is short and awkward, turned over
the stiff elastic cravat, and whatever energy or humor or tender gravity
marked the living face is hardened into its pulseless outline. No corpse
in the world is better prepared according to appearances. The white
satin around it reflects sufficient light upon the face to show us that
death is really there; but there are sweet roses and early magnolias,
and the balmiest of lilies strewn around, as if the flowers had begun to
bloom even upon his coffin. Looking on uninterruptedly! for there is no
pressure, and henceforward the place will be thronged with gazers who
will take from the sight its suggestiveness and respect. Three years
ago, when little Willie Lincoln died, Doctors Brown and Alexander, the
embalmers or injectors, prepared his body so handsomely that the
President had it twice disinterred to look upon it. The same men, in the
same way, have made perpetual these beloved lineaments. There is now no
blood in the body; it was drained by the jugular vein and sacredly
preserved, and through a cutting on the inside of the thigh the empty
blood vessels were charged with a chemical preparation which soon
hardened to the consistence of stone. The long and bony body is now hard
and stiff, so that beyond its present position it cannot be moved any
more than the arms or legs of a statue. It has undergone many changes.
The scalp has been removed, the brain taken out, the chest opened and
the blood emptied. All that we see of Abraham Lincoln, so cunningly
contemplated in this splendid coffin, is a mere shell, an effigy, a
sculpture. He lies in sleep, but it is the sleep of marble. All that
made this flesh vital, sentient, and affectionate is gone forever.

The officers present are Generals Hunter and Dyer and two staff
captains. Hunter, compact and dark and reticent, walks about the empty
chamber in full uniform, his bright buttons and sash and sword
contrasting with his dark blue uniform, gauntlets upon his hands, crape
on his arm and blade, his corded hat in his hands, a paper collar just
apparent above his velvet tips, and now and then he speaks to Captain
Nesmith or Captain Dewes, of General Harding's staff, rather as one who
wishes company than one who has anything to say. His two silver stars
upon his shoulder shine dimly in the draped apartment. He was one of the
first in the war to urge the measures which Mr. Lincoln afterward
adopted. The aids walk to and fro, selected without reference to any
association with the late President. Their clothes are rich, their
swords wear mourning, they go in silence, everything is funereal. In the
deeply-draped mirrors strange mirages are seen, as in the coffin scene
of "Lucretia Borgia," where all the dusky perspectives bear vistas of
gloomy palls. The upholsterers make timid noises of driving nails and
spreading tapestry; but save ourselves and these few watchers and
workers, only the dead is here. The White House, so ill-appreciated in
common times, is seen to be capacious and elegant--no disgrace to the
nation even in the eyes of those foreign folk of rank who shall gather
here directly.

As we sit brooding, with the pall straight before us, the funeral guns
are heard indistinctly booming from the far forts, with the tap of drums
in the serried street without, where troops and citizens are forming for
the grand procession. We see through the window in the beautiful spring
day that the grass is brightly green; and all the trees in blossom, show
us through their archways the bronze and marble statues breaking the
horizon. But there is one at an upper window, seeing all this through
her tears, to whom the beautiful noon, with its wealth of zephyrs and
sweets, can waft no gratulation. The father of her children, the
confidant of her affection and ambition, has passed from life into
immortality, and lies below, dumb, cold murdered. The feeling of
sympathy for Mrs. Lincoln is as wide-spread as the regret for the chief
magistrate. Whatever indiscretions she may have committed in the abrupt
transition from plainness to power are now forgiven and forgotten. She
and her sons are the property of the nation associated with its truest
glories and its worst bereavement. By and by the guests drop in, hat in
hand, wearing upon their sleeves waving crape; and some of them slip up
to the coffin to carry away a last impression of the fading face.

But the first accession of force is that of the clergy, sixty in number.
They are devout looking men, darkly attired, and have come from all the
neighboring cities to represent every denomination. Five years ago these
were wrangling over slavery as a theological question, and at the
beginning of the war it was hard, in many of their bodies, to carry
loyal resolutions, To-day there are here such sincere mourners as Robert
Pattison, of the Methodist church, who passed much of his life among
slaves and masters. He and the rest have come to believe that the
President was wise and right, and follow him to his grave, as the
apostles the interred on calvary. All these retire to the south end of
the room, facing the feet of the corpse, and stand there silently to
wait for the coming of others. Very soon this East room is filled with
the representative intelligence of the entire nation. The governors of
states stand on the dais next to the head of the coffin, with the varied
features of Curtin, Brough, Fenton, Stone, Oglesby and Ingraham. Behind
them are the mayors and councilmen of many towns paying their last
respects to the representative of the source of all municipal freedom.
To their left are the corporate officers of Washington, zealous to make
this day's funeral honors atone for the shame of the assassination. With
these are sprinkled many scarred and worthy soldiers who have borne the
burden of the grand war, and stand before this shape they loved in quiet
civil reverence.

Still further down the steps and closer to the catafalque rest the
familiar faces of many of our greatest generals--the manly features of
Augur, whose blood I have seen trickling forth upon the field of battle;
the open almost, beardless contour of Halleck, who has often talked of
sieges and campaigns with this homely gentleman who is going to the
grave. There are many more bright stars twinkling in contiguous shoulder
bars, but sitting in a chair upon the beflowered carpet is Ulysses
Grant, who has lived a century in the last three weeks and comes to-day
to add the luster of his iron face to this thrilling and saddened
picture. He wears white gloves and sash, and is swarthy, nervous, and
almost tearful, his feet crossed, his square receding head turning now
here now there, his treble constellation blazing upon the left shoulder
only, but hidden on the right, and I seem to read upon his compact
features the indurate and obstinate will to fight, on the line he has
selected, the honor of the country through any peril, as if he had sworn
it by the slain man's bier--his state-fellow, patron, and friend. Here
also is General McCallum, who has seamed the rebellious South with
military roads to send victory along them, and bring back the groaning
and the scarred. These and the rest are grand historic figures, worthy
of all artistic depiction. They have looked so often into the mortar's
mouth, that no bravo's blade can make them wince. Do you see the
thin-haired, conical head of the viking Farragut, close by General
Grant, with many naval heroes close behind, storm-beaten, and every inch
Americans in thought and physiognomy?

What think the foreign ambassadors of such men, in the light of their
own overloaded bodies, where meaningless orders, crosses, and ribbons
shine dimly in the funeral light? These legations number, perhaps, a
hundred men, of all civilized races,--the Sardinian envoy, jetty-eyed,
towering above the rest. But they are still and respectful, gathered
thus by a slain ruler, to see how worthy is the republic he has
preserved. Whatever sympathy these have for our institutions, I think
that in such audience they must have been impressed with the futility of
any thought that either one citizen right or one territorial inch can
ever be torn from the United States. Not to speak disparagingly of these
noble guests, I was struck with the superior facial energy of our own
public servants, who were generally larger, and brighter-faced, born of
that aristocracy which took its patent from Tubal Cain, and Abel the
goatherd, and graduated in Abraham Lincoln. The Haytien minister,
swarthy and fiery-faced, is conspicuous among these.

But nearer down, and just opposite the catafalque so that it is
perpendicular to the direction of vision, stand the central powers of
our government, its President and counsellors. President Johnson is
facing the middle of the coffin upon the lowest step; his hands are
crossed upon his breast, his dark clothing just revealing his plaited
shirt, and upon his full, plethoric, shaven face, broad and severely
compact, two telling gray eyes rest under a thoughtful brow, whose
turning hair is straight and smooth. Beside him are Vice-President
Hamlin, whom he succeeded, and ex-Governor King, his most intimate
friend, who lends to the ruling severity of the place a half Falstaffian
episode. The cabinet are behind, as if arranged for a daguerreotypist,
Stanton, short and quicksilvery, in long goatee and glasses, in stunted
contrast to the tall and snow-tipped shape of Mr. Welles with the rest,
practical and attentive, and at their side is Secretary Chase, high,
dignified, and handsome, with folded arms, listening, but
undemonstrative, a half-foot higher than any spectator, and dividing
with Charles Sumner, who is near by, the preference for manly beauty in
age. With Mr. Chase are other justices of the Supreme Court and to their
left, near the feet of the corpse, are the reverend senators,
representing the oldest and the newest states--splendid faces, a little
worn with early and later toils, backed up by the high, classical
features of Colonel Forney, their secretary. Beyond are the
representatives and leading officials of the various departments, with a
few odd folks like George Francis Train, exquisite as ever, and, for
this time only, with nothing to say.

Close by the corpse sit the relatives of the deceased, plain, honest,
hardy people, typical as much of the simplicity of our institutions as
of Mr. Lincoln's self-made eminence. No blood relatives of Mr. Lincoln
were to be found. It is a singular evidence of the poverty of his
origin, and therefore of his exceeding good report, that, excepting his
immediate family, none answering to his name could be discovered. Mrs.
Lincoln's relatives were present, however, in some force. Dr. Lyman
Beecher Todd, General John B. S. Todd, C. M. Smith, Esq., and Mr. N. W.
Edwards, the late President's brother-in-law, plain, self-made people
were here and were sincerely affected. Captain Robert Lincoln sat during
the services with his face in his handkerchief weeping quietly, and
little Tad his face red and heated, cried as if his heart would break.
Mrs. Lincoln, weak, worn, and nervous, did not enter the East room nor
follow the remains. She was the chief magistrate's lady yesterday;
to-day a widow bearing only an immortal name. Among the neighbors of the
late President, who came from afar to pay respect to his remains, was
one old gentleman who left Richmond on Sunday. I had been upon the boat
with him and heard him in hot wrangle with some officers who advised the
summary execution of all rebel leaders. This the old man opposed, when
the feeling against him became so intense that he was compelled to
retire. He counselled mercy, good faith, and forgiveness. To-day, the
men who had called him a traitor, saw him among the family mourners,
bent with grief. All these are waiting in solemn lines, standing erect,
with a space of several feet between them and the coffin, and there is
no bustle nor unseemly curiosity, not a whisper, not a footfall--only
the collected nation looking with awed hearts upon eminent death.

This scene is historic. I regret that I must tell you of it over a
little wire, for it admits of all exemplification. In this high,
spacious, elegant apartment, laughter and levee, social pleasantry and
refined badinage, had often held their session. Dancing and music had
made those mirrors thrill which now reflect a pall, and where the most
beautiful women of their day had mingled here with men of brilliant
favor, now only a very few, brave enough to look upon death, were
wearing funeral weeds. The pleasant face of Mrs. Kate Sprague looks out
from these; but such scenes gain little additional power by beauty's
presence. And this wonderful relief was carved at one blow by John
Wilkes Booth.

The religious services began at noon. They were remarkable not only for
their association with the national event, but for a tremendous
political energy which they had. While none of the prayers or speeches
exhibited great literary carefulness, or will obtain perpetuity on their
own merits, they were full of feeling and expressed all the intense
concern of the country.

The procession surpassed in sentiment, populousness, and sincere good
feeling, anything of the kind we have had in America. It was several
miles long, and in all its elements was full and tasteful. The scene on
the avenue will be alway remembered as the only occasion on which that
great thoroughfare was a real adornment to the seat of government. In
the tree tops, on the house tops, at all the windows, the silent and
affected crowds clustered beneath half-mast banners and waving crape, to
reverentially uncover as the dark vehicle, bearing its rich
silver-mounted coffin, swept along; mottoes of respect and homage were
on many edifices, and singularly some of them were taken from the play
of Richard III., which was the murderer's favorite part The entire width
of the avenue was swept, from curb to curb, by the deep lines.

The chief excellence of this procession was its representative nature.
All classes, localities and trades were out. As the troops in broad,
straight columns, with reversed muskets, moved to solemn marches, all
the guns on the fortifications on the surrounding hills discharged
hoarse salutes--guns which the arbiter of war whom they were to honor
could hear no longer. Every business place was closed. Sabermen swept
the street of footmen and horsemen. The carriages drove two abreast.

Not less than five thousand officers, of every rank, marched abreast
with the cortege. They were noble looking men with intelligent faces,
and represented the sinews of the land, and the music was not the least
excellent feature of the mournful display. About thirty bands were in
the line, and these played all varieties of solemn marches, so that
there were continual and mingling strains of funeral music for more than
three hours. Artillery, consisting of heavy brass pieces, followed
behind. In fact, all the citizen virtues and all the military enterprise
of the country were evidenced. Never again, until Washington becomes in
fact what it is in name, the chief city of America, shall we have a
scene like this repeated--the grandest procession ever seen on this
continent, spontaneously evoked to celebrate the foulest crime on
record. If any feeling of gratulation could arise in so calamitous a
time, it would be, that so soon after this appalling calamity the nation
calmly and collectedly rallied about its succeeding rulers, and showed
in the same moment its regret for the past and its resolution for the
future. To me, the scene in the White House, the street, and the capitol
to-day, was the strongest evidence the war afforded of the stability of
our institutions, and the worthiness and magnanimous power of our
people.

The cortege passed to the left side of the Capitol, and entering the
great gates, passed to the grand stairway, opposite the splendid dome,
where the coffin was disengaged and carried up the ascent. It was posted
under the bright concave, now streaked with mournful trappings, and left
in state, watched by guards of officers with drawn swords. This was a
wonderful spectacle, the man most beloved and honored in the ark of the
republic. The storied paintings representing eras in its history were
draped in sable, through which they seemed to cast reverential glances
upon the lamented bier. The thrilling scenes depicted by Trumbull, the
commemorative canvases of Leutze, the wilderness vegetation of Powell,
glared from their separate pedestals upon the central spot where lay the
fallen majesty of the country. Here the prayers and addresses of the
noon were rehearsed and the solemn burial service read. At night the
jets of gas concealed in the spring of the dome were lighted up, so that
their bright reflection masses of burning light, like marvelous haloes,
upon the little box where so much that we love and honor rested on its
way to the grave. And so through the starry night, in the fane of the
great Union he had strengthened and recovered, the ashes of Abraham
Lincoln, zealously guarded, are now reposing. The sage, the citizen, the
patriot, the man, has reached all the eminence that life can give the
worthy or the ambitious. The hunted fugitive who struck through our
hearts to slay him, should stand beside his stately bier to see how
powerless are bullets and blades to take the real life of any noble man!




LETTER III.

THE MURDERER.


Washington, April 27th.

Justice is satisfied, though blinder vengeance may not be. While the
illustrious murdered is on the way to the shrine, the stark corpse of
his murderer lies in the shambles. The one died quietly, like his life;
the other died fighting, like his crime. And now that over all of them
the darkness and the dew have descended, the populace, which may not be
all satisfied, may perhaps be calmed. No triumphal mourning can add to
the President's glory; no further execration can disturb the assassin's
slumbers. They have gone for what they were into history, into
tradition, into the hereafter both of men and spirits; and what they
were may be in part concluded. Mr. Lincoln's career passes, in extent,
gravity, and eventful association, the province of newspaper biography;
but Booth is the hero of a single deed, and the delineation of him may
begin and be exhausted in a single article. I have been at pains, since
the day of the President's obsequies, to collect all valid information
on the subject of his assassin, in anticipation of the latter's capture
and death. Now that these have been consummated, I shall print this
biography.

The elder Booth in every land was a sojourner, as all his fathers were.
Of Hebrew descent, and by a line of actors, he united in himself that
strong Jewish physiognomy which, in its nobler phases, makes all that is
dark and beautiful, and the combined vagrancy of all men of genius and
all men of the stage. Fitful, powerful, passionate, his life was a
succession of vices and triumphs. He mastered the intricate characters
of dramatic literature by intuition, rather than by study, and produced
them with a vigor and vividness which almost passed the depicting of
real life. The stage on which he raved and fought became as historic as
the actual decks of battle ships, and his small and brawny figure comes
down to us in those paroxysms of delirious art, like that of _Harold, or
Richard, or Prince Rupert_. He drank to excess, was profligate but not
generous, required but not reliable, and licentious to the bounds of
cruelty. He threw off the wife of his bosom to fly from England with a
flower-girl, and, settling in Baltimore, dwelt with his younger
companion, and brought up many children, while his first-possessed went
down to a drunken and broken-hearted death. He himself, wandering
westward, died on the way, errant and feverish, even in the closing
moments. His widow, too conscious of her predecessor's wrongs, and often
taunted with them, lived apart, frugal and discreet, and brought her six
children up to honorable maturity. These were Junius Brutus, Edwin
Forrest (though he drops the Forrest for professional considerations),
John Wilkes, Joseph, and the girls. All of the boys are known to more or
less of fame; none of them in his art has reached the renown of the
father; but one has sent his name as far as that of the great playwright
to whom they were pupils; wherever Shakspeare is quoted, John Wilkes
Booth will be named, and infamously, like that Hubert in "King John,"
who would have murdered the gentle Prince Arthur.

It may not be a digression here to ask what has become of the children
of the weird genius I have sketched above. Mrs. Booth, against whom
calumny has had no word to say, now resides with her daughters in
Nineteenth street, New-York. John S. Clarke dwells in princely style in
Philadelphia, with the daughter whom he married; he is the business
partner of Edwin Booth, and they are likely to become as powerful
managers as they have been successful "stars." Edwin Booth, who is said
to have the most perfect physical head in America, and whom the ladies
call the beau ideal of the melancholy Dane, dwells also on Nineteenth
street. He has acquired a fortune, and is, without doubt, a frankly
loyal gentleman. He could not well be otherwise from his membership in
the Century Club where literature and loyalty, are never dissolved.
Correct and pleasing without being powerful or brilliant, he has led a
plain and appreciated career, and latterly, to his honor, has been
awakening among dramatic authors some emulation by offering handsome
compensations for original plays. Junius Brutus Booth, the oldest of
them all, most resembles in feature his wild and wayward father; he is
not as good an actor as was Wilkes, and kept in the West, that border
civilization of the drama; he now lies, on a serious charge of
complicity, in Capitol Hill jail. Joseph Booth tried the stage as an
utility actor and promptly failed. The best part he ever had to play was
_Orson_ in the "Iron Chest," and his discomfiture was signal; then he
studied medicine but grew discouraged, and is now in California in an
office of some sort. A son of Booth by his first wife became a first
class lawyer in Boston. He never recognized the rest of the family.
Wilkes Booth, the third son, was shot dead on Wednesday for attempting
to escape from the consequences of murder. Such are the people to whom
one of the greatest actors of our time gave his name and lineaments. But
I have anticipated the story:

Although her family was large, it was not so hard sailing with Mrs.
Rosalie Booth as may be inferred. Her husband's gains had been variably
great, and they owned a farm of some value near Baltimore. The boys had
plain but not sufficient schooling, though by the time John Wilkes grew
up Edwin and Junius were making some little money and helping the
family. So Wilkes was sent to a better school than they, where he made
some eventful acquaintances. One of these won his admiration as much in
the playground as in subsequent life upon the field of battle; this was
Fitzhugh Lee, son of the great rebel chieftain. I have not heard that
Lee ever had any friendship for young Wilkes, but his port and name were
enough to excite a less ardent imagination--the son of a soldier already
great, and a descendant of Washington. Wilkes Booth has often spoken of
the memory of the young man, envied his success, and, perhaps, boasted
of more intimacy than he ever had. The exemplars of young Wilkes, it was
soon seen, were anything but literary. He hated school and pent-up life,
and loved the open air. He used to stroll off to fish, though that sort
of amusement was too sedentary for his nature, but went on fowling
jaunts with enthusiasm. In these latter he manifested that fine nerve,
and certain eye, which was the talk of all his associates; but his
greatest love was the stable; He learned to ride with his first pair of
boots, and hung around the grooms to beg permission to take the nags to
water. He grew in later life to be both an indurated and a graceful
horseman. Toward his mother and sisters he was affectionate without
being obedient. Of all the sons, Wilkes was the most headstrong
in-doors, and the most contented away from home. He had a fitful
gentleness which won him forgiveness, and of one of his sisters he was
particularly fond, but none had influence over him. He was seldom
contentious, but obstinately bent, and what he willed, to did in
silence, seeming to discard sympathy or confidence. As a boy he was
never bright, except in a boy's sense; that is, he could run and leap
well, fight when challenged, and generally fell in with the sentiment of
the crowd. He therefore made many companions, and his early days all
passed between Baltimore city and the adjacent farm.

I have heard it said as the only evidence of Booth's ferocity in those
early times that he was always shooting cats, and killed off almost the
entire breed in his neighbourhood. But on more than one occasion he ran
away from both school and home, and once made the trip of the Chesapeake
to the oyster fisheries without advising anybody of his family.

While yet very young, Wilkes Booth became an habitue at the theater. His
traditions and tastes were all in that direction. His blood was of the
stage, like that of the Keans, the Kembles, and the Wallacks. He would
not commence at the bottom of the ladder and climb from round to round,
nor take part in more than a few Thespian efforts. One night, however, a
young actor, who was to have a benefit and wished to fill the house,
resolved for the better purpose to give Wilkes a chance. He announced
that a son of the great Booth of tradition, would enact the part of
Richmond, and the announcement was enough. Before a crowded place, Booth
played so badly that he was hissed. Still holding to his gossamer hopes
and high conceit, Wilkes induced John S. Clarke, who was then addressing
his sister, to obtain him a position in the company of the Arch Street
Theater at Philadelphia.

For eight dollars a week, Wilkes Booth, at the age of twenty-two,
contracted with William Wheatley to play in any piece or part for which
he might be cast, and to appear every day at rehearsal. He had to play
the _Courier_ in Sheridan Knowles's "Wife" on his first night, with five
or ten little speeches to make; but such was his nervousness that he
blundered continually, and quite balked the piece. Soon afterward he
undertook the part of one of the Venetian comrades in Hugo's "Lucretia
Borgia," and was to have said in his turn--

"Madame, I am Petruchio Pandolfo;" instead of which he exclaimed:

"Madame, I am Pondolfio Pet--, Pedolfio Pat--, Pantuchio Ped--; damn it?
what am I?"

The audience roared, and Booth, though full of chagrin, was compelled to
laugh with them.

The very next night he was to play _Dawson_, an important part in
Moore's tragedy of "The Gamester." He had bought a new dress to wear on
this night, and made abundant preparation to do himself honor. He
therefore invited a lady whom he knew to visit the theater, and witness
his triumph. But at the instant of his appearance on the stage, the
audience, remembering the Petruchio Pandolfo of the previous night,
burst into laughter, hisses, and mock applause, so that he was struck
dumb, and stood rigid, with nothing whatever to say. Mr. John Dolman, to
whose _Stukely_ has played, was compelled, therefore, to strike _Dawson_
entirely out of the piece.

These occurrences nettled Booth, who protested that he studied
faithfully but that his want of confidence ruined him. Mr. Fredericks
the stage manager made constant complaints of Booth, who by the way, did
not play under his full name, but as Mr. J. Wilkes--and he bore the
general reputation of having no promise, and being a careless fellow. He
associated freely with such of the subordinate actors as he liked; but
being, through Clarke, then a rising favourite, of better connections,
might, had he chosen, advanced himself socially, if not artistically.
Clarke was to have a benefit one evening, and to enact, among other
things, a mock _Richard III_., to which he allowed Wilkes Booth to play
a real _Richmond_. On this occasion, for the first time, Booth showed
some energy, and obtain some applause. But, in general, he was stumbling
and worthless I myself remember, on three consecutive nights, hearing
him trip up and receive suppressed hisses. He lacked enterprise; other
young actors, instead of waiting to be given better parts, committed
them to memory, in the hope that their real interpreter might not come
to hand. Among these I recall John McCullough, who afterwards became
quite a celebrated actor. He was getting, if I correctly remember, only
six dollars a week, while Booth obtained eight. Yet Wilkes Booth seemed
too slow or indifferent to get on the weather side of such chances. He
still held the part of third walking gentleman, and the third is always
the first to be walked off in case of strait, as was Wilkes Booth. He
did not survive forty weeks engagement, nor make above three hundred
dollars in all that time. The Kellers arrived; they cut down the
company, and they dispensed with Wilkes Booth. He is remembered in
Philadelphia by his failure as in the world by his crime.

About this time a manager named Kunkle gave Booth a salary of twenty
dollars a week to go to the Richmond Theater. There he played a higher
order of parts, and played them better, Winning applauses from the easy
provincial cities, and taking, as everywhere the ladies by storm. I have
never wondered why many actors were strongly predisposed toward the
South. There, their social status is nine times as big as with us. The
hospitable, lounging, buzzing character of the southerner is entirely
consonant with the cosmopolitanism of the stage, and that easy
"hang-up-your-hatativeness," which is the rule and the demand in
Thespianship. We place actors outside of society, and execrate them
because they are there. The South took them into affable fellowship, and
was not ruined by it, but beloved by the fraternity. Booth played two
seasons in Richmond, and left in some esteem.

When the John Brown raid occured, Booth left the Richmond Theater for
the scene of strife in a picked company with which he had affiliated for
some time. From his connection with the militia on this occasion he was
wont to trace his fealty to Virginia. He was a non-commissioned officer,
and remained at Charleston till after the execution, visiting the old
pike man in jail, and his company was selected to form guard around the
scaffold when John Brown went, white-haired, to his account. There may
be in this a consolation for the canonizers of the first arm-bearer
between the sections, that one whose unit swelled the host to crush out
that brave old life, took from the scene inspiration enough to slay a
merciful President in his unsuspecting leisure. Booth never referred to
John Brown's death in bravado; possibly at that gallows began some such
terrible purpose as he afterward consummated.

It was close upon the beginning of the war when Booth resolved to
transform himself from a stock actor to a "star." As many will read this
who do not understand such distinctions, let me preface it by explaining
that a "star" is an actor who belongs to no one theater, but travels
from each to all, playing a few weeks at a time, and sustained in his
chief character by the regular or stock actors. A stock actor is a good
actor, and a poor fool. A star is an advertisement in tights, who grows
rich and corrupts the public taste. Booth was a star, and being so, had
an agent. The agent is a trumpeter who goes on before, writing the
impartial notices which you see in the editorial columns of country
papers and counting noses at the theater doors. Booth's agent was one
Matthew Canning, an exploded Philadelphia lawyer, who took to managing
by passing the bar, and J. Wilkes no longer, but our country's rising
tragedian. J. Wilkes Booth, opened in Montgomery, Alabama, in his
father's consecrated part of _Richard III_. It was very different work
between receiving eight dollars a week and getting half the gross
proceeds of every performance. Booth kept northward when his engagement
was done, playing in many cities such parts as _Romeo_, the _Corsican
Brothers_, and _Raphael_ in the "_Marble Heart_;" in all of these he
gained applause, and his journey eastward, ending in eastern cities like
Providence, Portland, and Boston was a long success, in part deserved.
In Boston he received especial commendation for his enactment of
_Richard_.

I have looked over this play, his best and favorite one, to see how
closely the career of the crookback he so often delineated resembled his
own.

How like that fearful night of _Richard_ on Bosworth field must have
been Booth's sleep in the barn at Port Royal, tortured by ghosts of
victims all repeating.

    "When I was mortal my anointed body
    By thee was punched full of deadly holes:
    Think on the Tower and me! Despair and die!"

Or this, from some of Booth's female victims:

    "Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow!
    I that was washed to death with fulsome wine;
    Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death:
    To-morrow in the battle think on me; despair and die!"

These terrible conjurations must have recalled how aptly the scene as
often rehearsed by Booth, sword in hand, where, leaping from his bed, he
cries in horror:

    "Give me another horse! bind up my wounds!
    Have mercy, Jesu! Soft! I did but dream.
    Oh! coward conscience how thou dost afflict me!
    The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight!
    Cold, flareful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
    What do I fear? Myself! there is none else by:
    Is there a murderer here? No!--Yes!--I am!
    Then fly,--what from myself?

              *       *       *       *       *

    My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
    And every tongue brings in a several tale.
    And every tale condemns me for a villain!
    Perjury, perjury in the highest degree:
    Murder, stern murder in the direst degree:
    All several sins, all used in each degree.
    Throng to the bar, crying all, _Guilty! guilty!_"

By these starring engagments, Booth made incredible sums. His cashbook,
for one single season, showed earnings deposited in bank of twenty-two
odd thousand dollars. In New York he did not get a hearing, except at a
benefit or two: where he played parts not of his selection. In
Philadelphia his earlier failure predisposed the people to discard him,
and they did. But he had made enough, and resolved to invest his
winnings, The oil fever had just begun; he hired an agent, sent him to
the western districts and gave him discretionary power; his investments
all turned out profitable.

Booth died, as far as understood without debts. The day before the
murder he paid an old friend a hundred dollars which he had borrowed two
days previously. He banked at Jay Cook's in Washington, generally; but
turned most of his funds into stock and other matters. He gave eighty
dollars eight month's ago for a part investing with others in a piece of
western oil land. The certificate for this land he gave to his sister.
Just before he died his agent informed him that the share was worth
fifteen thousand dollars. Booth kept his accounts latterly with great
regularity, and was lavish as ever, but took note of all expenditures,
however irregular. He was one of those men whom the possession of money
seems to have energized; his life, so purposeless long before, grew by
good fortune to a strict computation with the world. Yet what availed so
sudden reformation, and of what use was the gaining of wealth, to throw
one's life so soon away, and leap from competence to hunted infamy.

The beauty of this man and his easy confidentiality, not familiar, but
marked by a mild and even dignity, made many women impassioned of him.
He was licentious as men, and particularly as actors go, but not a
seducer, so far as I can learn. I have traced one case in Philadelphia
where a young girl who had seen him on the stage became enamored of him.

She sent him bouquets, notes, photographs and all the accessories of an
intrigue. Booth, to whom such things were common, yielded to the girl's
importunities at last and gave her an interview. He was surprised to
find that so bold a correspondent was so young, so fresh, and so
beautiful. He told her therefore, in pity, the consequences of pursuing
him; that he entertained no affection for her, though a sufficient
desire, and that he was a man of the world to whom all women grew
fulsome in their turn.

"Go home," he said, "and beware of actors. They are to be seen, not to
be known."

The girl, yet more infatuated, persisted. Booth, who had no real virtue
except by scintillations, became what he had promised, and one more soul
went to the isles of Cyprus.

In Montgomery, if I do not mistake, Booth met the woman from whom he
received a stab which he carried all the rest of his days. She was an
actress, and he visited her. They assumed a relation creditable only in
_La Boheme_, and were as tender as love without esteem can ever be. But,
after a time, Booth wearied of her and offered to say "good by." She
refused--he treated her coldly; she pleaded--he passed her by.

Then, with a jealous woman's frenzy, she drew a knife upon him and
stabbed him in the neck, with the intent to kill him. Being muscular, he
quickly disarmed her, though he afterward suffered from the wound
poignantly.

Does it not bring a blush to our faces that a good, great man, like he
who has died--our President--should have met his fate from one so inured
to a life of ribaldry? Yet, only such an one could have been found to
murder Abraham Lincoln.

The women persecuted Booth more than he followed them. He was waylaid by
married women in every provincial town or city where he played. His face
was so youthful, yet so manly, and his movements so graceful and
excellent, that other than the coarse and errant placed themselves in
his way. After his celebrated Boston engagement, women of all ages and
degrees pressed in crowds before the Tremont House to see him depart.
Their motives were various, but whether curiosity or worse, exhibiting
plainly the deep influence which Booth had upon the sex. He could be
anywhere easy and gentlemanly, and it is a matter of wonder that with
the entry which he had to many well-stocked homes, he did not make
hospitality mourn and friendship find in his visit shame and ruin. I
have not space to go into the millionth catalogue of Booth's intrigues,
even if this journal permitted further elucidation of so banned a
subject. Most of his adherents of this class were, like Heine's Polish
virgins, and he was very popular with those dramatic ladies--few, I hope
and know, in their profession--to whom divorce courts are superfluous.
His last permanent acquaintance was one Ella Turner, of Richmond, who
loved him with all the impetuosity of that love which does not think,
and strove to die at the tidings of his crime and fight. Happy that even
such a woman did not die associated with John Wilkes Booth. Such
devotion to any other murderer would have earned some poet's tear. But
the daisies will not grow a whole rod from _his_ grave.

Of what avail, may we ask, on the impossible supposition that Booth's
crime could have been considered heroic, was it that such a record
should have dared to die for fame? Victory would have been ashamed of
its champion, as England of Nelson, and France of Mirabeau.

I may add to this record that he had not been in Philadelphia a year, on
first setting out in life, before getting into a transaction of the kind
specified. For an affair at his boarding-house he was compelled to pay a
considerable sum of money, and it happily occurred just as he was to
quit the city. He had many quarrels and narrow escapes through his
license, a husband in Syracuse, N. Y., once followed him all the way to
Cleveland to avenge a domestic insult.

Booth's paper "To Whom it may Concern" was not his only attempt at
influential composition. He sometimes persuaded himself that he had
literary ability; but his orthography and pronunciation were worse than
his syntax. The paper deposited with J. S. Clarke was useful as showing
his power to entertain a deliberate purpose. It has one or two smart
passages in it--as this:

"Our once bright red stripes look like _bloody gashes_ on the face of
heaven."

In the passages following there is common sense and lunacy:

"I know how foolish I shall be deemed for undertaking such a step as
this, where, on the one side, I have many friends and everything to make
me happy, where my profession _alone_, has gained me an income of _more
than_ twenty thousand dollars a year, and where my _great personal
ambition_ in my profession has such a great field for labor. On the
other hand, the South have never bestowed upon me one kind word; a place
now where I have no friends, except beneath the sod; a place where I
must either become a private soldier or a beggar. To give up all of the
_former_ for the _latter_, besides my mother and sisters, whom I love so
dearly (although they so widely differ with me in opinion) seems insane;
but God is my judge."

Now, read the beginning of the manifesto, and see how prophetic were his
words of his coming infamy. If he expected so much for capturing the
President merely, what of our execration at slaying him?

"Right or wrong, God judge me, not man. For be my motive good or bad, of
one thing I am sure, _the lasting condemnation_ of the North.

"I love peace more than life. Have loved the Union beyond expression.
For four years have I waited, hoped and prayed for the dark clouds to
break, and for a restoration of our former sunshine. _To wait longer
would be a crime_. All hope for peace is dead. My prayers have proved as
idle as my hopes. God's will be done. _I go to see and share the bitter
end_."

To wait longer would be a crime. Oh! what was the crime _not_ to wait!
Had he only shared the bitter end, then, in the common trench, his
memory might have been hidden. The end had come when he appeared to make
of benignant victory a quenchless revenge. One more selection from his
apostrophe will do. It suggests the manner of his death:

"They say that the South has found _that_ 'last ditch' which the North
have so long derided. Should I reach her in safety, and find it true, I
will proudly beg permission to triumph or die in that same 'ditch' by
her side." The swamp near which he died may be called, without unseemly
pun--a truth, not a _bon mot_--the last ditch of the rebellion.

None of the printed pictures that I have seen do justice to Booth. Some
of the _cartes de visite_ get him very nearly. He had one of the finest
vital heads I have ever seen. In fact, he was one of the best exponents
of vital beauty I have ever met. By this I refer to physical beauty in
the Medician sense--health, shapeliness, power in beautiful poise, and
seemingly more powerful in repose than in energy. His hands and feet
were sizable, not small, and his legs were stout and muscular, but
inclined to bow like his father's. From the waist up he was a perfect
man; his chest being full and broad, his shoulders gently sloping, and
his arms as white as alabaster, but hard as marble. Over these, upon a
neck which was its proper column, rose the cornice of a fine Doric face,
spare at the jaws and not anywhere over-ripe, but seamed with a nose of
Roman model, the only relic of his half-Jewish parentage, which gave
decision to the thoughtfully stern sweep of two direct, dark eyes,
meaning to woman snare, and to man a search warrant, while the lofty
square forehead and square brows were crowned with a weight of curling
jetty hair, like a rich Corinthian capital. His profile was eagleish,
and afar his countenance was haughty. He seemed throat full of
introspections, ambitious self-examinings, eye-strides into the future,
as if it withheld him something to which he had a right. I have since
wondered whether this moody demeanor did not come of a guilty spirit,
but all the Booths look so.

Wilkes spoke to me in Washington for the first time three weeks before
the murder. His address was winning as a girl's, rising in effect not
from what he said, but from how he said it. It was magnetic, and I can
describe it therefore by its effects alone. I seemed, when he had
spoken, to lean toward this man. His attitude spoke to me; with as easy
familiarity as I ever observed he drew rear and conversed. The talk was
on so trite things that it did not lie a second in the head, but when I
left him it was with the feeling that a most agreeable fellow had passed
by.

The next time the name of Wilkes Booth recurred to me was like the
pistol shot he had fired. The right hand I had shaken murdered the
father of the country.

Booth was not graceful with his feet, although his ordinary walk was
pleasant enough. But his arms were put to artistic uses; not the baser
ones like boxing, but all sorts of fencing, manual practice, and the
handling of weapons.

In his dress, he was neat without being particular. Almost any clothes
could fit him; but he had nothing of the exquisite about him; his
neckties and all such matters were good without being gaudy. Nature had
done much for him. In this beautiful palace an outlaw had builded his
fire, and slept, and plotted, and dreamed.

I have heard it said that Booth frequently cut his adversaries upon the
stage in sheer wantonness or bloodthirstiness. This is a mistake, and is
attributable to his father, the elder Booth, who had the madness of
confounding himself with the character. Wilkes was too good a fencer to
make ugly gashes; his pride was his skill, not his awkwardness. Once

he was playing with John McCullough in the last act of "Richard." They
were fighting desperately. Suddenly the cross-piece on the hilt of
McCullough's sword flew off and cut the owner deeply in the forehead.
Blood ran down McCullough's face, though they continued to struggle, and
while, ostensibly, Booth was imitating a demon, he said in a half
whisper:

"Good God, John, did I hurt you?"

And when they went off the stage, Booth was white with fear that he had
gashed his friend.

As an actor, Booth was too energetic to be correct; his conception of
Richard was vivid and original, one of the best that we have had, and he
came nearer his father's rendering of the last act than any body we have
had. His combat scene was terrific. The statement that his voice had
failed has no valid foundation; it was as good when he challenged the
cavalry-men to combat as in the best of his Thespian successes. In all
acting that required delicate characterization, refined conception or
carefulness, Booth was at sea. But in strong physical parts, requiring
fair reading and an abundance of spring and tension, he was much finer
than hearsay would have us believe.

His _Romeo_ was described a short time ago by the Washington
_Intelligencer_ as the most satisfactory of all renderings of that fine
character. He played the _Corsican Brothers_ three weeks on a run in
Boston. He played _Pescara_ at Ford's Theater--his last mock part in
this world--on to-morrow (Saturday) night, six weeks ago.

He was fond of learning and reciting fugitive poems. His favorite piece
was "The Beautiful Snow" comparing it to a lost purity. He has been
known by gentlemen in this city to recite this poem with fine effect,
and cry all the while. This was on the principle of "guilty people
sitting at a play." His pocket-book was generally full of little
selections picked up at random, and he had considerable delicacy of
appreciation.

On the morning of the murder, Booth breakfasted with Miss Carrie Bean,
the daughter of a merchant, and a very respectable young lady, at the
National Hall. He arose from the table at, say eleven o'clock. During
the breakfast, those who watched him say that he was lively, piquant and
self-possessed as ever in his life.

That night the horrible crime thrilled the land. A period of crippled
flight succeeded. Living in swamps, upon trembling hospitality, upon
hopes which sank as he leaned upon them. Booth passed the nights in
perilous route or broken sleep, and in the end went down like a bravo,
but in the eyes of all who read his history, commanding no respect for
his valor, charity for his motive, or sympathy for his sin.

The closing scenes of these terrible days are reserved for a second
paper. Much matter that should have gone into this is retained for the
present.




LETTER IV.

THE ASSASSIN'S DEATH.


Washington, April 28--8 P. M.

A hard and grizzly face overlooks me as I write. Its inconsiderable
forehead is crowned with turning sandy hair, and the deep concave of its
long insatiate jaws is almost hidden by a dense red beard, which can not
still abate the terrible decision of the large mouth, so well sustained
by searching eyes of spotted gray, which roll and rivet one. This is the
face of Lafayette Baker, colonel and chief of the secret service. He has
played the most perilous parts of the war, and is the capturer of the
late President's murderer. The story that I am to tell you, as he and
his trusty dependents told it to me, will be aptly commenced here, where
the net was woven which took the dying life of Wilkes Booth.

When the murder occured, Colonel Baker was absent from Washington, He
returned on the third morning, and was at once besought by Secretary
Stanton to join the hue and cry against the escaped Booth. The sagacious
detective found that nearly ten thousand cavalry, and one-fourth as many
policemen, had been meantime scouring, without plan or compass, the
whole territory of Southern Maryland. They were treading on each other's
heels, and mixing up the thing so confoundedly, that the best place for
the culprits to have gone would have been in the very midst of their
pursuers. Baker at once possessed himself of the little the War
Department had learned, and started immediately to take the usual
detective measures, till then neglected, of offering a reward and
getting out photographs of the suspected ones. He then dispatched a few
chosen detectives to certain vital points, and awaited results.

The first of these was the capture of Atzeroth. Others, like the taking
of Dr. Mudge, simultaneously occured. But the district supected being
remote from the railway routes, and broken by no telegraph station, the
colonel, to place himself nearer the theater of events, ordered an
operator, with the necessary instrument, to tap the wire running to
Point Lookout, near Chappells Point, and send him prompt messages.

The same steamer which took down the operator and two detectives.
brought back one of the same detectives and a negro. This negro, taken
to Colonel Baker's office, stated so positively that he had seen Booth
and another man cross the Potomac in a fishing boat, while he was
looking down upon them from a bank, that the colonel, was at first
skeptical; but when examined the negro answered so readily and
intelligently, recognizing the men from the photographs, that Baker knew
at last that he had the true scent.

Straightway he sent to General Hancock for twenty-five men, and while
the order was going, drew down his coast survey-maps. With that quick
detective intuition amounting almost to inspiration, he cast upon the
probable route and destination of the refugees, as well as the point
where he would soonest strike them. Booth, he knew, would not keep along
the coast, with frequent deep rivers to cross, nor, indeed, in any
direction east of Richmond, where he was liable at any time to cross our
lines of occupation; nor, being lame, could he ride on; horseback, so as
to place himself very far westward of his point of debarkation in
Virginia. But he would travel in a direct course from Bluff point, where
he crossed to Eastern Tennessee, and this would take him through Port
Royal on the Rappahannock river, in time to be intercepted there by the
outgoing cavalry men.

When, therefore, twenty-five men, under one Lieutenant Dougherty,
arrived at his office door, Baker placed the whole under control of his
former lieutenant-colonel, E. J. Conger, and of his cousin, Lieutenant
L. B. Baker--the first of Ohio, the last of New-York--and bade them go
with all dispatch to Belle Plain on the Lower Potomac, there to
disembark, and scour the country faithfully around Port Royal, but not
to return unless they captured their men.

Conger is a short, decided, indomitable, courageous fellow, provincial
in his manners, but fully understanding his business, and collected as a
housewife on Sunday.

Young Baker is large and fine-looking--a soldier, but no policeman--and
he deferred to Conger, very properly, during most of the events
succeeding.

Quitting Washington at 2 o'clock P. M. on Monday, the detectives and
cavalrymen disembarked at Belle Plain, on the border of Stafford county,
at 10 o'clock, in the darkness. Belle Plain is simply the nearest
landing to Fredericksburg, seventy miles from Washington city, and
located upon Potomac creek. It is a wharf and warehouse merely, and here
the steamer John S. Ide stopped and made fast, while the party galloped
off in the darkness. Conger and Baker kept ahead, riding up to
farm-houses and questioning the inmates, pretending to be in search of
the Maryland gentlemen belonging to the party. But nobody had seen the
parties described, and, after a futile ride on the Fredericksburg road,
they turned shortly to the east, and kept up their baffled inquiries all
the way to Port Conway, on the Rappahannock.

On Tuesday morning they presented themselves at the Port Royal ferry,
and inquired of the ferry-man, while he was taking them over in squads
of seven at a time, if he had seen any two such men. Continuing their
inquiries at Port Royal, they found one Rollins a fisherman, who
referred them to a negro named Lucas, as having driven two men a short
distance toward Bowling Green in a wagon. It was found that these men
answered to the description, Booth having a crutch as previously
ascertained.

The day before Booth and Harold had applied at Port Conway for the
general ferry-boat, but the ferryman was then fishing and would not
desist for the inconsiderable fare of only two persons, but to their
supposed good fortune a lot of confederate cavalrymen just then came
along, who threatened the ferryman with a shot in the head if he did not
instantly bring across his craft and transport the entire party. These
cavalrymen were of Moseby's disbanded command, returning from Fairfax
Court House to their homes in Caroline county. Their captain was on his
way to visit a sweetheart at Bowling Green, and he had so far taken
Booth under his patronage, that when the latter was haggling with Lucas
for a team, he offered both Booth and Harold the use of his horse, to
ride and walk alternately.

In this way Lucas was providentially done out of the job, and Booth rode
off toward Bowling Green behind the confederate captain on one and the
same horse.

So much learned, the detectives, with Rollins for a guide, dashed off in
the bright daylight of Tuesday, moving southwestward through the level
plains of Caroline, seldom stopping to ask questions, save at a certain
halfway house, where a woman told them that the cavalry party of
yesterday had returned minus one man. As this was far from
circumstantial, the party rode along in the twilight, and reached
Bowling Green at eleven o'clock in the night.

This is the court-house town of Caroline county--a small and scattered
place, having within it an Ancient tavern, no longer used for other than
lodging purposes; but here they hauled from his bed the captain
aforesaid, and bade him dress himself. As soon as he comprehended the
matter he became pallid and eagerly narrated all the facts in his
possession. Booth, to his knowledge, was then lying at the house of one
Garrett, which they had passed, and Harold had departed the existing day
with the intention of rejoining him.

Taking this captain along for a guide, the worn out horsemen retraced,
though some of the men were so haggard and wasted with travel that they
had to be kicked into intelligence before they could climb to their
saddles. The objects of the chase thus at hand, the detectives, full of
sanguine purpose; hurried the cortege so well along that by 2 o'clock
early morning, all halted at Garrett's gate. In the pale moonlight three
hundred yards from the main road, to the left, a plain old farmhouse
looked grayly through its environing locusts. It was worn and
whitewashed, and two-storied, and its half-human windows glowered down
upon the silent cavalrymen like watching owls, which stood as sentries
over some horrible secret asleep within. The front of this house looked
up the road toward the Rappahannock, but did not face it, and on that
side a long Virginia porch protruded, where, in the summer, among the
honeysuckles, the humming bird flew like a visible odor. Nearest the
main road, against the pallid gable, a single-storied kitchen stood, and
there were three other doors, one opening upon the porch, one in the
kitchen gable, and one in the rear of the farmhouse.

Dimly seen behind, an old barn, high and weather-beaten, faced the
roadside gate, for the house itself lay to the left of its own lane; and
nestling beneath the barn, a few long corn-cribs lay with a cattle shed
at hand. There was not a swell of the landscape anywhere in sight. A
plain dead level contained all the tenements and structures. A worm
fence stretched along the road broken by two battered gate posts, and
between the road and the house, the lane was crossed by a second fence
and gate. The farm-house lane, passing the house front, kept straight on
to the barn, though a second carriage track ran up to the porch.

[Illustration: Plan of Garrett's House.

_A_ Door through which the dying man was brought. _B_ Corner at which
the barn was fired. _C_ Spot in the barn on which Booth stood. _D_ Point
where Corbett fired. _E_ Porch where Booth died. _G_ Door at which
Lieutenant Baker knocked. _H_ Shed. _I_ Kitchen.]

It was a homely and primitive scene enough, pastoral as any farm boy's
birth-place, and had been the seat of many toils and endearments. Young
wives had been brought to it, and around its hearth the earliest cries
of infants, gladdening mothers' hearts, had made the household jubilant
till the stars came out, and were its only sentries, save the bright
lights at its window-panes as of a camp-fire, and the suppressed
chorusses of the domestic bivouac within, where apple toasting and nut
cracking and country games shortened the winter shadows. Yet in this
house, so peaceful by moonlight, murder had washed its spotted hands,
and ministered to its satiated appetite. History--present in every nook
in the broad young world--had stopped, to make a landmark of Garrett's
farm.

In the dead stillness, Baker dismounted and forced the outer gate;
Conger kept close behind him, and the horsemen followed cautiously. They
made no noise in the soft clay, nor broke the all-foreboding silence
anywhere, till the second gate swung open gratingly, yet even then nor
hoarse nor shrill response came back, save distant croaking, as of frogs
or owls, or the whizz of some passing night-hawk. So they surrounded the
pleasant old homestead, each horseman, carbine in poise, adjusted under
the grove of locusts, so as to inclose the dwelling with a circle of
fire. After a pause, Baker rode to the kitchen door on the side, and
dismounting, rapped and halloed lustily. An old man, in drawers and
night-shirt, hastily undrew the bolts, and stood on the threshold,
peering shiveringly into the darkness.

Baker seized him by the throat at once, and held a pistol to his ear.
"Who--who is it that calls me?" cried the old man. "Where are the men
who stay with you?" challenged Baker. "If you prevaricate you are a dead
man!" The old fellow, who proved to be the head of the family, was so
overawed and paralysed that he stammered, and shook, and said not a
word. "Go light a candle," cried Baker, sternly, "and be quick about
it." The trembling old man obeyed, and in a moment the imperfect rays
flared upon his whitening hairs and bluishly pallid face. Then the
question was repeated, backed up by the glimmering pistol, "where are
those men?" The old man held to the wall, and his knees smote each
other. "They are gone," he said. "We hav'n't got them in the house, I
assure you that they are gone." Here there were sounds and whisperings
in the main building adjoining, and the lieutenant strode to the door. A
ludicrous instant intervened, the old man's modesty outran his terror.
"Don't go in there," he said, feebly; "there are women undressed in
there." "Damn the women," cried Baker; "what if they are undressed? We
shall go in if they haven't a rag." Leaving the old man in mute
astonishment, Baker bolted through the door, and stood in an assemblage
of bare arms and night robes. His loaded pistol disarmed modesty of its
delicacy and substituted therefor a seasonable terror. Here he repeated
his summons, and the half light of the candle gave to his face a more
than bandit ferocity. They all denied knowledge of the strangers'
whereabouts.

In the interim Conger had also entered, and while the household and its
invaders were thus in weird tableaux, a young man appeared, as if he had
risen from the ground. The muzzles of everybody turned upon him in a
second; but, while he blanched, he did not lose loquacity. "Father," he
said, "we had better tell the truth about the matter. Those men whom you
seek, gentlemen, are in the barn, I know. They went there to sleep."
Leaving one soldier to guard the old man--and the soldier was very glad
of the job, as it relieved him of personal hazard in the approaching
combat--all the rest, with cocked pistols at the young man's head,
followed on to the barn. It lay a hundred yards from the house, the
front barndoor facing the west gable, and was an old and spacious
structure, with floors only a trifle above the ground level.

The troops dismounted, were stationed at regular intervals around it,
and ten yards distant at every point, four special guards placed to
command the door and all with weapons in supple preparation, while Baker
and Conger went direct to the portal. It had a padlock upon it, and the
key of this Baker secured at once. In the interval of silence that
ensued, the rustling of planks and straw was heard inside, as of persons
rising from sleep.

At the same moment Baker hailed:

"To the persons in this barn. I have a proposal to make; we are about to
send in to you the son of the man in whose custody you are found. Either
surrender to him your arms and then give yourselves up, or we'll set
fire to the place. We mean to take you both, or to have a bonfire and a
shooting match."

No answer came to this of any kind. The lad, John M. Garrett, who was in
deadly fear, was here pushed through the door by a sudden opening of it,
and immediately Lieutenant Baker locked the door on the outside. The boy
was heard to state his appeal in under tone. Booth replied:

"Damn you. Get out of here. You have betrayed me."

At the same time he placed his hand in his pocket as for a pistol. A
remonstrance followed, but the boy slipped quickly over the reopened
portal, reporting that his errand had failed, and that he dared not
enter again. All this time the candle brought from the house to the barn
was burning close beside the two detectives, rendering it easy for any
one within to have shot them dead. This observed, the light was
cautiously removed, and everybody took care to keep out of its
reflection. By this time the crisis of the position was at hand, the
cavalry exhibited very variable inclinations, some to run away, others
to shoot Booth without a summons, but all excited and fitfully silent.
At the house near by the female folks were seen collected in the
doorway, and the necessities of the case provoked prompt conclusions.
The boy was placed at a remote point, and the summons repeated by Baker:

"You must surrender inside there. Give up your arms and appear. There is
no chance for escape. We give you five minutes to make up your mind."

A bold, clarion reply came from within, so strong as to be heard at the
house door:

"Who are you, and what do you want with us?"

Baker again urged: "We want you to deliver up your arms and become our
prisoners."

"But who are you?" hallooed the same strong voice.

Baker.--"That makes no difference. We know who you are, and we want you.
We have here fifty men, armed with carbines and pistols. You cannot
escape."

There was a long pause, and then Booth said:

"Captain, this is a hard case, I swear. Perhaps I am being taken by my
own friends." No reply from the detectives.

Booth--"Well, give us a little time to consider."

[Illustration: Garrett's House, Where Booth Died--Sketched by W. N.
Walton, for "Harper's Weekly" for May 30th, 1865]

Baker--"Very well. Take time."

Here ensued a long and eventful pause. What thronging memories it
brought to Booth, we can only guess. In this little interval he made the
resolve to die. But he was cool and steady to the end. Baker, after a
lapse, hailed for the last time.

"Well, we have waited long enough; surrender your arms and come out, or
we'll fire the barn."

Booth answered thus: "I am but a cripple, a one-legged man. Withdraw
your forces one hundred yard from the door, and I will come. Give me a
chance for my life, captain. I will never be taken alive."

Baker--"We did not come here to fight, but to capture you. I say again,
appear, or the barn shall be fired."

Then with a long breath, which could be heard outside, Booth cried in
sudden calmness, still invisible, as were to him his enemies:

"Well, then, my brave boys, prepare a stretcher for me."

There was a pause repeated, broken by low discussions within between
Booth and his associate, the former saying, as if in answer to some
remonstrance or appeal, "Get away from me. You are a damned coward, and
mean to leave me in my distress; but go, go. I don't want you to stay. I
won't have _you_ stay." Then he shouted aloud:

"There's a man inside who wants to surrender."

Baker--"Let him come, if he will bring his arms."

Here Harold, rattling at the door, said: "Let me out; open the door; I
want to surrender."

Baker--"Hand out your arms, then."

Harold--"I have not got any."

Baker--"You are the man that carried the carbine yesterday; bring it
out."

Harold--"I haven't got any."

This was said in a whining tone, and with an almost visible shiver.
Booth cried aloud, at this hesitation: "He hasn't got any arms; they are
mine, and I have kept them."

Baker--"Well, he carried the carbine, and must bring it out."

Booth--"On the word and honor of a gentleman, he has no arms with him.
They are mine, and I have got them."

At this time Harold was quite up to the door, within whispering distance
of Baker. The latter told him to put out his hands to be handcuffed, at
the same time drawing open the door a little distance. Harold thrust
forth his hands, when Baker, seizing him, jerked him into the night, and
straightway delivered him over to a deputation of cavalrymen. The fellow
began to talk of his innocence and plead so noisily that Conger
threatened to gag him unless he ceased. Then Booth made his last appeal,
in the same clear unbroken voice:

"Captain, give me a chance. Draw off your men and I will fight them
singly. I could have killed you six times to-night, but I believe you to
be a brave man, and would not murder you. Give a lame man a show."

It was too late for parley. All this time Booth's voice had sounded from
the middle of the barn.

Ere he ceased speaking, Colonel Conger, slipping around to the rear,
drew some loose straws through a crack, and lit a match upon them. They
were dry and blazed up in an instant, carrying a sheet of smoke and
flame through the parted planks, and heaving in a twinkling a world of
light and heat upon the magazine within. The blaze lit up the black
recesses of the great barn till every wasp's nest and cobweb in the roof
was luminous, flinging streaks of red and violet across the tumbled farm
gear in the corner, plows, harrows, hoes, rakes, sugar mills, and making
every separate grain in the high bin adjacent, gleam like a mote of
precious gold. They tinged the beams, the upright columns, the
barricades, where clover and timothy, piled high, held toward the hot
incendiary their separate straws for the funeral pile. They bathed the
murderer's retreat in beautiful illumination, and while in bold outline
his figure stood revealed, they rose like an impenetrable wall to guard
from sight the hated enemy who lit them. Behind the blaze, with his eye
to a crack, Conger saw Wilkes Booth standing upright upon a crutch. He
likens him at this instant to his brother Edwin, whom he says he so much
resembled that he half believed, for the moment the whole pursuit to
have been a mistake. At the gleam of the fire Wilkes dropped his crutch,
and, carbine in both hands, crept up to the spot to espy the incendiary
and shoot him dead. His eyes were lustrous like fever, and swelled and
rolled in terrible beauty, while his teeth were fixed, and he wore the
expression of one in the calmness before frenzy. In vain he peered with
vengeance in his look; the blaze that made him visible concealed his
enemy. A second he turned glaring at the fire, as if to leap upon it and
extinguish it, but it had made such headway that this was a futile
impulse and he dismissed it. As calmly as upon the battlefield a veteran
stands amidst the hail of ball and shell, and plunging iron, Booth
turned at a man's stride, and pushed for the door, carbine in poise, and
the last resolve of death, which we name despair, set on his high,
bloodless forehead.

As so he dashed, intent to expire not unaccompanied, a disobedient
sergeant at an eye-hole drew upon him the fatal bead. The barn was all
glorious with conflagration and in the beautiful ruin this outlawed man
strode like all that, we know of wicked valor, stern in the face of
death. A shock, a shout, a gathering up of his splendid figure as if to
overtip the stature God gave him, and John Wilkes Booth fell headlong to
the floor, lying there in a heap, a little life remaining.

"He has shot himself!" cried Baker, unaware of the source of the report,
and rushing in, he grasped his arms to guard against any feint or
strategy. A moment convinced him that further struggle with the prone
flesh was useless. Booth did not move, nor breathe, nor gasp. Conger and
two sergeants now entered, and taking up the body, they bore it in haste
from the advancing flame, and laid it without upon the grass, all fresh
with heavenly dew.

"Water," cried Conger, "bring water."

When this was dashed into his face, he revived a moment and stirred his
lips. Baker put his ear close down, and heard him say:

"Tell mother--and die--for my country."

They lifted him again, the fire encroaching in hotness upon them and
placed him on the porch before the dwelling.

A mattrass was brought down, on which they placed him and propped his
head, and gave him water and brandy. The women of the household, joined
meantime by another son, who had been found in one of the corn cribs,
watching as he said, to see that Booth and Harold did not steal the
horses, were nervous, but prompt to do the dying man all kindnesses,
although waived sternly back by the detectives. They dipped a rag in
brandy and water, and this being put between Booth's teeth he sucked it
greedily. When he was able to articulate again, he muttered to Mr. Baker
the same words, with an addenda. "Tell mother I died for my country. I
thought I did for the best." Baker repeated this, saying at the same
time "Booth, do I repeat it correctly." Booth nodded his head. By this
time the grayness of dawn was approaching; moving figures inquisitively
coming near were to be seen distinctly, and the cocks began to crow
gutturally, though the barn was a hulk of blaze and ashes, sending
toward the zenith a spiral line of dense smoke. The women became
importunate that the troops might be ordered to extinguish the fire,
which was spreading toward their precious corn-cribs. Not even death
could banish the call of interest. Soldiers were sent to put out the
fire, and Booth, relieved of the bustle around him, drew near to death
apace. Twice he was heard to say, "kill me, kill me." His lips often
moved but could complete no appreciable sound. He made once a motion
which the quick eye of Conger understood to mean that his throat pained
him. Conger put his finger there, when the dying man attempted to cough,
but only caused the blood at his perforated neck to flow more, lively.
He bled very little, although shot quite through, beneath and behind the
ears, his collar being severed on both sides.

A soldier had been meanwhile despatched for a doctor, but the route and
return were quite six miles, and the sinner was sinking fast. Still the
women made efforts to get to see him, but were always rebuffed, and all
the brandy they could find was demanded by the assassin, who motioned
for strong drink every two minutes. He made frequent desires to be
turned over, not by speech, but by gesture, and was alternately placed
upon his back, belly and side. His tremendous vitality evidenced itself
almost miraculously. Now and then, his heart would cease to throb, and
his pulses would be as cold as a dead man's. Directly life would begin
anew, the face would flush up effulgently, the eyes open and brighten,
and soon relapsing, stillness re-asserted, would again be dispossessed
by the same magnificent triumph of man over mortality. Finally the fussy
little doctor arrived, in time to be useless. He probed the wound to see
if the ball were not in it, and shook his head sagely, and talked
learnedly.

Just at his coming Booth had asked to have his hands raised and shown
him. They were so paralyzed that he did not know their location. When
they were displayed he muttered, with a sad lethargy, "Useless,
useless." These were the last words he ever uttered. As he began to die
the sun rose and threw beams into all the tree-tops. It was of a man's
height when the struggle of death twitched and fingered in the fading
bravo's face. His jaw drew spasmodically and obliquely downward; his
eyeballs rolled to-ward his feet, and began to swell; lividness, like a
horrible shadow, fastened upon him, and, with a sort of gurgle and
sudden check, he stretched his feet and threw his head back and gave up
the ghost.

They sewed him up in a saddle blanket. This was his shroud; too like a
soldier's. Harold, meantime, had been tied to a tree, but was now
released for the march. Colonel Conger pushed on immediately for
Washington; the cortege was to follow. Booth's only arms were his
carbine knife, and two revolvers. They found about him bills of
exchange, Canada money, and a diary. A venerable old negro living in the
vicinity had the misfortune to possess a horse. This horse was a relic
of former generations, and showed by his protruding ribs the general
leanness of the land. He moved in an eccentric amble, and when put upon
his speed was generally run backward. To this old negro's horse was
harnessed a very shaky and absurd wagon, which rattled like approaching
dissolution, and each part of it ran without any connection or
correspondence with any other part. It had no tail-board, and its shafts
were sharp as famine; and into this mimicry of a vehicle the murderer
was to be sent to the Potomac river, while the man he had murdered was
moving in state across the mourning continent. The old negro geared up
his wagon by means of a set of fossil harness, and when it was backed to
Garrett's porch, they laid within it the discolored corpse. The corpse
was tied with ropes around the legs and made fast to the wagon sides.
Harold's legs were tied to stirrups, and he was placed in the centre of
four murderous looking cavalrymen. The two sons of Garrett were also
taken along, despite the sobs and petitions of the old folks and women,
but the rebel captain who had given Booth a lift, got off amidst the
night's agitations, and was not rearrested. So moved the cavalcade of
retribution, with death in its midst, along the road to Port Royal. When
the wagon started, Booth's wound till now scarcely dribbling, began to
run anew. It fell through the crack of the wagon, dripping upon the
axle, and spotting the road with terrible wafers. It stained the planks,
and soaked the blankets; and the old negro, at a stoppage, dabbled his
hands in it by mistake; he drew back instantly, with a shudder and
stifled expletive, "Gor-r-r, dat'll never come off in de world; it's
murderer's blood." He wrung his hands, and looked imploringly at the
officers, and shuddered again: "Gor-r-r, I wouldn't have dat on me fur
tousand, tousand dollars." The progress of the team was slow, with
frequent danger of shipwreck altogether, but toward noon the cortege
filed through Port Royal, where the citizens came out to ask the matter,
and why a man's body, covered with sombre blankets, was going by with so
great escort. They were told that it was a wounded confederate, and so
held their tongues. The little ferry, again in requisition, took them
over by squads, and they pushed from Port Conway to Bell Plain, which
they reached in the middle of the afternoon. All the way the blood
dribbled from the corpse in a slow, incessant, sanguine exudation. The
old negro was niggardly dismissed with two paper dollars. The dead man
untied and cast upon the vessel's dock, steam gotten up in a little
while, and the broad Potomac shores saw this skeleton ship flit by, as
the bloody sun threw gashes and blots of unhealthy light along the
silver surface.

All the way associate with the carcass, went Harold, shuddering in so
grim companionship, and in the awakened fears of his own approaching.
ordeal, beyond which it loomed already, the gossamer fabric of a
scaffold. He tried to talk for his own exoneration, saying he had
ridden, as was his wont, beyond the East Branch, and returning, found
Booth wounded, who begged him to be his companion. Of his crime he knew
nothing, so help him God, &c. But nobody listened to him. All interest
of crime, courage, and retribution centered in the dead flesh at his
feet. At Washington, high and low turned out to look on Booth. Only a
few were permitted to see his corpse for purposes of recognition. It was
fairly preserved, though on one side of the face distorted, and looking
blue like death, and wildly bandit-like, as if beaten by avenging winds.

Yesterday the Secretary of War, without instructions of any kind,
committed to Colonel Lafayette C. Baker, of the secret service, the
stark corpse of J. Wilkes Booth. The secret service never fulfilled its
volition more secretively. "What have you done with the body?" said I to
Baker. "That is known" he answered, "to only one man living besides
myself. It is gone. I will not tell you where. The only man who knows is
sworn to silence. Never till the great trumpeter comes shall the grave
of Booth be discovered." And this is true. Last night, the 27th of
April, a small row boat received the carcass of the murderer; two men
were in it they carried the body off into the darkness, and out of that
darkness it will never return. In the darkness, like his great crime,
may it remain forever, impalpable, invisible, nondescript, condemned to
that worse than damnation,--annihilation. The river-bottom may ooze
about it laden with great shot and drowning manacles. The earth may have
opened to give it that silence and forgiveness which man will never give
its memory. The fishes may swim around it, or the daisies grow white
above it; but we shall never know. Mysterious, incomprehensible,
unattainable, like the dim times through which we live and think upon as
if we only dreamed them in perturbed fever, the assassin of a nation's
head rests somewhere in the elements, and that is all; but if the
indignant seas or the profaned turf shall ever vomit his corpse from
their recesses, and it receive humane or Christian burial from some who
do not recognize it, let the last words those decaying lips ever uttered
be carved above them with a dagger, to tell the history of a young and
once promising life--useless! useless!




LETTER V.

A SOLUTION OF THE CONSPIRACY.

[The annexed Letter, which has been cavilled at, as much as copied, is a
rationale of the Conspiracy, combined from the Government's own
officers. When it was written it was believed to be true: the evidence
at the trial has confirmed much of it: I reprint it to show how men's
ingenuities were at work to account for the conception and progress of
the Plot.]


Washington, May 2.

Justice and fame are equally and simultaneously satisfied. The President
is not yet in his sarcophagus, but all the conspirators against his
life, with a minor exception or two, are in their prison cells waiting
for the halter.

The dark and bloody plot against a good ruler's life is now so fully
unraveled that I may make it plain to you. There is nothing to be gained
by further waiting; the trials are proceeding; the evidence is mountain
high. Within a week the national scaffold will have done its work, and
be laid away forever. This prompt and necessary justice will signal the
last public assassination in America. Borgia, and Medici, and
Brinvilliers, have left no descendants on this side of the world.

The conspiracy was both the greatest and the smallest of our cycle.
Narrowed in execution to a few, it was understood and connived at by a
multitude. One man was its head and heart; its accessories were so
numerous that the trouble is not whom to suspect, but whom not accuse.
Damning as the result must be to the character of our race, it must be
admitted, in the light of facts, that Americans are as secretive and as
skillful plotters as any people in the world. The Rye House plot, never
fully understood; the many schemes of Mazzini, never fastened upon him
sufficiently well for implication, yield in extent, darkness and
intricacy, to the republican plot against the President's life and those
of his counselors. The police operations prove that the late murder as
not a spasmodic and fitful crime, but long premeditated, and carried to
consummation with as much cohesion and resolution as the murder of
Allessandro de Medici or Henri Quatre.

I have been accused of cannonizing Booth. Much as I denounce and
deprecate his crime--holding him to be worthy of all execration, and so
seeped in blood that the excuses of a century will fail to lift him out
of the atmosphere of common felons--I still, at every new developement,
stand farther back in surprise and terror at the wonderful resources and
extraordinary influence of one whom I had learned to consider a mere
Thespian, full of sound, fury, and assertion.

Strange and anomalous as the facts may seem, John Wilkes Booth was the
sole projector of the plot against the President which culminated in the
taking of that good man's life. He had rolled under his tongue the sweet
paragraphs of Shakspeare refering to Brutus, as had his father so well,
that the old man named one son Junius Brutus, and the other John Wilkes,
after the wild English agitator, until it became his ambition, like the
wicked Lorenzino de Medici, to stake his life upon one stroke for fame,
the murder of a ruler obnoxious to the South.

That Wilkes Booth was a southern man from the first may be accounted for
upon grounds, of interest as well as of sympathy. It is insidious to
find no higher incentive than appreciation, but on the stage this is the
first and last motive; and as Edwin Booth made his success in the North
and remained steadfast, Wilkes Booth was most truly applauded in the
South, and became rebel. A false emotion of gratitude, as well as an
impulse of mingled waywardness and gratitude, set John Wilkes's face
from the first toward the North, and he burned to make his name a part
of history, cried into fame by the applauses of the South.

He hung to his bloody suggestion with dogged inflexibility, maintaining
only one axiom above all the rest--that whatever minor parts might be
enacted--Casca, Cassius, or what not--he was to be the dramatic Brutus,
excepting that assassin's negativeness. In other words, the idea was to
be his own, as well us the crowning blow.

Booth shrank at first from murder, until another and less dangerous
resolution failed. This was no less than the capture of the President's
body, and its detention or transportation to the South. I do not rely on
this assertion upon his sealed letter, where he avows it; there has been
found upon a street within the city limits, a house belonging to one
Mrs. Greene; mined and furnished with underground apartments, manacles
and all the accessories to private imprisonment. Here the President, and
as many as could be gagged and conveyed away with him, were to be
concealed in the event of failure to run them into the confederacy.
Owing to his failure to group around him as many men as he desired,
Booth abandoned the project of kidnapping; but the house was discovered
last week, as represented, ready to be blown up at a moment's notice.

It was at this time that Booth devised his triumphant route through the
South. The dramatic element seems to have been never lacking in his
design, and with all his base purposes he never failed to consider some
subsequent notoriety to be enjoyed. He therefore shipped, before the end
of 1864, his theatrical wardrobe from Canada to Nassau. After the
commission of his crime he intended to reclaim it, and "star" through
the South, drawing money as much by his crime as his abilities.

When Booth began "on his own responsibility," to hunt for accomplices,
he found his theory at fault. The bold men he had dreamed of refused to
join him in the rash attempt at kidnapping the President, and were too
conscientious to meditate murder. All those who presented themselves
were military men, unwilling to be subordinate to a civilian, and a mere
play-actor, and the mortified bravo found himself therefore compelled to
sink to a petty rank in the plot, or to make use of base and despicable
assistants. His vanity found it easier to compound with the second
alternative than the first.

Here began the first resolve, which, in its mere animal estate, we may
name courage. Booth found that a tragedy in real life could no more be
enacted without greasy-faced and knock-kneed supernumeraries than upon
the mimic stage. Your "First Citizen," who swings a stave for Marc
Antony, and drinks hard porter behind the flies is very like the bravo
of real life, who murders between his cocktails at the nearest bar.
Wilkes Booth had passed the ordeal of a garlicky green-room, and did not
shrink from the broader and ranker green-room of real life. He assembled
around him, one by one, the cut-throats at whom his soul would have
revolted, except that he had become, by resolve, a cut-throat in
himself.

About this time certain gentlemen in Canada began to be unenviably
known. I abstain from giving their names, because unaware of how far
they seconded this crime, if at all. But they seconded as infamous
things, such as cowardly raids from neutral territory into the states,
bank robbings, lake pirating, city burning, counterfeiting, railway
sundering, and the importation of yellow fever into peaceful and
unoffending communities. I make no charges against those whom I do not
know, but simply say that the confederate agents, Jacob Tompson, Larry
McDonald, Clement Clay, and some others, had already accomplished enough
villainy to make Wilkes Booth, on the first of the present year, believe
that he had but to seek an interview with them.

He visited the provinces once certainly, and three times it is believed,
stopping in Montreal at St. Lawrence Hall, and banking four hundred and
fifty-five dollars odd at the Ontario bank. This was his own money. I
have myself seen his bank-book with the single entry of this amount. It
was found in the room of Atzerott, at Kirkwood's Hotel. From this visit,
whatever encouragement Booth received, he continued in systematic
correspondence with one or more of those agents down to the commission
of his crime. I dare not say how far each of these agents was
implicated. My personal conviction is that they were neither loth to the
murder nor astonished when it had been done. They had money with
discretion from the confederacy, though acting at discretion and outside
of responsibility, and always, at every wild adventure, they instructed
their dupes that each man took his life in his hand on every incursion
into the north. So Beale took his, raiding on the great lakes. So
Kennedy took his, on a midnight bonfire-tramp into the metropolis. So
took the St. Albans raiders their lives in their palms, dashing into a
peaceful town. And if these agents entertained Wilkes Booth's suggestion
at all they plainly told him that he carried his life in his dagger's
edge, and could expect from them neither aid nor exculpation.

Some one or all of these agents furnished Booth with a murderer. The
fellow Wood or Payne, who stabbed Mr. Seward and was caught at Mrs.
Surratt's house in Washington. He was one of three Kentucky brothers,
all outlaws, and had himself, it is believed, accompanied one of his
brothers, who is known to have been at St. Albans on the day of the
bank-delivery. This Payne, besides being positively identified as the
assassin of the Sewards, had no friends nor haunts in Washington. He was
simply a dispatched murderer, and after the night of the crime, struck
northward of the frontier, instead of southward in the company of Booth.
The proof, of this will follow in the course of the article.

While I assert that the Canadian agents knew Booth and patted his back,
calling him, like Macbeth, the "prince of cut-throats," I am equally
certain that Booth's project was unknown in Richmond. No word, nor
written line, no clue of any sort has been found attaching Booth to the
confederate authorities. The most that can be urged to meet preposterous
claims of this sort is, that out of the rebellion grew the murder; which
is like attributing the measles to the creation of man. But McDonald and
his party had money at discretion, and under their control the vilest
fellows on the continent. Their personal influence over those errant
ones amounted to omnipotence. Most of the latter were young and sanguine
people, like Beale and Booth; their plots were made up at St.
Catharine's, Toronto, and Montreal, and they have maintained since the
war began, rebel mail routes between Canada and Richmond, leading
directly passed Washington.

If Booth received no positive instructions, he was at any rate adjudged
a man likely to be of use, and therefore introduced to the rebel
agencies in and around Washington. Doubtless by direct letter, or verbal
instruction, he received a password to the house of Mrs. Surratt.

Half applauded, half rebuffed by the rebel agents in Canada, Booth's
impressions of his visit were just those which would whet him soonest
for the tragedy. His vanity had been fed by the assurance that success
depended upon himself alone, and that as he had the responsibility he
would absorb the fame; and the method of correspondence was of that
dark and mysterious shape which powerfully operated upon his dramatic
temperament.

What could please an actor, and the son of an actor, better than to
mingle as a principal in a real conspiracy, the aims of which were
pseudo-patriotic, and the end so astounding that at its coming the whole
globe would reel. Booth reasoned that the ancient world would not feel
more sensitively the death of Julius Cęsar than the new the sudden
taking off of Abraham Lincoln.

And so he grew into the idea of murder. It became his business thought.
It was his recreation and his study. He had not worked half so hard for
histrionic success as for his terrible graduation into an assassin. He
had fought often on the boards, and seen men die in well-imitated
horror, with flowing blood upon his keen sword's edge, and the strong
stride of mimic victory with which he flourished his weapon at the
closing of the curtain. He embraced conspiracy like an old diplomatist,
and found in the woman and the spot subjects for emulation.

Southeast of Washington stretches a tapering peninsula, composed of four
fertile counties, which at the remote tip make Point Lookout, and do not
contain any town within them of more than a few hundred inhabitants.
Tobacco has ruined the land of these, and slavery has ruined the people.
Yet in the beginning they were of that splendid stock of Calvert and
Lord Baltimore, but retain to-day only the religion of the peaceful
founder. I mention it is an exceptional and remarkable fact, that every
conspirator in custody is by education a Catholic. These are our most
loyal citizens elsewhere, but the western shore of Maryland is a noxious
and pestilential place for patriotism. The county immediately outside of
the District of Columbia, to the south, is named Prince Gorgia's and the
pleasantest village of this county, close to Washington, is called
Surrattsville. This consists of a few cabins at a cross-road,
surrounding a fine old hotel, the master whereof, giving the settlement
his name, left the property to his wife, who for a long time carried it
on with indifferent success. Having a son and several daughters, she
moved to Washington soon after the beginning of the war and let the
tavern to a trusty friend--one John Lloyd. Surrattsville has gained
nothing in patronage or business from the war, except that it became at
an early date, a rebel postoffice. The great secret mail from Matthias
Creek, Virginia, to Port Tobacco, struck Surrattsville, and thence
headed off to the east to Washington, going meanderingly north. Of this
poet route Mrs. Surratt was a manageress; and John Lloyd, when he rented
her hotel, assumed the responsibility of looking out for the mail, as
well the duty of making Mrs. Surratt at home when she chose to visit
him.

So Surrattsville only ten miles from Washington, has been throughout the
war a sect of conspiracy. It was like a suburb of Richmond, reaching
quite up to the rival capital; and though the few Unionists on the
peninsula knew its reputation well enough, nothing of the sort came out
until the murder.

Treason never found a better agent than Mrs. Surratt. She is a large,
masculine, self-possessed female, mistress of her house, and as lithe a
rebel as Belle Boyd or Mrs. Greenhough. She has not the flippantry and
menace of the first, nor the social power of the second; but the
rebellion has found no fitter agent.

At her country tavern and Washington home Booth was made welcome, and
there began the muttered murder against the nation and mankind.

The acquaintance of Mrs. Surratt in Lower Maryland undoubtedly suggested
to Booth the route of escape, and made him known to his subsequent
accomplices. Last fall he visited the entire region, as far as
Leonardstown, in St. Mary's county, professing to be in search of land
but really hunting up confederates upon whom he could depend. At this
time he bought a map, a fellow to which I have seen among Atzerott's
effects, published at Buffalo for the rebel government, and marking at
hap-hazard all the Maryland villages, but without tracing the highroads
at all. The absence of these roads, it will be seen hereafter, very
nearly misled Booth during his crippled flight.

It could not but have struck Booth that this isolated part of Maryland
ignorant and rebel to the brim, without telegraph or railways, or direct
stage routes, belted with swamps and broken by dense timber, afforded
extraordinary opportunities for shelter and escape. Only the coast
survey had any adequate map of it; it was _ultima thule_ to all intents,
and treason might subsist in welcome upon it for a thousand years.

When Booth cast around him for assistance, he naturally selected those
men whom he could control. The first that recommended himself was one
Harold, a youth of inane and plastic character, carried away by the
example of an actor, and full of execrable quotations, going to show
that he was an imitator of the master spirit both in text and
admiration. This Harold was a gunner, and therefore versed in arms; he
had traversed the whole lower portion of Maryland, and was therefore a
geographer as well as a tool. His friends lived at every farmhouse
between Washington and Leonardsville, and he was respectably enough
connected, so as to make his association creditable as well as useful.

Harold, whose picture I have seen, is a dull-faced, shallow boy,
smooth-haired, and provincial; he had no money nor employment, except
that he clerked for a druggist a while, until he knew Wilkes Booth, who
looked at him only once, and bought his soul for a smile. Harold was
infatuated by Booth as a woman by a soldier. He copied his gait and
tone, adopted his opinions, and was unhappy out of his society. Booth
gave him money, mysteriously obtained, and together they made the
acquaintance of young John Surratt, son of the conspiratress.

Young Surratt does not appear to have been a puissant spirit in the
scheme; indeed, all design and influence therein was absorbed by Mrs.
Surratt and Booth. The latter was the head and heart of the plot; Mrs.
Surratt was his anchor, and the rest of the boys were disciples to
Iscariot and Jezebel. John Surratt, a youth of strong Southern
physiognomy, beardless and lanky, knew of the murder and connived at it.
"Sam" Arnold and one McLaughlin were to have been parties to it, but
backed out in the end. They all relied upon Mrs. Surratt, and took their
"cues" from Wilkes Booth.

The conspiracy had its own time and kept its own counsel. Murder except
among the principals, was seldom mentioned except by genteel
implication. But they all publicly agreed that Mr. Lincoln ought to be
shot, and that the North was a race of fratricides. Much was said of
Brutus, and Booth repeated heroic passages to the delight of Harold, who
learned them also, and wondered if he was not born to greatness.

In this growing darkness, where all rehearsed cold-hearted murder,
Wilkes Booth grew great of stature. He had found a purpose consonant
with his evil nature and bad influence over weak men; so he grew
moodier, more vigilant, more plausible. By mien and temperament he was
born to handle a stiletto. We have no face so markedly Italian; it would
stand for Caesar Borgia any day in the year. All the rest were swayed or
persuaded by Booth; his schemes were three in order:

1st. To kidnap the President and Cabinet, and run them South or blow
them up.

2d. Kidnapping failed, to murder the President and the rest and seek
shelter in the confederate capital.

3d. The rebellion failed, to be its avenger, and throw the country into
consternation, while he escaped by the unfrequented parts of Maryland.

When this last resolution had been made, the plot was both contracted
and extended. There were made two distinct circles of confidants--those
aware of the meditated murder, and those who might shrink from murder,
though willing accessories for a lesser object. Two colleagues for blood
were at once accepted--Payne and Atzerott.

The former I have sketched; he is believed to have visited Washington
once before, at Booth's citation; for the murder was at first fixed for
the day of inauguration. Atzerott was a fellow of German descent, who
had led a desperate life at Port Tobacco, where he was a house-painter.
He had been a blockade-runner across the Potomac, and a mail-carrier.
When Booth and Mrs. Surratt broke the design to him, with a suggestion
that there was wealth in it, he embraced the offer at once, and bought a
dirk and pistol. Payne also came from the North to Washington, and, as
fate would have it, the President was announced to appear at Ford's
theater in public. There the resolve of blood was reduced to a definite
moment.

On the night before the crime Booth found on whom he could rely. John
Surratt was sent northward by his mother on Thursday. Sam Arnold and
McLaughlin, each of whom was to kill a cabinet officer, grew
pigeon-livered and ran away. Harold true to his partiality, lingered
around Booth to the end; Atzerott went so far as to take his knife and
pistol to Kirkwood's, where President Johnson was stopping, and hid them
under the bed. But either his courage failed, or a trifling accident
deranged his plan. But Payne, a professional murderer, stood "game," and
fought his way over prostrate figures to his sick victim's bed. There
was great confusion and terror among the tacit and rash conspirators on
Thursday night. They had looked upon the plot as of a melodrama, and
found to their horror that John Wilkes Booth meant to do murder.

Six weeks before the murder, young John Surratt had taken two splendid
repeating carbines to Surrattville and told John Lloyd to secret them.

The latter made a hole in the wainscotting and suspended them from
strings, so that they fell within the plastered wall of the room below.
On the very afternoon of the murder, Mrs. Surratt was driven to
Surrattsville, and she told John Lloyd to have the carbines ready
because they would be called for that night. Harold was made
quartermaster, and hired the horses. He and Atzerott were mounted
between 8 o'clock and the time of the murder, and riding about the
streets together.

The whole party was prepared for a long ride, as their spurs and
gauntlets show. It may have been their design to ride in company to the
Lower Potomac, and by their numbers exact subsistence and
transportation; but all edifices of murder lack a corner stone. We only
know that Booth ate and talked well during the day; that he never seemed
so deeply involved in 'oil,' and that there is a hiatus between his
supper here and his appearance at Ford's theater.

Lloyd, I may interpolate, ordered his wife a few days before the murder
to go on a visit to Allen's Fresh. She says she does not know why she
was so sent away, but swears that it is so. Harold, three weeks before
the murder, visited Port Tobacco, and said that the next time the boys
heard of him he would be in Spain; he added that with Spain there was no
extradition treaty. He said at Surrattsville that he meant to make a
barrel of money, or his neck would stretch.

Atzerott said that if he ever came to Port Tobacco again he would be
rich enough to buy the whole place.

Wilkes Booth told a friend to go to Ford's on Friday night and see the
best acting in the world.

At Ford's theater, on Friday night, there were many standers in the
neighborhood of the door, and along the dress circle in the direction of
the private box where the President sat.

The play went on pleasantly, though Mr. Wilkes Booth an observer of the
audience, visited the stage and took note of the positions. His alleged
associate, the stage carpenter, then received quiet orders to clear the
passage by the wings from the prompter's post to the stage door. All
this time, Mr. Lincoln, in his family circle, unconscious of the death
that crowded fast upon him, watched the pleasantry and smiled and felt
heartful of gentleness.

Suddenly there was a murmur near the audience door, as of a man speaking
above his bound. He said:

"Nine o'clock and forty-five minutes!"

These words were reiterated from mouth to mouth until they passed the
theater door, and were heard upon the sidewalk.

Directly a voice cried, in the same slightly-raised monotone:

"Nine o'clock and fifty minutes!"

This also passed from man to man, until it touched the street like a
shudder.

"Nine o'clock and fifty-five minutes!" said the same relentless voice,
after the next interval, each of which narrowed to a lesser span the
life of the good President.

Ten o'clock here sounded, and conspiring echo said in reverberation:

"Ten o'clock!"

So like a creeping thing, from lip to lip, went:

"Ten o'clock and five minutes."

(An interval.)

"Ten o'clock and ten minutes!"

At this instant Wilkes Booth appeared in the door of the theater, and
the men who had repeated the time so faithfully and so ominously
scattered at his coming, as at some warning phantom. Fifteen minutes
afterwards the telegraph wires were cut.

All this is so dramatic that I fear to excite a laugh when I write it.
But it is true and proven, and I do not say it but report it.

All evil deeds go wrong. While the click of the pistol, taking the
President's life, went like a pang through the theater, Payne was
spilling blood in Mr. Seward's house from threshold to sick chamber. But
Booth's broken leg delayed him or made him lose his general calmness and
he and Harold left Payne no to his fate.

I have not adverted to the hole bored with a gimlet in the entry door of
Mr. Lincoln's box, and cut out with a penknife. The theory that the
pistol-ball of Booth passed through this hole is exploded. And the stage
carpenter may have to answer for this little orifice with all his neck.
For when Booth leaped from the box he strode straight across the stage
by the footlights, reaching the prompter's post, which is immediately
behind that private box opposite Mr. Lincoln. From this box to the stage
door in the rear, the passage-way leads behind the ends of the scenes,
and if generally either closest up by one or more withdrawn scenes, or
so narrow that only by doubling and turning sidewise can one pass along.
On this fearful night, however, the scenes were so adjusted to the
murderer's design that he had a free aisle from the foot of the stage to
the exit door.

Within fifteen minutes after the murder the wires were severed entirely
around the city, excepting only a secret wire for government uses, which
leads to Old Point. I am told that by this wire the government reached
the fortifications around Washington, first telegraphing all the way to
Old Point, and then back to the outlying forts. This information comes
to me from so many creditable channels that I must concede it.

Payne, having, as he thought, made an end of Mr. Seward--which would
have been the case but for Robinson, the nurse--mounted his horse, and
attempted to find. Booth. But the town was in alarm, and he galloped at
once for the open country, taking as he imagined, the proper road for
the East Branch. He rode at a killing pace, and when near Fort Lincoln,
on the Baltimore pike, his horse threw him headlong. Afoot and
bewildered, he resolved to return to the city, whose lights he could
plainly see; but before doing so ho concealed himself some time, and
made some almost absurd efforts to disguise himself. Cutting a cross
section from the woolen undershirt which covered his muscular arm, he
made a rude cap of it, and threw away his bloody coat. This has since
been found in the woods, and blood has been found also on his bosom and
sleeves. He also spattered himself plentifully with mud and clay, and,
taking an abandoned pick from the deserted intrenchments near by, he
struck at once for Washington.

By the providence which always attends murder, he reached Mrs. Surratt's
door just as the officers of the government were arresting her. They
seized Payne at once, who had an awkward lie to urge in his
defense--that he had come there to dig a trench. That night he dug a
trench deep and broad enough for both of them to lie in forever. They
washed his hands, and found them soft and womanish; his pockets
contained tooth and nail brushes and a delicate pocket knife. All this
apparel consorted ill with his assumed character. He is, without doubt,
Mr. Seward's attempted murderer.

Coarse, and hard, and calm, Mrs. Surratt shut up her house after the
murder, and waited with her daughters till the officers came. She was
imperturbable, and rebuked her girls for weeping, and would have gone to
jail like a statue, but that in her extremity, Payne knocked at her
door. He had come, he said, to dig a ditch for Mrs. Surratt, whom he
very well knew. But Mrs. Surratt protested that she had ever seen the
man at all, and had no ditch to clean.

"How fortunate, girls," she said, "that these officers are here; this
man might have murdered us all."

Her effrontery stamps her as worthy of companionship with Booth. Payne
has been identified by a lodger of Mrs. Surratt's, as having twice
visited the house under the name of Wood. The girls will render valuable
testimony in the trial. If John Surratt were in custody the links would
be complete.

Atzerott had a room almost directly over Vice-President Johnson's. He
had all the materials to do murder, but lost spirit or opportunity. He
ran away so hastily that all his arms and baggage were discovered; a
tremendous bowie-knife and a Colt's cavalry revolver were found between
the mattresses of his bed. Booth's coat was also found there, showing
conspired flight in company, and in it three boxes of cartridges, a map
of Maryland, gauntlet for riding, a spur and a handkerchief marked with
the name of Booth's mother--a mother's souvenir for a murderer's pocket!

Atzerott fled alone, and was found at the house of his uncle in
Montgomery county. I do not know that any instrument of murder has ever
made me thrill as when I drew this terrible bowie-knife from its sheath.
Major O'Bierne, of New-York, was the instigator of Atzerott's discovery
and arrest.

I come now to the ride out of the city by the chief assassin and his
dupe. Harold met Booth immediately after the crime in the next street,
and they rode at a gallop past the Patent Office and over Capitol Hill.

As they crossed the Eastern branch at Uniontown, Booth gave his proper
name to the officer at the bridge. This, which would seem to have been
foolish, was, in reality, very shrewd. The officers believed that one of
Booth's accomplices had given this name in order to put them out of the
real Booth's track. So they made efforts elsewhere, and so Booth got a
start. At midnight, precisely, the two horsemen stopped at
Surrattsville, Booth remaining on his nag while Harold descended and
knocked lustily at the door. Lloyd, the landlord, came down at once,
when Harold pushed past him into the bar, and obtained a bottle of
whiskey, some of which he gave to Booth immediately. While Booth was
drinking, Harold went up stairs and brought down one of the carbines.
Lloyd started to get the other, but Harold said:

"We don't want it; Booth has broken his leg and can't carry it."

So the second carbine remained in the hall, where the officers afterward
found it.

As the two horsemen started to go off, Booth cried out to Lloyd:

"Do you want to hear some news?"

"I don't care much about it," cried Lloyd, by his own account.

"We have murdered," said Booth, "the President and Secretary of State!"

And with this horrible confession, Booth and Harold dashed away in the
midnight, across Prince George's county.

On Saturday, before sunrise, Booth and Harold, who had ridden all night
without stopping elsewhere, reached the house of Dr. Mudd, three miles
from Bryantown. They contracted with him for twenty-five dollars in
greenbacks to set the broken leg. Harold, who knew Dr. Mudd, introduced
Booth under another name, and stated that he had fallen from his horse
during the night. The doctor remarked of Booth that he draped the lower
part of his face while the leg was being set; he was silent, and in
pain. Having no splits in the house, they split up an old-fashioned
wooden band-box and prepared them. The doctor was assisted by an
Englishman, who at the same time began to hew out a pair of crutches.
The inferior bone of the left leg was broken vertically across, and
because vertically it did not yield when the crippled man walked upon
it.

The riding boot of Booth had to be cut from his foot; within were the
words "J. Wilkes." The doctor says he did not notice these, but that
visual defect may cost him his neck. The two men waited around the house
all day, but toward evening they slipped their horses from the stable
and rode away in the direction of Allen's Fresh.

Below Bryantown run certain deep and slimy swamps, along the belt of
these Booth and Harold picked up a negro named Swan, who volunteered to
show them the road for two dollars; they gave him five more to show them
the route to Allen's Fresh, but really wished, as their actions
intimated, to gain the house of one Sam. Coxe, a notorious rebel, and
probably well advised of the plot. They reached the house at midnight.
It is a fine dwelling, one of the best in Maryland. And after hallooing
for some time, Coxe came down to the door himself. As soon as he opened
it and beheld who the strangers were, he instantly blew out a candle he
held in his hand, and without a word pulled them into the house, the
negro remaining in the yard. The confederates remained in Coxe's house
till 4 A. M., during which time, the negro saw them drink and eat
heartily; but when they reappeared they spoke in a loud tone, so that
Swan could hear them, against the hospitality of Coxe. All this was
meant to influence the darkey; but their motives were as apparent as
their words. He conducted them three miles further on, when they told
him that now they knew the way, and giving him five dollars more--making
twelve in all--told him to go back.

But when the negro, in the dusk of the morning, looked after them as he
receded, he saw that both horses' heads were turned once more toward
Coxe's, and it was this man, doubtless, who harbored the fugitives from
Sunday to Thursday, aided, possibly, by such neighbors as the Wilsons
and Adamses.

At the point where Booth crossed the Potomac the shores are very
shallow, and one must wade out some distance to where a boat will float.
A white man came up here with a canoe on Friday, and tied it by a stone
anchor. Between seven and eight o'clock it disappeared, and in the
afternoon some men at work in Virginia, saw Booth and Harold land, tie
the boat's rope to a stone, and fling it ashore, and strike at once
across a ploughed field for King George Court House. Many folks
entertained them without doubt, but we positively hear of them next at
Port Royal Ferry, and then at Garrett's farm.

I close this article with a list of all who were at Garrett's farm on
the death of Booth.

    1. E. J. Conger, \ Detectives.
    2. Lieut. Baker, /
    3. Surgeon from Port Royal,
    4. Four Garrett daughters.
    5. Harold, Booth's accomplice,

_Soldiers_.--Company H, Sixteenth New-York Volunteer Cavalry, Lieutenant
Ed. P. Doherty commanding: Corporals A. Neugarten, J. Waly, M. Hornsby:
Privates J. Mellington, D. Darker, E. Parelays, W. Mockgart;
Corporals--Zimmer (Co. C), M. Taenaek; Privates H. Pardman, J. Meiyers,
W. Burnn, F. Meekdank, G. Haich, J. Raien, J. Kelly, J. Samger (Co. M),
G. Zeichton,--Steinbury, L. Sweech (Co. A), A. Sweech (Co. H), F.
Diacts; Sergeant Wandell; Corporals Lannekey, Winacky; Sergeant Corbett
(Co. L).

Sergeant Corbett, who shot Booth, was the only man of the command
belonging to the same company with Lieutenant Doherty, Commandant.




LETTER VI.

THE DETECTIVES' STORIES.


Washington, May 2--P. M.

The police resources of the country have been fairly tested during the
past two weeks. Under the circumstances, the shrewdness and energy of
both municipal and national detectives have been proven good. The latter
body has had a too partial share of the applause thus far, while the
great efforts of our New-York and other officers have been overlooked.
In the crowning success of Doherty, Conger, and Baker on the Virginia
side of the water we have forgotten the as vigorous and better sustained
pursuit on the Maryland side.

Yet the Secretary of War has thanked all concerned, especially referring
to many excellent leaders in the long hunt through Charles and St.
Mary's counties. Here the military and civil forces together amounted to
quite a small army, and constituted by far the largest police
organization ever known on this side of the Atlantic.

I think the adventures and expedients of these public servants worthy of
a column. It would be out of all proportion to pass them by when we
devote a dozen lines to every petty larceny and shoplifting.

On the Friday night of the murder the departments were absolutely
paralyzed. The murderers had three good hours for escape; they had
evaded the pursuit of lightning by snapping the telegraph wires, and
rumor filled the town with so many reports that the first valuable
hours, which should have been used to follow hard after them, were
consumed in feverish efforts to know the real extent of the
assassination.

Immediately afterwards, however, or on Saturday morning early, the
provost and special police force got on the scent, and military in
squads were dispatched close upon their heels.

Three grand pursuits wore organized: one reaching up the north bank of
the Potomac toward Chain bridge, to prevent escape by that direction
into Virginia, where Mosby, it was suspected, waited to hail the
murderers;

A second starting from Richmond, Va., northward, forming a broad
advancing picket or skirmish line between the Blue Ridge and the broad
sea-running streams;

A third to scour the peninsula towards Point Lookout.

The latter region became the only one well examined; the northern
expedition failed until advised from below to capture Atzerott, and
failed, to capture Payne. Yet there were cogent probabilities that the
assassin had taken this route; far Mosby would have given them the right
hand of fellowship.

When that guerrilla heard of Booth's feat, said Captain Jett, he
exclaimed:

"Now, by----! I could take that man in my arms."

Washington, as a precautionary measure, was doubly picketed at once; the
authorities in all northern towns advised of the personnel of the
murderer, and requests made of the detective chiefs in Baltimore,
Philadelphia, and New-York, to forward to Washington without delay their
best decoys.

A court of inquiry was organized on the moment, and early in the week
succeeding rewards were offered. An individual, and not the government,
offered the first rewards.

There were two men without whom the hunt would have gone astray many
times.

John S. Young, chief of the New-York detective force, a powerful and
resolute man, whose great weight and strength are matched by boundless
energy, and both subordinate to a head as clear as the keen and
searching warrant of his eye. This man has been in familiar converse
with every rebel agent in the Canadas, and is feared by them as they
fear the fates of Beall and Kennedy. Without being a sensationist, he
has probably rendered the cleverest services of the war to the general
government. They sent for him immediately after the tragedy, and he
stopped on the way for his old police companion, Marshal Murray. The
latter's face and figure are familiar to all who know New-York; he
resembles an admiral on his quarter-deck; he is a detective of fair and
excellent repute, and has a somewhat novel pride in what he calls "the
most beautiful gallows in the United States."

These officials were ordered to visit Colonel Ingraham's office and
examine the little evidence on hand. They and their tried officers
formed a junction on Sunday afternoon with the large detective force of
Provost-Marshal Major O'Bierne. The latter commands the District of
Columbia civil and military police. He is a New-Yorker and has been shot
through the body in the field.

The detective force of Young and Murray consisted of Officers Radford,
Kelso, Elder, and Hoey, of New-York; Deputy-Marshal Newcome, formerly of
THE WORLD'S city staff; Officers Joseph Pierson and West, of Baltimore.

Major O'Bierne's immediate aids were Detectives John Lee, Lloyd,
Gavigan, Coddingham, and Williams.

A detachment of the Philadelphia detective police, force--Officers
Taggert, George Smith, and Carlin, reporting to Colonel Baker--went in
the direction of the North Pole; everybody is on the _que vive_ for
them.

To the provost-marshal of Baltimore, MacPhail, who knew the tone and
bearing of the country throughout, was joined the zealous co-operation
of Officer Lloyd, of Major O'Bierne's staff, who had a personal feeling
against the secessionists of lower Maryland; they had once driven him
away for his loyalty, and had reserved their hospitality for assassins.

Lieutenant Commander Gushing, I am informed, also rendered important
services to the government in connection with the police operations.
Volunteer detectives, such as Ex-Marshal Lewis and Angelis, were
plentiful; it is probable that in the pitch of the excitement five
hundred detective officers were in and around Washington city. At the
same time the secret police of Richmond abandoned their ordinary
business, and devoted themselves solely to this overshadowing offense.

No citizen, in these terrible days, knows what eyes were upon him as he
talked and walked, nor how his stature and guise were keenly scanned by
folks who passed him absent-faced, yet with his mental portrait
carefully turned over, the while some invisible hand clutched a
revolver, and held a life or death challenge upon his lips.

The military forces were commanded by Colonel Welles, of the Twenty
sixth Michigan regiment, whose activity and zeal were amply sustained by
Colonel Clendenning, of the Eighth Illinois cavalry, probably the finest
body of horse in the service.

The first party to take the South Maryland road was dispatched by Major
O'Bierne, and commanded by Lieutenant Lovett, of the Veteran Reserves.
It consisted of twenty-five cavalry men, with detectives Cottingham,
Lloyd, and Gavigan; these latter, with the lieutenant, kept well in
advance. They made inquiries of a soothing and cautious character, but
saw nothing suspicious until they arrived at Piscataway, where an
unknown man, some distance ahead, observed them, and took to the woods.
This was on Sunday night, forty hours after the murder.

Guided by Officer Lloyd, the little band dashed on, arriving at
Bryantown on Tuesday. Here they arrested John Lloyd, of the hotel at
Surrattsville, of whom they had previously inquired for the murderers,
and he had said positively that he neither knew them nor had seen
anybody whatever on the night of the crime. He was returning in a wagon,
with his wife, whom he had ordered, the day before, to go on a visit to
Allen's Fresh, The Monday afterward he started to bring her back. This
woman, frightened at the arrest, acknowledged at once that in her
husband's conduct there was some inexplicable mystery. He was taciturn
and defiant as before, until confronted by some of his old Union
neighbors.

The few Unionists of Prince George's and Charles counties, long
persecuted and intimidated, now came forward and gave important
testimony.

Among these was one Roby, a very fat and very zealous old gentleman,
whose professions were as ample as his perspiration. He told the
officers of the secret meetings for conspiracy's, sake at Lloyd's Hotel,
and although a very John Gilpin on horseback, rode here and there to his
great loss of wind and repose, fastening fire-coals upon the guilty or
suspected.

Lloyd was turned over to Mr. Cottingham, who had established a jail at
Robytown; that night his house was searched, and Booth's carbine found
hidden in the wall. Three days afterward, Lloyd himself confessed--and
his neck is quite nervous at this writing.

This little party, under the untiring Lovett, examined all the
farm-houses below Washington resorting to many shrewd expedients, and
taking note of the great swamps to the east of Port Tobacco; they
reached Newport at last and fastened tacit guilt upon many residents.

Beyond Bryantown they overhauled the residence of Doctor Mudd and found
Booth's boot. This was before Lloyd confessed, and was the first
positive trace the officers had that they were really close upon the
assassins.

I do not recall anything more wild and startling than this vague and
dangerous exploration of a dimly known, hostile, and ignorant country.
To these few detectives we owe much of the subsequent successful
prosecution of the pursuit. They were the Hebrew spies.

By this time the country was filling up with soldiers, but previously a
second memorable detective party went out under the personal command of
Major O'Bierne. It consisted, besides that officer, of Lee, D'Angellia,
Callahan, Hoey, Bostwick, Hanover, Bevins, and McHenry, and embarked at
Washington on a steam-tug for Chappell's Point. Here a military station
had long been established for the prevention of blockade and
mail-running across the Potomao. It was commanded by Lieutenant Laverty,
and garrisoned by sixty-five men. On Tuesday night, Major O'Bierne's
party reached this place, and soon afterwards, a telegraph station was
established here by an invaluable man to the expedition, Captain
Beckwith, General Grant's chief cypher operator, who tapped the Point
Lookout wire, and placed the War Department within a moment's reach of
the theater of events.

Major O'Bierne's party started at once over the worst road in the world
for Port Tobacco.

If any place in the world is utterly given over to depravity, it is Port
Tobacco. From this town, by a sinuous creek, there is flat boat
navigation to the Potomac, and across that river to Mattox's creek.
Before the war Port Tobacco was the seat of a tobacco aristocracy and a
haunt of negro traders. It passed very naturally into a rebel post for
blockade-runners and a rebel post-office general. Gambling, corner
fighting, and shooting matches were its lyceum education. Violence and
ignorance had every suffrage in the town. Its people were smugglers, to
all intents, and there was neither Bible nor geography to the whole
region adjacent. Assassination was never very unpopular at Port Tobacco,
and when its victim was a northern president it became quite heroic. A
month before the murder a provost-marshal near by was slain in his
bed-chamber. For such a town and district the detective police were the
only effective missionaries. The hotel here is called the Brawner House;
it has a bar in the nethermost cellar, and its patrons, carousing in
that imperfect light, look like the denizens of some burglar's crib,
talking robbery between their cups; its dining-room is dark and
tumble-down, and the _cuisine_ bears traces of Caffir origin; a barbecue
is nothing to a dinner there. The Court House of Port Tobacco is the
most superflous house in the place, except the church. It stands in the
center of the town in a square, and the dwellings lie about it closely,
as if to throttle justice. Five hundred people exist in Port Tobacco;
life there reminds me, in connection with the slimy river and the
adjacent swamps, of the great reptile period of the world, when
iguanadons and pterodactyls and pleosauri ate each other.

Into this abstract of Gomorrah the few detectives went like angels who
visited Lot. They pretended to be enquiring for friends, or to have
business designs, and the first people they heard of were Harold and
Atzerott. The latter had visited Port Tobacco three weeks before the
murder, and intimated at that time his design of fleeing the country.
But everybody denied having seen him subsequent to the crime.

Atzerott had been in town just prior to the crime. He had been living
with a widow woman named Mrs. Wheeler, by whom he had several children,
and she was immediately called upon by Major O'Bierne. He did not tell
her what Atzerott had done, but vaguely hinted that he had committed
some terrible crime, and that since he had done her wrong, she could
vindicate both herself and justice by telling his whereabouts. The woman
admitted that Atzerott had been her bane, but she loved him, and refused
to betray him.

His trunk was found in her garret, and in it the key to his paint shop
in Port Tobacco. The latter was fruitlessly searched, but the probable
whereabouts of Atzerott in Mongomery county obtained, and Major O'Bierne
telegraphing there immediately, the desperate fellow was found and
locked up. A man named Crangle who had succeeded Atzerott in Mrs.
Wheeler's pliable affections, was arrested at once and put in jail. A
number of disloyal people were indicated or "spotted" as in no wise
angry at the President's taking off, and for all such a provost prison
was established.

[Illustration: Maryland.]

A few miles from Port Tobacco dwelt a solitary woman, who, when
questioned, said that for many nights she had heard, after she had
retired to bed, a man enter her cellar and lie there all night,
departing before dawn. Major O'Bierne and the detectives ordered her to
place a lamp in her window the next night she heard him enter, and at
dark they established a cordon of armed officers around the place. At
midnight punctually she exhibited the light, when the officers broke
into the house and thoroughly searched it, without result. Yet the woman
positively asserted that she had heard the man enter.

It was afterward found that she was of diseased mind.

By this time the military had come up in considerable numbers, and Major
O'Bierne was enabled to confer with Major Wait, of the Eighth Illinois.

The major had pushed on Monday night to Leonardstown, and pretty well
overhauled that locality.

It was at this time that preparations were made to hunt the swamps
around Chapmantown, Beantown, and Allen's Fresh. Booth had been entirely
lost since his departure from Mudd's house, and it was believed that he
had either pushed on for the Potomac or taken to the swamps. The
officers sagaciously determined to follow him to the one and to explore
the other.

The swamps tributary to the various branches of the Wicomico river, of
which the chief feeder is Allen's creek, bear various names, such as
Jordan's swamp, Atchall's swamp, and Scrub swamp. There are dense
growths of dogwood, gum, and beech, planted in sluices of water and bog;
and their width varies from a half mile to four miles, while their
length is upwards of sixteen miles. Frequent deep ponds dot this
wilderness place, with here and there a stretch of dry soil, but no
human being inhabits the malarious extent; even a hunted murderer would
shrink from hiding there. Serpents and slimy lizards are the only
denizens; sometimes the coon takes refuge in this desert from the
hounds, and in the soil mud a thousand odorous muskrats delve, with now
and then a tremorous otter. But not even the hunted negro dares to
fathom the treacherous clay, nor make himself a fellow of the slimy
reptiles which reign absolute in this terrible solitude. Here the
soldiers prepared to seek for the President's assassin, and no search of
the kind has ever been so thorough and patient. The Shawnee, in his
strong hold of despair in the heart of Okeefeuokee, would scarcely have
changed homes with Wilkes Booth and David Harold, hiding in this inhuman
country.

The military forces deputed to pursue the fugitives were seven hundred
men of the Eighth Illinois cavalry, six hundred men of the Twenty-second
Colored troops, and one hundred men of the Sixteenth New York. These
swept the swamps by detachments, the mass of them dismounted, with
cavalry at the belts of clearing, interspersed with detectives at
frequent intervals in the rear. They first formed a strong picket cordon
entirely around the swamps, and then, drawn up in two orders of battle,
advanced boldly into the bogs by two lines of march. One party swept the
swamps longitudinally, the other pushed straight across their smallest
diameter.

A similar march has not been made during the war; the soldiers were only
a few paces apart, and in steady order they took the ground as it came,
now plunging to their arm-pits in foul sluices of gangrened water, now
hopelessly submerged in slime, now attacked by Regions of wood ticks,
now tempting some unfaithful log or greenishly solid morass, and
plunging to the tip of the skull in poison stagnation; the tree boughs
rent their uniforms; they came out upon dry land, many of them without a
rag of garment scratched, and gashed, and spent, repugnant to
themselves, and disgusting to those who saw them; but not one trace of
Booth or Harold was any where found. Wherever they might be, the swamps
did not contain them.

While all this was going on, a force started from Point Lookout, and
swept the narrow necks of Saint Mary's quite up to Medley's Neck. To
complete the search in this part of the country, Colonel Wells and Major
O'Bierne started with a force of cavalry and infantry for Chappel Point;
they took the entire peninsula as before, and marched in close skirmish
line across it, but without finding anything of note. The matter of
inclosing a house was by cavalry advances, which held all the avenues
till mounted detectives came up. Many strange and ludicrous adventures
occured on each of these expeditions. While the forces were going up
Cobb's neck, there was a counter force coming down from Allen's Fresh.

Major O'Bierne started for Leonardstown with his detective force, and
played off Laverty as Booth, and Hoey as Harold. These two advanced to
farm-houses and gave their assumed names, asking at the same time for
assistance and shelter. They were generally avoided, except by one man
named Claggert, who told them they might hide in the woods behind his
house. When Claggert was arrested, however he stated that he meant to
hide them only to give them up. While on this adventure, a man who had
heard of the reward came very near shooting Laverty. The ruse now became
hazardous and the detectives resumed their real characters.

I have not time to go into the detail of this long and excellent hunt.
My letter of yesterday described how the detectives of Mr. Young and
Marshal Murray examined the negro Swan, and traced Booth to the house of
Sam Coxe, the richest rebel in Charles county. There is a gap in the
evidence between the arrival of Booth at this place and his crossing the
Potomac above Swan Point, in a stolen or purposely-provided canoe. But
as Coxe's house is only ten miles from the river, it is possible that he
made the passage of the intermediate country undiscovered.

One Mills, a rebel mail-carrier, also arrested, saw Booth and Harold
lurking along the river bank on Friday; he referred Major O'Bierne to
one Claggert, a rebel, as having seen them also; but Claggert held his
tongue, and went to jail. On Saturday night, Major O'Bierne, thus
assured, also crossed the Potomac with his detectives to Boon's farm,
where the fugitives had landed. While collecting information here a
gunboat swung up the stream, and threatened to fire on the party.

It was now night, and all the party worn to the ground with long travel
and want of sleep. Lieutenant Laverty's men went a short distance down
the country and gave up, but Major O'Bierne, with a single man, pushed
all night to King George's court-house, and next day, Sunday,
re-embarked for Chappell's Point. Hence he telegraphed his information,
and asked permission to pursue, promising to catch the assassins before
they reached Port Royal.

This the department refused. Colonel Baker's men were delegated to make
the pursuit with the able Lieutenant Doherty, and. O'Bierne, who was the
most active and successful spirit in the chase, returned to Washington,
cheerful and contented.

At Mrs. Burratt's Washington house, at the Pennsylvania Hotel,
Washington, and at Surrattsville, the Booth plot was almost entirely
arranged. These three places will be relics of conspiracy forever.

Harold said to Lieutenant Doherty, after the latter had dragged him from
the barn.

"Who's that man in there? It can't be Booth; he told me his name was
Loyd."

He further said that he had begged food for Booth from house to house
while the latter hid in the woods.

The confederate captain, Willie Jett, who had given Booth a lift behind
his saddle from Port Royal to Garrett's farm, was then courting a Miss
Goldmann at Bowling Green; his traveling companions were Lieutenants
Ruggles and Burbridge.

Payne, the assassin of the Sewards, was arrested by Officers, Sampson,
of the sub-treasury, and Devoe, acting under General Alcott. The latter
had besides, Officers Marsh and Clancy (a stenographer).

The reward for the capture of Booth will be distributed between very
many men. The negro, Swan, will get as much of it, as he deserves. It
amounts to about eighty thousand dollars, but the War Department may
increase it at discretion. The entire rewards amount to a hundred and
sixty odd thousand. Major O'Bierne should get a large part of it as
well.

This story which I must close abruptly, deserves to be re-written, with
all its accessory endeavours. What I have said is in skeleton merely,
and far from exhaustive.




LETTER VII.

THE MARTYR.


Washington, May 14.

I am sitting in the President's office. He was here very lately, but he
will not return to dispossess me of this high-backed chair he filled so
long, nor resume his daily work at the table where I am writing.

There are here only Major Hay and the friend who accompanies me. A
bright-faced boy runs in and out, darkly attired, so that his fob-chain
of gold is the only relief to his mourning garb. This is little Tad.,
the pet of the White House. That great death, with which the world
rings, has made upon him only the light impression which all things make
upon childhood. He will live to be a man pointed out everywhere, for his
father's sake; and as folks look at him, the tableau of the murder will
seem to encircle him.

The room is long and high, and so thickly hung with maps that the color
of the wall cannot be discerned. The President's table at which I am
seated, adjoins a window at the farthest corner; and to the left of my
chair as I recline in it, there is a large table before an empty grate,
around which there are many chairs, where the cabinet used to assemble.
The carpet is trodden thin, and the brilliance of its dyes is lost. The
furniture is of the formal cabinet class, stately and semi-comfortable;
there are book cases sprinkled with the sparse library of a country
lawyer, but lately plethoric, like the thin body which has departed in
its coffin. They are taking away Mr. Lincoln's private effects, to
deposit them wheresoever his family may abide, and the emptiness of the
place, on this sunny Sunday, revives that feeling of desolation from
which the land has scarce recovered. I rise from my seat and examine the
maps; they are from the coast survey and engineer departments, and
exhibit all the contested grounds of the war: there are pencil lines
upon them where some one has traced the route of armies, and planned the
strategic circumferences of campaigns. Was it the dead President who so
followed the march of empire, and dotted the sites of shock and
overthrow?

Here is the Manassas country--here the long reach of the wasted
Shenandoah; here the wavy line of the James and the sinuous peninsula.
The wide campagna of the gulf country sways in the Potomac breeze that
filters in at the window, and the Mississippi climbs up the wall, with
blotches of blue and red to show where blood gushed at the bursting of
deadly bombs. So, in the half-gloomy, half-grand apartment, roamed the
tall and wrinkled figure whom the country had summoned from his plain
home into mighty history, with the geography of the republic drawn into
a narrow compass so that he might lay his great brown hand upon it
everywhere. And walking to and fro, to and fro, to measure the destinies
of arms, he often stopped, with his thoughtful eyes upon the carpet, to
ask if his life were real and if he were the arbiter of so tremendous
issues, or whether it was not all a fever-dream, snatched from his sofa
in the routine office of the Prairie state.

There is but one picture on the marble mantel over the cold grate--John
Bright, a photograph.

I can well imagine how the mind of Mr. Lincoln often went afar to the
face of Bright, who said so kindly things of him when Europe was mocking
his homely guise and provincial phraseology. To Mr. Lincoln, John Bright
was the standard-bearer of America and democracy in the old world. He
thrilled over Bright's bold denunciations of peer and "Privilege," and
stretched his long arm across the Atlantic to take that daring Quaker
innovator by the hand.

I see some books on the table; perhaps they have lain there undisturbed
since the reader's dimming eyes grew nerveless. A parliamentary manual,
a Thesaurus, and two books of humor, "Orpheus C. Kerr," and "Artemus
Ward." These last were read by Mr. Lincoln in the pauses of his hard
day's labor. Their tenure here bears out the popular verdict of his
partiality for a good joke; and, through the window, from the seat of
Mr. Lincoln, I see across the grassy grounds of the capitol, the broken
shaft of the Washington Monument, the long bridge and the fort-tipped
Heights of Arlington, reaching down to the shining river side. These
scenes he looked at often to catch some freshness of leaf and water, and
often raised the sash to let the world rush in where only the nation
abided, and hence on that awful night, he departed early, to forget this
room and its close applications in the _abandon_ of the theater.

I wonder if that were the least of Booth's crimes--to slay this public
servant in the stolen hour of recreation he enjoyed but seldom. We
worked his life out here, and killed him when he asked a holiday.

Outside of this room there is an office, where his secretaries sat--a
room more narrow but as long--and opposite this adjacent office, a
second door, directly behind Mr. Lincoln's chair leads by a private
passage to his family quarters. This passage is his only monument in the
building; he added nor subtracted nothing else; it tells a long story of
duns and loiterers, contract-hunters and seekers for commissions,
garrulous parents on paltry errands, toadies without measure and talkers
without conscience. They pressed upon him through the great door
opposite his window, and hat in hand, come courtsying to his chair, with
an obsequious "Mr. President!"

If he dared, though the chief magistrate and commander of the army and
navy, to go out of the great door, these vampires leaped upon him with
their Babylonian pleas, and barred his walk to his hearthside. He could
not insult them since it was not in his nature, and perhaps many of them
had really urgent errands. So he called up the carpenter and ordered a
strategic route cut from his office to his hearth, and perhaps told of
it after with much merriment.

Here should be written the biography of his official life--in the room
where have concentrated all the wires of action, and where have
proceeded the resolves which vitalized in historic deeds. But only the
great measures, however carried out, were conceived in this office. The
little ones proceeded from other places..

Here once came Mr. Stanton, saying in his hard and positive way:

"Mr. Lincoln, I have found it expedient to disgrace and arrest General
Stone."

"Stanton," said Mr. Lincoln, with an emotion of pain, "when you
considered it necessary to imprison General Stone, I am glad you did not
consult me about it."

And for lack of such consultation, General Stone, I learn, now lies a
maniac in the asylum. The groundless pretext, upon which he suffered the
reputation of treason, issued from the Department of War--not from this
office.

But as to his biography, it is to be written by Colonel Nicolay and
Major Hay. They are to go to Paris together, one as attache of legation,
the other as consul, and while there, will undertake the labor. They are
the only men who know his life well enough to exhaust it, having
followed his official tasks as closely as they shared his social hours.

Major Hay is a gentleman of literary force. Colonel Nicolay has a fine
judgment of character and public measures. Together they should satisfy
both curiosity and history.

As I hear from my acquaintances here these episodes of the President's
life, I recall many reminiscences of his ride from Springfield to
Harrisburg, over much of which I passed. Then he left home and became an
inhabitant of history. His face was solid and healthy, his step young,
his speech and manner bold and kindly. I saw him at Trenton stand in the
Legislature, and say, in his conversational intonation:

"We may have to put the foot down firm."

How should we have hung upon his accents then had we anticipated his
virtues and his fate.

Death is requisite to make opinion grave. We looked upon Mr. Lincoln
then as an amusing sensation, and there was much guffaw as he was
regarded by the populace; he had not passed out of partisan ownership.
Little by little, afterward, he won esteem, and often admiration, until
the measure of his life was full, and the victories he had achieved made
the world applaud him. Yet, at this date, the President was sadly
changed. Four years of perplexity and devotion had wrinkled his face,
and stooped his shoulders, and the failing eyes that glared upon the
play closed as his mission was completed, and the world had been
educated enough to comprehend him.

The White House has been more of a Republican mansion under his control
than for many administrations. Uncouth guests came to it often, typical
of the simple western civilization of which he was a graduate, and while
no coarse altercation has ever ensued, the portal has swung wide for
five years.

A friend, connected with a Washington newspaper, told me that he had
occasion to see Mr. Lincoln one evening, and found that the latter had
gone to bed. But he was told to sit down in the office, and directly the
President entered. He wore only a night shirt, and his long, lank
hirsute limbs, as he sat down, inclined the guest to laughter. Mr.
Lincoln disposed of his request at once, and manifested a desire to
talk. So he reached for the cane which my friend carried and conversed
in this manner:

"I always used a cane when I was a boy. It was a freak of mine. My
favorite one was a knotted beech stick, and I carved the head myself.
There's a mighty amount of character in sticks. Don't you think so? You
have seen these fishing poles that fit into a cane? Well, that was an
old idea of mine. Dogwood clubs were favorite ones with the boys. I
'spose they use'em yet. Hickory is too heavy, unless you get it from a
young sapling. Have you ever noticed how a stick in one's hand will
change his appearance? Old women and witches would'nt look so without
sticks. Meg Merrilies understands that."

In this way my friend, who is a clerk, in a newspaper office, heard the
President talk for an hour. The undress of the man and the witness of
his subject would be staples for merriment if we did not reflect that
his greatness was of no conventional cast, that the playfulness of his
nature and the simplicity of his illustration lightened public business
but never arrested it.

Another gentleman, whom I know, visited the President in high dudgeon
one night. He was a newspaper proprietor and one of his editors had been
arrested.

"Mr. Lincoln," he said, "I have been off electioneering for your
re-election, and in my absence you have had my editor arrested. I won't
stand it, sir. I have fought better administrations than yours."

"Why, John," said the President, "I don't know much about it. I suppose
your boys have been too enterprizing. The fact is, I don't interfere
with the press much, but I suppose I am responsible."

"I want you to order the man's release to-night," said the applicant. "I
shan't leave here till I get it. In fact, I am the man who should be
arrested. Why don't you send me to Capitol Hill?"

This idea pleased the President exceedingly. He laughed the other into
good humor.

"In fact," he said, "I am under restraint here, and glad of any pretext
to release a journalist."

So he wrote the order, and the writer got his liberty.

It must not be inferred from this, however, that the President was a
devotee to literature. He had no professional enthusiasm for it. The
literary coterie of the White House got little flattery but its members
were treated as agreeable citizens and not as the architects of any
body's fortune.

Willis went there much for awhile, but yielded to his old habit of
gossiping about the hall paper and the teapots. Emerson went there once,
and was deferred to us if he were anything but a philosopher. Yet he so
far grasped the character of his host as to indite that noble
humanitarian eulogy upon him, delivered at Concord, and printed in the
WORLD. It will not do to say definitely In this notice how several
occasional writers visited the White House, heard the President's views
and assented to them and afterward abused him. But these attained no
remembrance nor tart reproach from that least retaliatory of men. He
harbored no malice, and is said to have often placed himself on the
stand-point of Davis and Lee, and accounted for their defection while he
could not excuse it.

He was a good reader, and took all the leading NEW YORK dailies every
day. His secretaries perused them and selected all the items which would
interest the President; these were read to him and considered. He bought
few new books, but seemed ever alive to works of comic value; the vein
of humor in him was not boisterous in its manifestations, but touched
the geniality of his nature, and he reproduced all that he absorbed, to
elucidate some new issue, or turn away argument by a laugh.

As a jester, Mr. Lincoln's tendency was caricatured by the prints, but
not exaggerated. He probably told as many stories as are attributed to
him. Nor did he, as is averred, indulge in these jests on solemn
occasions. No man felt with such personal intensity the extent of the
casualties of his time, and he often gravely reasoned whether he could
be in any way responsible for the bloodshed and devastation over which
it was his duty to preside.

An acquaintance of mine--a private--once went to him to plead for a
man's life. He had never seen the man for whom he pleaded, and had no
acquaintance with the man's family. Mr. Lincoln was touched by his
disinterestedness, and said to him:

"If I were anything but the President, I would be constantly working as
you have done."

Whenever a doubt of one's guilt lay on his mind, the man was spared by
his direct interference..

There was an entire absence in the President's character of the heroic
element. He would do a great deed in _deshabille_ as promptly as in full
dress. He never aimed to be brilliant, unconsciously understanding that
a great man's brilliancy is to be measured by the "wholeness" and
synthetic cast of his career rather than by any fitful ebullitions. For
that reason we look in vain through his messages for "points." His point
was not to turn a sentence or an epigram, but to win an effect,
regardless of the route to it.

He was commonplace in his talk, and Chesterfield would have had no
patience with him; his dignity of character lay in his uprightness
rather than in his formal manner. Members of his government often
reviewed him plainly in his presence. Yet he divined the true course,
while they only argued it out.

His good feeling was not only personal, but national. He had no
prejudice against any race or potentate. And his democracy was of a
practical, rather than of a demonstrative, nature. He was not Marat, but
Moreau--not Paine and Jefferson; but Franklin.

His domestic life was like a parlor of night-time, lit by the equal
grate of his genial and uniform kindness. Young Thaddy played with him
upon the carpet; Robert came home from the war and talked to his father
as to a school-mate, he was to Mrs. Lincoln as chivalrous on the last
day of his life as when he courted her. I have somewhere seen a picture
of Henry IV. of France, riding his babies on his back: that was the
President.

So dwelt the citizen who is gone--a model in character if not in
ceremony, for good men to come who will take his place in the same White
House, and find their generation comparing them to the man thought
worthy of assassination. I am glad to sit here in his chair, where he
has bent so often,--in the atmosphere of the household he purified, in
the sight of the green grass and the blue river he hallowed by gazing
upon, in the very centre of the nation he preserved for the people, and
close the list of bloody deeds, of desperate fights of swift expiations,
of renowned obsequies of which I have written, by inditing at his table
the goodness of his life and the eternity of his memory.




LETTER VIII.

THE TRIAL.


Washington, May 26.

The most exciting trial of our times has obtained a very meager
commemoration in all but its literal features. The evidence adduced in
the course of it, has been too faithfully reported, through its
far-fetched and monotonous irregularities, but nobody realizes the
extraordinary scene from which so many columns emanate, either by aid of
the reporters' scanty descriptions, or by the purblind sketches of the
artists.

Now that the evidence is growing vapid, and the obstinacy of the
military commission has lost its coarse zest, we may find enough readers
to warrant a fuller sketch of the conspirators' prison.

About a mile below Washington, where the high Potomac Bluffs meet the
marshy border of the Eastern branch, stands the United States arsenal, a
series of long, mathematically uninteresting brick buildings, with a
broad lawn behind them, open to the water, and level military plazas, on
which are piled pyramids of shell and ball, among acres of cannon and
cannon-carriages, and caissons. A high wall, reaching circularly around
these buildings, shows above it, as one looks from Washington, the
barred windows of an older and more gloomy structure than the rest,
which forms the city front of the group of which it is the principal.
This was a penitentiary, but, long ago added to the arsenal, it has been
re-transformed to a court-room and jail, and in its third, or uppermost
story, the Military Commission is sitting.

The main road to the arsenal is by a wide and vacant avenue, which abuts
against a gate where automaton sentries walk, but the same gate can best
be reached on foot by the shores of the Potomac, in the sight, of the
forts, the shipping, and Alexandria.

The scene at the arsenal in time of peace is common-place enough, except
that across the Eastern Branch the towers of the lunatic asylum, perched
upon a height, look down baronially; but this trial of murderers has
made the spot a fair.

A whole company of volunteers keeps the gate, through which are passing
cabs, barouches, officers' ambulances, and a stream of folks on foot;
while farther along almost a regiment crosses the drive, their huddled
shelter tents extending entirely across the peninsula. These are playing
cards on the ground, and tossing quoits, and sleeping on their faces,
while a gunboat watches the river front, and under a circular wall a
line of patrols, ten yards apart, go to and fro perpetually.

It is 10 o'clock, and the court is soon to sit. Its members ride down in
superb ambulances and bring their friends along to show them the majesty
of justice. A perfect park of carriages stands by the door to the left,
and from these dismount major-generals' wives, in rustling silks;
daughters of congressmen, attired like the lilies of the milliner;
little girls who hope to be young ladies and have come with "Pa," to
look at the assassins; even brides are here, in the fresh blush of their
nuptials, and they consider the late spectacle of the review as good as
lost, if the court-scene be not added to it. These tender creatures have
a weakness for the ring of manacles, the sight of folks to be suspended
in the air, the face of a woman confederate in blood.

They chat with their polite guides, many of whom are gallant captains,
and go one after another up the little flight of steps which leads to
the room of the officer of the day.

He passes them, if he pleases, up the crooked stairways, and when they
have climbed three of these, they enter a sort of garret-room, oblong,
and plastered white, and about as large as an ordinary town-house
parlor.

Four doors open into it--that by which we have entered, two from the
left, where the witnesses wait, and one at the end, near the left far
corner, which is the outlet from the cells.

A railing, close up to the stairway door, gives a little space in the
foreground for witnesses; two tables, transverse to this rail, are for
the commission and the press, the first-named being to the right;
between these are a raised platform and pivot arm-chair for the witness;
below are the sworn phonographers and the counsel for the accused, and
then another rail like that separating the crowd from the court, holds
behind it the accused and their guards.

These are they who are living not by years nor by weeks, but by breaths.
They are motley enough, for the most part, sitting upon a long bench
with their backs against the wall,--ill-shaved, haggard, anxious, and
the dungeon door at their left opens now and then to show behind it a
moving bayonet. There are women within the court proper, edging upon the
reporters, introduced there by a fussy usher, and through four windows
filters the imperfect daylight, making all things distinguishable, yet
shadowy. The _coup d'oeil_ of this small and crowded scene is lively as
a popular funeral.

There is the witness with raised hand, pointing toward heaven, and
looking at Judge Holt. The gilt stars, bars, and orange-colored sashes
of the commission; the women's brilliant silks and bonnets; the crowding
spectators, with their brains in their eyes; the blue coats of the
guards; the working scribes; and last of all the line of culprits, whose
suspected guilt has made them worthy of all illustration.

Between the angle of the wall and the studded door, under the heavy bar
of dressed stone which marks above the thickness of the gaol, sits all
alone a woman's figure, clothed in solemn black. Her shadowy skirt hides
her feet, so that we cannot see whether they are riveted; her sleeves of
sable sweep down to her wrist, and dark gloves cover the plumpness of
her hand, while a palm-leaf fan nods to and fro to assist the obscurity
of her vail of crape, descending from her widow's bonnet.


A solitary woman, beginning the line of coarse indicted men, shrinking
beneath the scornful eyes of her sex, and the as bold survey of men more
pitiful, may well excite, despite her guilt, a moment of sympathy.

Let men remember that she is the mother of a son who has fled to save
his forfeit life by deserting her to shame, and perhaps, to death. Let
women, who will not mention her in mercy, learn from her end, in all
succeeding wars, to make patriotism of their household duties and not
incite to blood.

Mrs. Surratt is a graduate of that seminary which spits in soldiers
faces, denounces brave generals upon the rostrum, and cries out for an
interminable scaffold when all the bells are ringing peace.

How far her wicked love influenced her to participation in the murder
rests in her own breast, and up to this time she has not differed from
mothers at large--to twist her own bow-string rather than build his
gibbet.

Beneath her shadowy bonnet, over her fan-tip, we see two large, sad
eyes, rising and falling, and now and then when the fan sways to and
fro, the hair just turning gray with trouble, and the round face growing
wan and seamed with terrible reflection, are seen a moment crouching
low, as if she would wish to grovel upon the floor and bury her forehead
in her hands.

Yet, sometimes, across Mrs. Surratt's face a stealthiness creeps--a sort
of furtive, feline flashing of the eye, like that of one which means to
leap sideways. At these times her face seems to grow hard and colorless,
as if that tiger expression which Pradier caught upon the face of
Brinvilliers and fastened into a masque, had been repeated here. Not to
grow mawkish while we must be kind, let us not forget that this woman is
an old plotter. If she did not devise the assassination, she was privy
to it long. She was an agent of contraband mails--a bold, crafty,
assured rebel--perhaps a spy--and in the event of her condemnation, let
those who would plead for her spend half their pity upon that victim
whose heart was like a woman's, and whose hand was merciful as a
mother's.

Before the door sits an officer, uncovered, who does not seem to labor
under any particular fear, chiefly because the captives are ironed to
immovability, and he stares and smiles alternately, as if he were
somewhat amiable and extremely bored.

Next to the officer is a shabby-looking boy, whose seat is by the right
jamb of the jail door. Of all boys just old enough to feel their oats,
this boy is the most commonplace. His parents would be likely to have no
sanguine hopes of his reaching the presidency; for his head indicates
latent dementia, and a slice or two from it would recommend him, without
exanimation, to the school for the feeble-minded. Better dressed, and
washed, and shaved, he might make a tolerable adornment to a hotel door,
or even reach the dignity of a bar-keeper or an usher at a theatre. But
that this fellow should occupy a leaf in history and be confounded with
a tragedy entering into the literature of the world, reverses manifest
destiny, and leaves neither phrenology nor physiognomy a place to stand
upon.

Come up! Gall, Spurzheim, and Lavater, and remark his sallow face,
attenuated by base excesses! Do you know any forehead so broad which
means so little? the oyster could teach this man philosophy! His chin is
sharp, his eyes are blank blue, his short black hair curls over his
ears, and his beard is of a prickly black, with a moustache which does
not help his general contemptibleness. A dirty grayish shirt without a
linen collar, is seen between the lapels of the greasy and dusty cloth
coat, sloping at the shoulders; and under his worn brown trowsers, the
manacle of iron makes an ugly garter to his carpet clipper.

This is David Harold, who shared the wild night-ride of Booth, and
barely escaped that outlaw's death in the burning barn.

He stoops to the rail of the dock, now and then, to chat with his
attorney, and a sort of blank anxiety which he wears, as his head turns
here and there, shifts to a frolicking smile. But a woman of unusual
attractions enters the court, and Harold is much more interested in her
than in his acquittal.

Great Caesar's dust, which stopped a knot-hole, has in this play boy an
inverse parallel. He was at best hostler to a murderer, and failed in
that. His chief concern at present is to have somebody to talk to; and
he thinks upon the whole, that if an assassination is productive of so
little fun, he will have nothing to do with another one.

That Harold has slipped into history gives us as much surprise as that
he has yet to suffer death gives us almost contempt for the scaffold.
But if the scaffold must wait for only wise men to get upon it, it must
rot. Your wise man does no murder in the first place, and if so, in the
second, he dodges the penalty. In this world, Harold, idiotcy is oftener
punished than guilt.

That Booth should have used Harold is very naturally accounted for.
Actors live only to be admired; vanity rises to its climax in them.
Booth preferred this sparrow to sing him peans rather than live by an
eagle and be screamed at now and then.

At the right hand side of Harold sits a soldier in blue, who is
evidently thinking about a game of quoits with his comrades in the jail
yard; he wonders why lawyers are so very dry, and is surprised to find a
trial for murder as tedious as a thanksgiving sermon.

But on the soldier's other hand is a figure which makes the center and
cynosure of this thrilling scene. Taller by a whole head than either his
companions or the sentries, Payne, the assassin, sits erect, and flings
his barbarian eye to and fro, radiating the tremendous energy of his
colossal physique.

He is the only man worthy to have murdered Mr. Seward. When against the
delicate organization, the fine, subtle, nervous mind of the Secretary
of State, this giant, knife in hand, precipitated himself, two forms of
civilization met as distinctly as when the savage Gauls invaded the
Roman senate.

Lawlessness and intelligence, the savage and the statesman, body and
mind, fought together upon Mr. Seward's bed.

The mystery attending Payne's home and parentage still exists to make
him more incomprehensible. Out of the vague, dim _ultima thule_, like
those Asiatic hordes which came from nowhere and shivered civilization,
Payne suddenly appeared and fought his way to the _sanctum sanctorum_ of
law. I think his part in the assassination more remarkable than Booth's,
The latter's crime was shrewdly plotted, as by one measuring
intelligence with the whole government. But Payne did not think--he only
struck!

With this man's face before me as I write, I am reminded of some Maori
chief waging war from the lust of blood or the pride of local dominion.
His complexion is bloodless, yet so healthy that a passing observer
would afterward speak of it as ruddy. His face is broad, with a
character nose, sensual lips, and very high cheek bones; the cranium is
full and the brow speaking, while the head runs back to an abnormal apex
at the tip of the cerebellum. His straight, lusterless black hair, duly
parted, is at the summit so disturbed that tufts of it rise up like Red
Jacket's or Tecumseh's; but the head is kept well up, and rests upon a
wonderfully broad throat, muscular as one's thigh, and without any
trace, as he sits, of the protuberance called Adam's apple. Withal, the
eye is the man Payne's power. It is dark and speechless, and rolls here
and there like that of a beast in a cage which strives in vain to
understand the language of its captors. It seems to say, if anything,
that, it has no sympathy with anybody approximate, and has submitted,
like a lion bound, to the logic of conviction and of chains.

Payne looks at none of his fellow-prisoners: assassins caught seldom
cares to recognise each other; for while there is faithfulness among
thieves, there is none among murderers. His great white eyeball never
roves to anybody's in the dock, nor theirs to his. He has confessed his
crime and they know it; so they have no mutual hope; they listen to the
evidence because it concerns them; ho looks at it only, because it
cannot save him. He is entirely beardless, yet in his boyish chin more
of a man physically than the rest, combined.

While I watch this man I am constantly repeating to myself that stanza
of Bryant's:

  "Upon the market place he stood,--
  A man of giant frame,
  Amid the gathering multitude
  That shrank to hear his name;
  All proud of step and firm of limb,
  His dark eye on the ground--
  And silently they gazed on him,
  As on a lion bound."

His dress, which we scarcely notice in the grander contrast of his pose
and stature, is an old shirt of woolen blue, with a white nap at the
button-holes, and upon his knees of black cloth he twirls, as if for
relaxation, between his powerful manacles, a soiled white
handkerchief--if from his mother, we conjecture, a gift to a bloodhound
from his dam. His heavy handcuffs make his broad shoulders more narrow.
Yet we can see by the outline of the sleeves what girth the muscles has,
and the hand at the end of his long and bony arm is wide and huge, as if
it could wield a claymore as well as a dirk. He also wears carpet
slippers, but his ankles are clogged with so heavy irons that two men
must carry them when he enters or leaves the dock. For this man there
can be no sentiment--no more than for a bull. The flesh on his face is
hard, as if cast, rather than generated, and while we see how he towers
above the entire court, we watch him in wonder, as if he were some
maniac denizen of a zone where men without minds grow to the stature and
power of fiends.

The face of Payne is not of the traditional southern peculiarities. He
resembles rather a Pennsylvania mountaineer than a Kentucky rustic.

Three weeks ago I gave, in an account of the conspiracy which many
gainsayed, but which the trial has fully confirmed, a sketch of this
man, to which I still adhere. He was furnished to Booth and John Surratt
from Canada; sent upon special service with his life in his hands; and
he faced the murder he was to commit like any prize-fighter. I pity
Beall, who died intelligently for a wretched essay against civilians,
that his biography and fate must be matched by this savage's!

Next to Payne, and crouching under him like a frog under a rock, is an
inconsiderable soldier, who chews his cud, and would cheerfully hang his
protege for the sake of being rid of him. My sympathies are entirely
enlisted for this soldier; he has neither the joy of being acquitted,
nor the excitement of being tried. He is quite a sizable man by himself,
but Payne overhangs him, and the dullness of the trial quite stultifies
him. The few points of law which are admitted here are not so evident to
this soldier as the point of his bayonet. I see what ails him.

He wants to swear.

A beam running overhead divides the court lengthwise in half, and as the
prisoners sit at the end of the court, the German Atzerott, or Adzerota,
has a place just beneath the beam. This is very ominous for Atzerott.
The filthiness of this man denies him sympathy. He is a disgusting
little groveler of dry, sandy hair, oval head, ears set so close to the
chin that one would think his sense of hearing limited to his jaws, and
a complexion so yellow that the uncropped brownness of his beard does
not materially darken it. He wears a grayish coat, low grimy shirt, and
the usual carpet slippers of threadbare red over his shifting and
shiftless feet. His head is bent forward, and seems to be anxiously
trying to catch the tenor of the trial. Many persons outside of the
court, Atzerott, are equally puzzled!

From as much examination of this man as his insignificance permits, I
should call him a "gabby" fellow--loud of resolution, ignoble of effort.
Over his lager no man would be braver. His face is familiar to me from a
review of those detective cabinets usually called "Rogues' Galleries."
As a "sneak thief" or "bagman," I should convict him by his face; the
same indictment would make me acquit him instantly of assassination. In
this estimate I rely upon evidence as well as upon appearance. Atzerott
swaggered about Kirk wood's Hotel asking for the Vice-President's room;
Payne or Booth would have done the murder silently. Nobody pities a
dirty man. The same arts of dress and cleanliness which please ladies
influence juries.

Next to Atzerott sits a soldier--a very jolly and smooth faced
soldier--who at one time hears a witness say something laughable. The
soldier immediately grins to the farthest point of his scalp. But he is
chagrined to find that the joke is too trivial to admit of a laugh of
duration. Very few jokes before the present court do so. But this
soldier being of long charity and excellent patience, awaits the next
joke like a veteran under orders, and reposes his chin upon the dock as
if aware that between jokes there was ample time for a nap.

The next prisoner to the right is O'Laughlin. He is a small man, about
twenty-eight years of age, attired in a fine, soiled coat, but without
white linen upon either his bosom or neck, and handcuffs rest hugely
upon his mediocrity. His moustache, eye-brows, and hair are regular and
very black. He does not look unlike Booth, though he seems to have
little bodily power, and he is very anxious, as if more earnest than any
of the rest, to have a fair lease upon life. His countenance is not
prepossessing, though he might be considered passably good looking in a
mixed company.

Between O'Laughlin and the next prisoner, Spangler, sits a soldier in
ultramarine--a discontented soldier, a moody, dissatisfied, and
arbitrary soldier. His definition of military justice is like the boy's
answer at school to the familiar question upon the Constitution of the
United States:

"What rights do accused persons enjoy ?"

The boy wrote out, very carefully, this answer:

"Death by hanging."

The boy would have been correct had the question applied to accused
persons before a court-martial.

Spangler, the scene-shifter and stage-carpenter, has the face and
bearing of a day-laborer. His blue woollen shirt does not confuse him,
as he is used to it. He has an oldish face, wrinkled by fearful
anticipations, and his hair is thin. He is awkwardly built, and watches
the trial earnestly, as if striving to catch between the links of
evidence vistas of a life insured. This man has a simple and pleading
face, and there is something genial in his great, incoherent
countenance. He is said to have cleared the stage for Booth's escape,
but this is indifferently testified to. He had often been asked by Booth
to take a drink at the nearest bar. Persons who drink assure me that the
greatest mark of confidence which a great man can show a lesser one is
to make that tender; this, therefore, explains Booth's power over
Spangler.

Spangler is the first scene-shifter who may become a _dramatis personę_.

A soldier sits between Spangler and Doctor Mudd. The soldier would like
Spangler to get up and go away, so that he could have as much of the
bench as he might sleep upon. This particular soldier, I may be
qualified to say, would sleep upon his post.

Doctor Mudd has a New England and not a Maryland face. He compares, to
those on his left, as Hyperion to a squatter. His high, oval head is
bald very far up, but not benevolently so, and it is covered with light
red hair, so thin as to contrast indifferently with the denseness of his
beard and goatee. His nose would be insignificant but for its sharpness,
and at the nostrils it is swelling and high-spirited. His eyes impinge
upon his brows, and they are shining and rather dark, while the brows
themselves are so scantily clothed with hair that they seem quite naked.
Mudd is neatly dressed in a green-grass duster, and white bosom and
collar; if he had no other advantages over his associates these last
would give it to him. He keeps his feet upon the rail before him in true
republican style, and rolls a morsel of tobacco under his tongue.

The military commission works as if it were delegated not to try, but to
convict, and Dr. Mudd, if he be innocent, is in only less danger than if
he were guilty. He has a sort of home-bred intelligence in his face, and
socially is as far above his fellows as Goliah of Gath above the rest of
the Philistines.

On the right of Doctor Mudd sits a soldier, who is striving to look
through his legs at the judge-advocate, as if taking a sort of secret
aim at that person, with the intent to fetch him down, because he makes
the trial so very dry, and the soldier so very thirsty.

The last man, who sits on the extreme right of the prisoners, is Mr.
Sam. Arnold. He is, perhaps, the best looking of the prisoners, and the
least implicated. He has a solid, pleasant face; has been a rebel
soldier, foolishly committed himself to Booth, with perhaps no intention
to do a crime, recanted in pen and ink, and was made a national
character. Had he recanted by word of mouth he might have saved himself
unpleasant dreams. This shows everybody the absurdity of writing what
they can so easily say. The best thing Arnold ever wrote was his letter
to Booth refusing to engage in murder. Yet this recantation is more in
evidence against than then his original purpose.

Arnold looks out of the window, and feels easy.

The reporters who are present are generally young fellows, practical and
ardent, like Woods, of Boston; Colburn, of THE WORLD; and Major Poore,
who has been the chronicler of such scenes for twenty years. Ber.
Pitman, one of the authors of phonetic writing, is among the official
reporters, and the Murphies, who could report the lightning, if it could
talk, are slashing down history as it passes in at their ears and runs
out at their fingers' ends.

The counsel for the accused strike me as being commonplace lawyers. They
either have no chance or no pluck to assert the dignity of their
profession. Reverdy Johnson is not here. The first day disgusted him, as
he is a practitioner of _law_. Yet the best word of the trial has been
his:

"I, gentlemen, am a member of that body of legislators which creates
courts-martial and major-generals!"

The commission has collectively an imposing appearance: the face of
Judge Holt is swarthy; he questions with slow utterance, holding the
witness in his cold, measuring eye. Hunter, who sits at the opposite end
of the table, shuts his eyes now and then, either to sleep or think, or
both, and the other generals take a note or two, and watch for occasions
to distinguish themselves.

Excepting Judge Holt, the court has shown as little ability as could be
expected from soldiers, placed in unenviable publicity, and upon a duty
for which they are disqualified, both by education and acumen. Witness
the lack of dignity in Hunter, who opened the court by a coarse allusion
to "humbug chivalry;" of Lew. Wallace, whose heat and intolerance were
appropriately urged in the most exceptional English; of Howe, whose
tirade against the rebel General Johnson was feeble as it was
ungenerous! This court was needed to show us at least the petty tyranny
of martial law and the pettiness of martial jurists. The counsel for the
defence have just enough show to make the unfairness of the trial
partake of hypocrisy, and the wideness of the subjects discussed makes
one imagine that the object of the commission is to write a cyclopedia,
and not to hang or acquit six or eight miserable wretches.




LETTER IX.

THE EXECUTIONS.


Washington, Friday, July 7th.

The trial is over; four of the conspirators have paid with their lives
the penalty of the Great Conspiracy; the rest go to the jail, and with
one exception for the remainder of their lives.

Whatever our individual theories may be, the great crime is ended, and
this is the crowning scene:

It was a long and dusty avenue, along which rambled soldiers in bluishly
white coats, cattle with their tongues out, straying from the herd, and
a few negroes making for their cabins, which dotted the fiery and vacant
lots of the suburbs. At the foot of this avenue, where a lukewarm river
holds between its dividing arms a dreary edifice of brick, the way was
filled with collected cabs, and elbowing people, abutting against a
circle of sentinels who kept the arsenal gate. The low, flat, dust-white
fields to the far left were also lined with patrols and soldiers lying
on the ground in squads beside their stacked muskets. Within these a
second blue and monotonous line extended. The drive from the arsenal
gate to the arsenal's high and steel-spiked wall was beset by companies
of exacting sabremen, and all the river bank to the right was edged with
blue and bayonets. This exhibition of war was the prelude to a very
ghastly but very popular episode--an execution. Three men and a woman
were to be led out in shackles and hung to a beam. They had conspired to
take life; they had thrilled the world with the partial consummation of
their plot; they were to reach the last eminence of assassins, on this
parched and oppressive noon, by swinging in pinioned arms and muffled
faces in the presence of a thousand people.

The bayonets at the gate were lifted as I produced my pass. It was the
last permission granted. In giving it away the General seemed relieved,
for he had been sorely troubled by applications. Everybody who had
visited Washington to seek for an office, sought to see this expiation
also. The officer at the gate looked at my pass suspiciously. "I don't
believe that all these papers have been genuine," he said. Is an
execution, then, so great a warning to evil-doers, that men will commit
forgery to see it?

I entered a large grassy yard, surrounded by an exceedingly high wall.
On the top of this wall, soldiers with muskets in their hands, were
thickly planted. The yard below was broken by irregular buildings of
brick. I climbed by a flight of rickety outside stairs to the central
building, where many officers were seated at the windows, and looked
awhile at the strange scene on the grassy plaza. On the left, the long,
barred, impregnable penitentiary rose. The shady spots beneath it were
occupied by huddling spectators. Soldiers were filling their canteens at
the pump. A face or two looked out from the barred jail. There were many
umbrellas hoisted on the ground to shelter civilians beneath them.
Squads of officers and citizens lay along the narrow shadow of the
walls. The north side of the yard was enclosed on three sides by columns
of soldiers drawn up in regular order, the side next to the penitentiary
being short to admit of ingress to the prisoner's door; but the opposite
column reached entirely up to the north wall.

Within this enclosed area a structure to be inhabited by neither the
living nor the dead was fast approaching completion. It stood gaunt,
lofty, long. Saws and hammers made dolorous music on it. Men, in their
shirt sleeves, were measuring it and directing its construction in a
business way. Now and then some one would ascend its airy stair to test
its firmness; others crawled beneath to wedge its slim supports, or
carry away the falling debris.

Toward this skeleton edifice all looked with a strange nervousness. It
was the thought and speculation of the gravest and the gayest.

It was the gallows.

A beam reached, horizontally, in the air, twenty feet from the ground;
four awkward ropes, at irregular intervals, dangled from it, each noosed
at the end. It was upheld by three props, one in the center and one at
each end. These props came all the way to the ground where they were
morticed in heavy bars. Midway of them a floor was laid, twenty by
twelve feet, held in its position on the farther side by shorter props,
of which there were many, and reached by fifteen creaking steps, railed
on either side. But this floor had no supports on the side nearest the
eye, except two temporary rods, at the foot of which two inclined beams
pointed menacingly, held in poise by ropes from the gallows floor.

And this floor was presently discovered to be a cheat, a trap, a
pitfall.

Two hinges only held it to its firmer half. These were to give way at
the fatal moment, and leave only the shallow and unreliable air for the
bound and smothering to tread upon.

The traps were two, sustained by two different props.

The nooses were on each side of the central support.

Was this all?

Not all.

Close by the foot of the gallows four wooden boxes were piled upon each
other at the edge of four newly excavated pits, the fresh earth of which
was already dried and brittle in the burning noon.

Here were to be interred the broken carcasses when the gallows had let
go its throttle. They were so placed as the victims should emerge from
the gaol door they would be seen near the stair directly in the line of
march.

And not far from these, in silence and darkness beneath the prison where
they had lain so long and so forbodingly, the body of John Wilkes Booth,
sealed up in the brick floor, had long been mouldering. If the dead can
hear he had listened many a time to the rattle of their manacles upon
the stairs, to the drowsy hum of the trial and the buzz of the garrulous
spectators; to the moaning, or the gibing, or the praying in the bolted
cells where those whom kindred fate had given a little lease upon life
lay waiting for the terrible pronouncement.

It was a long waiting, and the roof of a high house outside the walls
was seen to be densely packed with people. Others kept arriving moment
by moment; soldiers were wondering when the swinging would begin and
officers arguing that the four folks "deserved it, damn them!" Gentlemen
of experience were telling over the number of such expiations they had
witnessed. Analytic people were comparing the various modes of shooting,
garroting, and guillotining. Cigars were sending up spirals of soothing
smoke. There was a good deal of covert fear that a reprieve might be
granted. Inquires were many and ingenuous for whisky, and one or two
were so deeply expectant that they fell asleep.

How much those four dying, hoping, cringing, dreaming felons were
grudged their little gasp of life! It was to be a scene, not a
postponement or a prolongation. "Who was to be the executioner?" "Why
had not the renowned and artistic Isaacs been sent for from New York?"
"Would they probably die game, or grow weak-kneed in the last
extremity?" Ah, the gallows' workmen have completed the job! "Now then
we should have it."

Still there was delay. The sun peeped into the new-made graves and made
blistering hot the gallows' floor. The old pump made its familiar music
to the cool plash of blessed water. The grass withered in the fervid
heat. The bronzed faces of the soldiers ran lumps of sweat. The file
upon the jail walls looked down into the wide yard yawningly. No wind
fluttered the two battle standards condemned to unfold their trophies
upon this coming profanation. Not yet arrived. Why? The extent of grace
has almost been attained. The sentence gave them only till two o'clock!
Why are they so dilatory in wishing to be hanged?

Suddenly the wicket opens, the troops spring to their feet, and stand at
order arms, the flags go up, the low order passes from company to
company; the spectators huddle a little nearer to the scaffold; all the
writers for the press produce their pencils and note-books.

First came a woman pinioned.

A middle-aged woman, dressed in black, bonnetted and veiled, walking
between two bare-headed priests.

One of these held against his breast a crucifix of jet, and in the folds
of his blue-fringed sash he carried an open breviary, while both of them
muttered the service for the dead.

Four soldiers with musket at shoulder, followed, and a captain led the
way to the gallows.

The second party escorted a small and shambling German, whose head had a
long white cap upon it, rendering more filthy his dull complexion, and
upon whose feet the chains clanked as he slowly advanced, preceded by
two officers, flanked by a Lutheran clergyman, and followed, as his
predecessor, by an armed squad.

The third, preacher and party, clustered about a shabby boy, whose limbs
tottered as he progressed.

The fourth, walked in the shadow of a straight high stature, whose tawny
hair and large blue eye were suggestive rather of the barbarian striding
in his conqueror's triumph, than the assassin going to the gallows.

All these, captives, priests, guards, and officers, nearly twenty in
all, climbed slowly and solemnly the narrow steps; and upon four arm
chairs, stretching across the stage in the rear of the traps, the
condemned were seated with their spiritual attendants behind them.

The findings and warrants were immediately read to the prisoners by
General Hartrauft in a quiet and respectful tone, an aid holding an
umbrella over him meantime. These having been already published, and
being besides very uninteresting to any body but the prisoners, were
paid little heed to, all the spectators interesting themselves in the
prisoners.

There was a fortuitous delicacy in this distribution, the woman being
placed farthest from the social and physical dirtiness of Atzerott, and
nearest the unblanched and manly physiognomy of Payne.

She was not so pale that the clearness of her complexion could not be
seen, and the brightness of the sun made her vail quite transparent. Her
eyes were seen to be of a soft gray; her brown hair lay smoothly upon a
full, square forehead; the contour of her face was comely, but her teeth
had the imperfectness of those of most southern women, being few and
irregular. Until the lips were opened she did not reveal them. Her
figure was not quite full enough to be denominated buxom, yet had all
the promise of venerable old age, had nature been permitted its due
course. She was of the medium height, and modest--as what woman would
not be under such searching survey? At first she was very feeble, and
leaned her head upon alternate sides of her arm-chair in nervous spasms;
but now and then, when a sort of wail just issued from her lips, the
priest placed before her the crucifix to lull her fearful spirit. All
the while the good fathers Wigett and Walter murmured their low, tender
cadences, and now and then the woman's face lost its deadly fear, and
took a bold, cognizable survey of the spectators. She wore a robe of
dark woolen, no collar, and common shoes of black listing. Her general
expression was that of acute suffering, vanishing at times as if by the
conjuration of her pride, and again returning in a paroxysm as she
looked at the dreadful rope dangling before her. This woman, to whom,
the priests have made their industrious moan, holding up the effigy of
Christ when their own appeals became of no avail, perched there in the
lofty air, counting her breaths, counting the winkfuls of light,
counting the final wrestles of her breaking heart, had been the belle of
her section, and many good men had courted her hand. She had led a
pleasant life, and children had been born to her--who shared her
mediocre ambition and the invincibility of her will. If the charge of
her guilt were proven, she was the Lady Macbeth of the west.

But women know nothing of consequences. She alone of all her sex stands
now in this thrilled and ghastly perspective, and in immediate
association with three creatures in whose company it is no fame to die:
a little crying boy, a greasy unkempt sniveller, and a confessed
desperado. Her base and fugitive son, to know the infamy of his
cowardice and die of his shame, should have seen his mother writhing in
her seat upon the throne his wickedness established for her.

Payne, the strangest criminal in our history, was alone dignified and
self possessed. He wore a closely-fitting knit shirt, a sailor's straw
hat tied with a ribbon, and dark pantaloons, but no shoes. His collar,
cut very low, showed the tremendous muscularity of his neck, and the
breadth of his breast was more conspicuous by the manner in which the
pinioned arms thrust it forward. His height, his vigor, his glare made
him the strong central figure of this interelementary tableaux. He said
no word; his eyes were red as with the penitential weeping of a
courageous man, and the smooth hardness of his skin seemed like a
polished muscle. He did not look abroad inquisitively, nor within
intuitively. He had no accusation, no despair, no dreaminess. He was
only looking at death as for one long expected, and not a tremor nor a
shock stirred his long stately limbs; withal, his blue eye was milder
than when I saw him last, as if some bitterness, or stolidness, or
obstinate pride had been exorcised, perhaps by the candor of confession.
Now and then he looked half-pityingly at the woman, and only once moved
his lips, as if in supplication. Few who looked at him, forgetful of his
crime, did not respect him. He seemed to feel that no man was more than
his peer, and one of his last commands was a word of regret to Mr.
Seward.

I have a doubt that this man is entirely a member of our nervous race. I
believe that a fiber of the aboriginal runs through his tough sinews. At
times he looked entirely an Indian. His hair is tufted, and will not lie
smoothly. His cheek-bones are large and high set. There is a tint in his
complexion. Perhaps the Seminole blood of his swampy state left a trace
of its combative nature there.

Payne was a preacher's son, and not the worst graduate of his class. His
real name is Lewis Thornton Powell.

He died without taking the hand of any living friend.

Even the squalid Atzerott was not so poor. I felt a pity for his
physical rather than his vital or spiritual peril. It seemed a
profanation to break the iron column of his neck, and give to the worm
his belted chest.

But I remember that he would have slain a sick old man.

The third condemned, although whimpering, had far more grit than I
anticipated; he was inquisitive and flippant-faced, and looked at the
noose flaunting before him, and the people gathered below, and the
haggard face of Atzerott, as if entirely conscious and incapable of
abstraction.

Harold would have enjoyed this execution vastly as a spectator. He was,
I think, capable of a greater degree of depravity than any of his
accomplices. Atzerott might have made a sneak thief, Booth a forger, but
Harold was not far from a professional pickpocket. He was keen-eyed,
insolent, idle, and, by a small experience in Houston street, would have
been qualified for a first-class "knuck." He had not, like the rest, any
political suggestion for the murder of the heads of the nation; and upon
the gallows, in his dirty felt hat, soiled cloth coat, light pantaloons
and stockings, he seemed unworthy of his manacles.

A very fussy Dutchman tied him up and fanned him, and he wept
forgetfully, but did not make a halt or absurd spectacle.

Atzerott was my ideal of a man to be hung--a dilution of Wallack's
rendering of the last hours of Fagan, the Jew; a sort of sick man, quite
garrulous and smitten, with his head thrown forward, muttering to the
air, and a pallidness transparent through his dirt as he jabbered
prayers and pleas confusedly, and looked in a complaining sort of way at
the noose, as if not quite certain that it might not have designs upon
him.

He wore a greyish coat, black vest, light pantaloons and slippers, and a
white affair on his head, perhaps a handkerchief.

His spiritual adviser stood behind him, evidently disgusted with him.

Atzerott lost his life through too much gabbing. He could have had
serious designs upon nothing greater than a chicken, but talked
assassination with the silent and absolute Booth, until entrapped into
conspiracy and the gallows, much against his calculation. This man was
visited by his mother and a poor, ignorant woman with whom he cohabited.
He was the picture of despair, and died ridiculously, whistling up his
courage.

These were the dramatis personę, no more to be sketched, no more to be
cross-examined, no more to be shackled, soon to be cold in their
coffins.

They were, altogether, a motley and miserable set. Ravaillae might have
looked well swinging in chains; Charlotte Corday is said to have died
like an actress; Beale hung not without dignity, but these people,
aspiring to overturn a nation, bore the appearance of a troop of
ignorant folks, expiating the blood-shed of a brawl.

When General Hartrauft ceased reading there was momentary lull, broken
only by the cadences of the priests.

Then the Rev. Mr. Gillette addressed the spectators in a deep impressive
tone. The prisoner, Lewis Thornton Powell, otherwise Payne, requested
him to thus publicly and sincerely return his thanks to General
Hartrauft, the other officers, the soldiers, and all persons who had
charge of him and had attended him. Not one unkind word, look, or
gesture, had been given to him by any one. Dr. Gillette then followed in
a fervent prayer in behalf of the prisoner, during which Payne's eyes
momentarily filled with tears, and he followed in the prayer with
visible feeling.

Rev. Dr. Olds followed, saying in behalf of the prisoner, David E.
Harold, that he tendered his forgiveness to all who had wronged him, and
asked the forgiveness of all whom he had wronged. He gave his thanks to
the officers and guards for kindnesses rendered him. He hoped that he
had died in charity with all men and at peace with God. Dr. Olds
concluded with a feeling prayer for the prisoner.

Rev. Dr. Butler then made a similar return of thanks on behalf of George
A. Atzerott for kindness received from his guards and attendants, and
concluded with an earnest invocation in behalf of the criminal, saying
that the blood of Jesus cleanses from all sin, and asking that God
Almighty might have mercy upon this man.

The solemnity of this portion of the scene may be imagined, the several
clergyman speaking in order the dying testament of their clients, and
making the hot hours fresh with the soft harmonies of their
benedictions.

The two holy fathers having received Mrs. Surratt's confession, after
the custom of their creed observed silence. In this, as in other
respects, Mrs. Surratt's last hours were entirely modest and womanly.

The stage was still filled with people; the crisis of the occasion had
come; the chairs were all withdrawn, and the condemned stood upon their
feet.

The process of tying the limbs began.

It was with a shudder, almost a blush, that I saw an officer gather the
ropes tightly three times about the robes of Mrs. Surratt, and bind her
ankles with cords. She half fainted, and sank backward upon the
attendants, her limbs yielding to the extremity of her terror, but
uttering no cry, only a kind of sick groaning, like one in the weakness
of fever, when a wry medicine must be taken.

Payne, with his feet firmly laced together, stood straight as one of the
scaffold beams, and braced himself up so stoutly that this in part
prevented the breaking of his neck.

Harold stood well beneath the drop, still whimpering at the lips, but
taut, and short, and boyish.

Atzerott, in his grovelling attitude, while they tied him began to
indulge in his old vice of gabbing. He evidently wished to make his
finale more effective than his previous cowardly role, and perhaps was
strengthening his fortitude with a speech, as we sometimes do of dark
nights with a whistle.

"Gentlemen," he said, with a sort of choke and gasp, "take ware." He
evidently meant "beware," or "take care," and confounded them.

Again, when the white death-cap was drawn over his face, he continued to
cry out under it, once saying, "Good bye, shentlemens, who is before me
now;" and again, "May we meet in the other world." Finally he drifted
away with low, half-intelligible ebullitions, as "God help me," "oh!
oh!" and the like.

The rest said nothing, except Mrs. Surratt, who asked to be supported,
that she might not fall, but Harold protested against the knot with
which he was to be dislocated, it being as huge as one's double fist.

In fact all the mechanical preparations were clumsy and inartistic, and
the final scenes of the execution, therefore, revolting in the extreme.
When the death-caps were all drawn over the faces of the prisoners, and
they stood in line in the awful suspense between absolute life and
immediate death, a man at the neck of each adjusting the cord, the knot
beneath the ears of each protruded five or six inches, and the cord was
so thick that it could not be made to press tightly against the flesh.

So they stood, while nearly a thousand faces from window, roof, wall,
yard and housetop, gazed, the scaffold behind them still densely packed
with the assistants, and the four executioners beneath, standing at
their swinging beams. The priests continued to murmur prayers. The
people were dumb, as if each witness stood alone with none near by to
talk to him.

An instant this continued, while an officer on the plot before, motioned
back the assistants, and then with a forward thrust of his hand,
signaled the executioners.

The great beams were darted against the props simultaneously. The two
traps fell with a slam. The four bodies dropped like a single thing,
outside the yet crowded remnant of the gallows floor, and swayed and
turned, to and fro, here and there, forward and backward, and with many
a helpless spasm, while the spectators took a little rush forward, and
the ropes were taut as the struggling pulses of the dying.

Mrs. Surratt's neck was broken immediately; she scarcely drew one
breath. Her short woman's figure, with the skirts looped closely about
it, merely dangled by the vibration of her swift descent, and with the
knot holding true under the ear, her head leaned sideways, and her
pinioned arms seemed content with their confinement.

Payne died a horrible death; the knot slipped to the back of his neck,
and bent his head forward on his breast, so that he strangled as he drew
his deep chest almost to his chin, and the knees contracted till they
almost seemed to touch his abdomen. The veins in his great wrists were
like whip-cords, expanded to twice their natural dimensions, and the
huge neck grew almost black with the dark blood that rushed in a flood
to the circling rope. A long while he swayed and twisted and struggled,
till at last nature ceased her rebellion and life went out unwillingly.

Harold also passed through some struggles. It is doubtful that his neck
was broken. The perspiration dripped from his feet, and he swung in the
hot noon just living enough to make death irritable.

Atzerott died easily. Life did not care to fight for his possession.

The two central figures lived long after the two upon the flanks.

There they hung, bundles of carcass and old clothes, four in a row, and
past all conspiracy or ambition, the river rolling by without a sound,
and men watching them with a shiver, while the heat of the day seemed
suddenly abated, as if by the sudden opening of a tomb.

The officers conversed in a half-audible tone; the reporters put up
their books; the assistants descended from the gallows; and the medical
men drew near. No wind stirred the unbreathing bodies, they were stone
dead.

The bodies were allowed to hang about twenty minutes, when surgeon Otis,
U. S. V., and Assistant Surgeons Woodward and Porter, U. S. A., examined
them and pronounced all dead. In about ten minutes more a ladder was
placed against the scaffold preparatory to cutting the bodies down. An
over-zealous soldier on the platform reached over and severed the cord,
letting one body fall with a thump, when he was immediately ordered down
and reprimanded. The body of Atzerott was placed in a strong white pine
box, and the other bodies cut down in the following order, Harold,
Powell, and Mrs. Surratt.

The carcasses thus recovered were given over to a squad of soldiers and
each placed in a pine box without uncovering the faces. The boxes were
forthwith placed in the pits prepared for them, and directly all but the
memory of their offense passed from the recording daylight.

In the gloomy shadow of that arsenal lies all the motive, and essay of a
crime which might have changed the destinies of our race. It will be
forever a place of suspicion and marvel, the haunted spot of the
Capitol, and the terror of all who to end a fancied evil, cut their way
to right with a dagger.




EXTRA MURAL SCENES.


As everything connected with this expiation will be greedily read I
compile from gossip and report a statement of the last intramural hours
of the prisoners.

During the morning a female friend of Atzerott, from Port Tobacco, had
an interview with him--she leaving him about eleven o'clock. He made the
following statement:

He took a room at the Kirkwood House on Thursday, in order to get a pass
from Vice-President Johnson to go to Richmond. Booth was to lease the
Richmond theater and the President was to be invited to attend it when
visiting Richmond, and captured there. Harold brought the pistol and
knife to the room about half-past two o'clock on Friday. He (Atzerott)
said he would have nothing to do with the murder of Johnson, when Booth
said that Harold had more courage than Atzerott, and he wanted Atzerott
to be with Harold to urge him to do it. There was a meeting at a
restaurant about the middle of March, at which John Surratt, O'Laughlin,
Booth, Arnold, Payne, Harold and himself were present, when a plan to
capture the President was discussed. They had heard the President was to
visit a camp, and they proposed to capture him, coach and all, drive
through long old fields to "T. B.," where the coach was to be left and
fresh horses were to be got, and the party would proceed to the river to
take a boat. Harold took a buggy to "T. B." in anticipation that Mr.
Lincoln would be captured, and he was to go with the party to the river.
Slavery had put him on the side of the South. He had heard it preached
in church that the curse of God was upon the slaves, for they were
turned black. He always hated the nigger and felt that they should be
kept in ignorance. He had not received any money from Booth, although he
had been promised that if they were successful they should never want,
that they would be honored throughout the South, and that they could
secure an exchange of prisoners and the recognition of the confederacy.

Harold slept well several hours, but most of the night he was sitting
up, either engaged with his pastor, Rev. Mr. Olds, of Christ Church, or
in prayer. His sisters were with him from an early hour this morning to
twelve o'clock; they being present when he partook of the sacrament at
the hands of Dr. Olds. The parting was particularly affecting. Harold
conversed freely with them, and expressed himself prepared to die.

Powell conversed with Dr. Gillette and Dr. Striker on religious topics
during the morning, sitting erect, as he did in the court-room. From his
conversation it appears that he was raised religiously, and belonged to
the Baptist church until after the breaking out of the rebellion. He
appeared to be sincerely repentant, and in his cell shed tears freely.
He gave his advisers several commissions of a private character, and
stated that he was willing to meet his God, asking all men to forgive,
and forgiving all who had done aught against him. Colonel Doster, his
counsel, also took leave of him during the morning, as well as with
Atzerott.

Mrs. Surratt's daughter was with her at an early hour. One of her male
friends also had an interview with her, and received directions
concerning the disposition of her property. During the night and morning
she received the ministrations of Revs. J. A. Walter and B. F. Wigett,
and conversed freely with them, expressing, while protesting her
innocence, her willingness to meet her God. Her counsel, Messrs. Aiken &
Clampitt, took leave of her during the morning.

A singular feature of this execution was the arrest of General Hancock
this morning, who appeared in court, to answer a writ of _habeas
corpus_, with a full staff. It is well to notice that this execution by
military order has not, therefore, passed without civil protest.
President Johnson extended to General Hancock the right conferred upon
the President by Congress of setting aside the _habeas corpus_.

As usual in such executions as this, there were many stirring outside
episodes, and much shrewd mixture of tragedy and business. A
photographer took note of the scene in all its phases, from a window of
a portion of the jail. Six artists were present, and thirty seven
special correspondents, who came to Washington only for this occasion.

The passes to the execution were written not printed, and, excepting the
bungling mechanism of the scaffold, the sorrowful event went off with
more than usual good order. Every body feels relieved to night, because
half of the crime is buried.

On Monday, Mudd, Arnold, O'Laughlin, and Spangler, will go northward to
prison. The three former for life, the last for six years.

Applications for pardon were made yesterday and to-day to President
Johnson, by Mrs. Samuel Mudd, who is quite woe-begone and disappointed,
in behalf of her husband, by the sisters of Harold, and by Miss Ann
Surratt. Harold's sisters, dressed in full mourning and heavily veiled,
made their appearance at the White House, for the purpose of interceding
with the President in behalf of their brother. Failing to see the
President, they addressed a note to Mrs. Johnson, and expressed a hope
that she would not turn a deaf ear to their pleadings. Mrs. Johnson
being quite sick, it was deemed expedient by the ushers not to deliver
the note, when, as a last expedient, the ladies asked permission to
forward a note to Mrs. Patterson, the President's daughter, which
privilege was not granted, as Mrs. Patterson is also quite indisposed
to-day. The poor girls went away with their last hope shattered.

The misery of the pretty and heart-broken daughter of Mrs. Surratt is
the talk of the city. This girl appears to have loved her mother with
all the petulant passion of a child. She visited her constantly, and
to-day made so stirring an effort to obtain her life that her devotion
takes half the disgrace from the mother. She got the priests to speak in
her behalf. Early to-day she knelt in the cell at her mother's feet, and
sobbed, with now and then a pitiful scream till the gloomy corridors
rang. She endeavored to win from Payne a statement that her mother was
not accessory, and, as a last resort, flung herself upon the steps of
the White-House, and made that portal memorable by her filial tears.
About half-past 8 o'clock this morning, Miss Surratt, accompanied by a
female friend, again visited the White-House, for the purpose of
obtaining an interview with the President. The latter having given
orders that he would receive no one to-day, the door-keeper stopped Miss
Surratt at the foot of the steps leading up to the President's office,
and would not permit her to proceed further. She then asked permission
to see General Muzzy, the president's military secretary, who promptly
answered the summons, and came down stairs where Miss Surratt was
standing. As soon as the general made his appearance, Miss Surratt threw
herself upon her knees before him, and catching him by the coat, with
loud sobs and streaming eyes, implored him to assist her in obtaining a
hearing with the President. General Muzzy, in as tender a manner as
possible, informed Miss Surratt that he could not comply with her
request, as President Johnson's orders were imperative, and he would
receive no one. Upon General Muzzy returning to his office, Miss Surratt
threw herself upon the stair steps, where she remained a considerable
length of time, sobbing aloud in the greatest anguish, protesting her
mother's innocence, and imploring every one who came near her to
intercede in her mother's behalf.

While thus weeping she declared her mother was too good and kind to be
guilty of the enormous crime of which she was convicted, and asserted
that if her mother was put to death she wished to die also. She was
finally allowed to sit in the east room, where she lay in wait for all
who entered, hoping to make them efficacious in her behalf, all the
while uttering her weary heart in a woman's touching cries: but at last,
certain of disappointment, she drove again to the jail and lay in her
mother's cell, with the heavy face of one who brings ill-news. The
parting will consecrate those gloomy walls. The daughter saw the mother
pinioned and kissed her wet face as she went shuddering to the scaffold.
The last words of Mrs. Surratt, as she went out of the jail, were
addressed to a gentleman whom she had known.

"Good-bye, take care of Annie."

To-night there is crape on the door of the Surratt's, and a lonely lamp
shines at a single window, where the sad orphan is thinking of her
bereavement.

The bodies of the dead have been applied for but at present will not
given up.

Judge Holt was petitioned all last night for the lives and liberties of
the condemned, but he was inexorable.

The soldiers who hung the condemned were appointed against their will. I
forbear to give their names as they do not wish the repute of
executioners. They all belonged to the Fourteenth Veteran Reserve
Infantry.

Here endeth the story of this tragedy upon a tragedy. All are glad that
it is done. I am glad particularly. It has cost me how many journeying
to Washington, how many hot midnights at the telegraph office, how many
gallops into wild places, and how much revolting familiarity with blood.

The end has come. The slain, both good and evil, are in their graves,
out of the reach of hangman and assassin. Only the correspondent never
dies. He is the true Pantheist--going out of nature for a week, but
bursting forth afresh in a day, and so insinuating himself into the
history of our era that it is beginning to be hard to find out where the
event ends and the writer begins.

Next week Ford's Theater opens with the "Octoroon." The gas will be
pearly as ever; the scenes as rich. The blood-stained foot-lights will
flash as of old upon merry and mimicking faces. So the world has its
tragic ebullitions; but its real career is comedy. Over the graves of
the good and the scaffolds of the evil, sits the leering Momus across
whose face death sometimes brings sleep, but never a wrinkle.




Produced by Afra Ullah and PG Distributed Proofreaders




THE POSITIVE SCHOOL OF CRIMINOLOGY

Three Lectures

Given at the University of Naples, Italy on April 22, 23 and 24, 1901


By Enrico Ferri

Translated by Ernest Untermann


Chicago

Charles H. Kerr & Company

1908





THE POSITIVE SCHOOL OF CRIMINOLOGY


I.

My Friends:

When, in the turmoil of my daily occupation, I received an invitation,
several months ago, from several hundred students of this famous
university, to give them a brief summary, in short special lectures, of
the principal and fundamental conclusions of criminal sociology, I
gladly accepted, because this invitation fell in with two ideals of
mine. These two ideals are stirring my heart and are the secret of my
life. In the first place, this invitation chimed with the ideal of my
personal life, namely, to diffuse and propagate among my brothers the
scientific ideas, which my brain has accumulated, not through any merit
of mine, but thanks to the lucky prize inherited from my mother in the
lottery of life. And the second ideal which this invitation called up
before my mind's vision was this: The ideal of young people of Italy,
united in morals and intellectual pursuits, feeling in their social
lives the glow of a great aim. It would matter little whether this aim
would agree with my own ideas or be opposed to them, so long as it
should be an ideal which would lift the aspirations of the young people
out of the fatal grasp of egoistic interests. Of course, we positivists
know very well, that the material requirements of life shape and
determine also the moral and intellectual aims of human consciousness.
But positive science declares the following to be the indispensable
requirement for the regeneration of human ideals: Without an ideal,
neither an individual nor a collectivity can live, without it humanity
is dead or dying. For it is the fire of an ideal which renders the life
of each one of us possible, useful and fertile. And only by its help can
each one of us, in the more or less short course of his or her
existence, leave behind traces for the benefit of fellow-beings. The
invitation extended to me proves that the students of Naples believe in
the inspiring existence of such an ideal of science, and are anxious to
learn more about ideas, with which the entire world of the present day
is occupied, and whose life-giving breath enters even through the
windows of the dry courtrooms, when their doors are closed against it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us now speak of this new science, which has become known in Italy by
the name of the Positive School of Criminology. This science, the same
as every other phenomenon of scientific evolution, cannot be
shortsightedly or conceitedly attributed to the arbitrary initiative of
this or that thinker, this or that scientist. We must rather regard it
as a natural product, a necessary phenomenon, in the development of that
sad and somber department of science which deals with the disease of
crime. It is this plague of crime which forms such a gloomy and painful
contrast with the splendor of present-day civilization. The 19th century
has won a great victory over mortality and infectious diseases by means
of the masterful progress of physiology and natural science. But while
contagious diseases have gradually diminished, we see on the other hand
that moral diseases are growing more numerous in our so-called
civilization. While typhoid fever, smallpox, cholera and diphtheria
retreated before the remedies which enlightened science applied by means
of the experimental method, removing their concrete causes, we see on
the other hand that insanity, suicide and crime, that painful trinity,
are growing apace. And this makes it very evident that the science which
is principally, if not exclusively, engaged in studying these phenomena
of social disease, should feel the necessity of finding a more exact
diagnosis of these moral diseases of society, in order to arrive at some
effective and more humane remedy, which should more victoriously combat
this somber trinity of insanity, suicide and crime.

The science of positive criminology arose in the last quarter of the
19th century, as a result of this strange contrast, which would be
inexplicable, if we could not discover historical and scientific reasons
for its existence. And it is indeed a strange contrast that Italy should
have arrived at a perfect theoretical development of a classical school
of criminology, while there persists, on the other hand, the disgraceful
condition that criminality assumes dimensions never before observed in
this country, so that the science of criminology cannot stem the tide of
crime in high and low circles. It is for this reason, that the positive
school of criminology arises out of the very nature of things, the same
as every other line of science. It is based on the conditions of our
daily life. It would indeed be conceited on our part to claim that we,
who are the originators of this new science and its new conclusions,
deserve alone the credit for its existence. The brain of the scientist
is rather a sort of electrical accumulator, which feels and assimilates
the vibrations and heart-beats of life, its splendor and its shame, and
derives therefrom the conviction that it must of necessity provide for
definite social wants. And on the other hand, it would be an evidence of
intellectual short-sightedness on the part of the positivist man of
science, if he did not recognize the historical accomplishments, which
his predecessors on the field of science have left behind as indelible
traces of their struggle against the unknown in that brilliant and
irksome domain. For this reason, the adherents of the positive school of
criminology feel the most sincere reverence for the classic school of
criminology. And I am glad today, in accepting the invitation of the
students of Naples, to say, that this is another reason why their
invitation was welcome to me. It is now 16 years since I gave in this
same hall a lecture on positive criminology, which was then in its
initial stages. It was in 1885, when I had the opportunity to outline
the first principles of the positive school of criminology, at the
invitation of other students, who preceded you on the periodic waves of
the intellectual generations. And the renewal of this opportunity gave
me so much moral satisfaction that, I could not under any circumstances
decline your invitation. Then too, the Neapolitan Atheneum has
maintained the reputation of the Italian mind in the 19th century, also
in that science which even foreign scientists admit to be our specialty,
namely the science of criminology. In fact, aside from the two terrible
books of the Digest, and from the practical criminologists of the Middle
Ages who continued the study of criminality, the modern world opened a
glorious page in the progress of criminal science with the modest little
book of Cesare Beccaria. This progress leads from Cesare Beccaria, by
way of Francesco Carrara, to Enrico Pessina.

Enrico Pessina alone remains of the two giants who concluded the cycle
of classic school of criminology. In a lucid moment of his scientific
consciousness, which soon reverted to the old abstract and metaphysical
theories, he announced in an introductory statement in 1879, that
criminal justice would have to rejuvenate itself in the pure bath of the
natural sciences and substitute in place of abstraction the living and
concrete study of facts. Naturally every scientist has his function and
historical significance; and we cannot expect that a brain which has
arrived at the end of its career should turn towards a new direction. At
any rate, it is a significant fact that this most renowned
representative of the classic school of criminology should have pointed
out this need of his special science in this same university of Naples,
one year after the inauguration of the positive school of criminology,
that he should have looked forward to a time when the study of natural
and positive facts would set to rights the old juridical abstractions.
And there is still another precedent in the history of this university,
which makes scientific propaganda at this place very agreeable for a
positivist. It is that six years before that introductory statement by
Pessina, Giovanni Bovio gave lectures at this university, which he
published later on under the title of "A Critical Study of Criminal
Law." Giovanni Bovio performed in this monograph the function of a
critic, but the historical time of his thought, prevented him from
taking part in the construction of a new science. However, he prepared
the ground for new ideas, by pointing out all the rifts and weaknesses
of the old building. Bovio maintained that which Gioberti, Ellero,
Conforti, Tissol had already maintained, namely that it is impossible to
solve the problem which is still the theoretical foundation of the
classic school of criminology, the problem of the relation between
punishment and crime. No man, no scientist, no legislator, no judge, has
ever been able to indicate any absolute standard, which would enable us
to say that equity demands a definite punishment for a definite crime.
We can find some opportunistic expedient, but not a solution of the
problem. Of course, if we could decide which is the gravest crime, then
we could also decide on the heaviest sentence and formulate a descending
scale which would establish the relative fitting proportions between
crime and punishment. If it is agreed that patricide is the gravest
crime, we meet out the heaviest sentence, death or imprisonment for
life, and then we can agree on a descending scale of crime and on a
parallel scale of punishments. But the problem begins right with the
first stone of the structure, not with the succeeding steps. Which is
the greatest penalty proportional to the crime of patricide? Neither
science, nor legislation, nor moral consciousness, can offer an absolute
standard. Some say: The greatest penalty is death. Others say: No,
imprisonment for life. Still others say: Neither death, nor imprisonment
for life, but only imprisonment for a time. And if imprisonment for a
time is to be the highest penalty, how many years shall it last
--thirty, or twenty-five, or ten?

No man can set up any absolute standard in this matter. Giovanni Bovio
thus arrived at the conclusion that this internal contradiction in the
science of criminology was the inevitable fate of human justice, and
that this justice, struggling in the grasp of this internal
contradiction, must turn to the civil law and ask for help in its
weakness. The same thought had already been illumined by a ray from the
bright mind of Filangieri, who died all too soon. And we can derive from
this fact the historical rule that the most barbarian conditions of
humanity show a prevalence of a criminal code which punishes without
healing; and that the gradual progress of civilization will give rise
to the opposite conception of healing without punishing.

Thus it happens that this university of Naples, in which the illustrious
representative of the classic school of criminology realized the
necessity of its regeneration, and in which Bovio foresaw its sterility,
has younger teachers now who keep alive the fire of the positivist
tendency in criminal science, such as Penta, Zuccarelli, and others,
whom you know. Nevertheless I feel that this faculty of jurisprudence
still lacks oxygen in the study of criminal law, because its thought is
still influenced by the overwhelming authority of the name of Enrico
Pessina. And it is easy to understand that there, where the majestic
tree spreads out its branches towards the blue vault, the young plant
feels deprived of light and air, while it might have grown strong and
beautiful in another place.

The positive school of criminology, then, was born in our own Italy
through the singular attraction of the Italian mind toward the study of
criminology; and its birth is also due to the peculiar condition our
country with its great and strange contrast between the theoretical
doctrines and the painful fact of an ever increasing criminality.

The positive school of criminology was inaugurate by the work of Cesare
Lombroso, in 1872. From 1872 to 1876 he opened a new way for the study
of criminality by demonstrating in his own person that we must first
understand the criminal who offends, before we can study and understand
his crime. Lombroso studied the prisoners in the various penitentiaries
of Italy from the point of view of anthropology. And he compiled his
studies in the reports of the Lombardian Institute of Science and
Literature, and published them later together in his work "Criminal
Man." The first edition of this work (1876) remained almost unnoticed,
either because its scientific material was meager, or because Cesare
Lombroso had not yet drawn any general scientific conclusions, which
could have attracted the attention of the world of science and law. But
simultaneously with its second edition (1878) there appeared two
monographs, which constituted the embryo of the new school,
supplementing the anthropological studies of Lombroso with conclusions
and systematizations from the point of view of sociology and law.
Raffaele Garofalo published in the Neapolitan Journal of Philosophy and
Literature an essay on criminality, in which he declared that the
dangerousness of the criminal was the criterion by which society should
measure the function of its defense against the disease of crime. And in
the same year, 1878, I took occasion to publish a monograph on the
denial of free will and personal responsibility, in which I declared
frankly that from now on the science of crime and punishment must look
for the fundamental facts of a science of social defense against crime
in the human and social life itself. The simultaneous publication of
these three monographs caused a stir. The teachers of classic
criminology, who had taken kindly to the recommendations of Pessina and
Ellero, urging them to study the natural sources of crime, met the new
ideas with contempt, when the new methods made a determined and radical
departure, and became not only the critics, but the zealous opponents of
the new theories. And this is easy to understand. For the struggle for
existence is an irresistible law of nature, as well for the thousands of
germs scattered to the winds by the oak, as for the ideas which grow in
the brain of man. But persecutions, calumnies, criticisms, and
opposition are powerless against an idea, if it carries within itself
the germ of truth. Moreover, we should look upon this phenomenon of a
repugnance in the average intellect (whether of the ordinary man or the
scientist) for all new ideas as a natural function. For when the brain
of some man has felt the light of a new idea, a sneering criticism
serves us a touchstone for it. If the idea is wrong, it will fall by the
wayside; if it is right, then criticisms, opposition and persecution
will cull the golden kernel from the unsightly shell, and the idea will
march victoriously over everything and everybody. It is so in all walks
of life--in art, in politics, in science. Every new idea will rouse
against itself naturally and inevitably the opposition of the accustomed
thoughts. This is so true, that when Cesare Beccaria opened the great
historic cycle of the classic school of criminology, he was assaulted by
the critics of his time with the same indictments which were brought
against us a century later.

When Cesare Beccaria printed his book on crime and penalties in 1774
under a false date and place of publication, reflecting the aspirations
which gave rise to the impending hurricane of the French revolution;
when he hurled himself against all that was barbarian in the mediaeval
laws and set loose a storm of enthusiasm among the encyclopedists, and
even some of the members of government, in France, he was met by a wave
of opposition, calumny and accusation on the part of the majority of
jurists, judges and lights of philosophy. The abbé Jachinci published
four volumes against Beccaria, calling him the destroyer of justice and
morality, simply because he had combatted the tortures and the death
penalty.

The tortures, which we incorrectly ascribe to the mental brutality of
the judges of those times, were but a logical consequence of the
contemporaneous theories. It was felt that in order to condemn a man,
one must have the certainty of his guilty, and it was said that the best
means of obtaining tins certainty, the queen of proofs, was the
confession of the criminal. And if the criminal denied his guilt, it was
necessary to have recourse to torture, in order to force him to a
confession which he withheld from fear of the penalty. The torture
soothed, so to say, the conscience of the judge, who was free to condemn
as soon as he had obtained a confession. Cesare Beccaria rose with
others against the torture. Thereupon the judges and jurists protested
that penal justice would be impossible, because it could not get any
information, since a man suspected of a crime would not confess his
guilt voluntarily. Hence they accused Beccaria of being the protector of
robbers and murderers, because he wanted to abolish the only means of
compelling them to a confession, the torture. But Cesare Beccaria had on
his side the magic power of truth. He was truly the electric accumulator
of his time, who gathered from its atmosphere the presage of the coming
revolution, the stirring of the human conscience. You can find a similar
illustration in the works of Daquin in Savoy, of Pinel in France, and of
Hach Take in England, who strove to bring about a revolution in the
treatment of the insane. This episode interests us especially, because
it is a perfect illustration of the way traveled by the positive school
of criminology. The insane were likewise considered to blame for their
insanity. At the dawn of the 19th century, the physician Hernroth still
wrote that insanity was a moral sin of the insane, because "no one
becomes insane, unless he forsakes the straight path of virtue and of
the fear of the Lord."

And on this assumption the insane were locked up in horrible dungeons,
loaded down with chains, tortured and beaten, for lo! their insanity was
their own fault.

At that period, Pinel advanced the revolutionary idea that insanity was
not a sin, but a disease like all other diseases. This idea is now a
commonplace, but in his time it revolutionized the world. It seemed as
though this innovation inaugurated by Pinel would overthrow the world
and the foundations of society. Well, two years before the storming of
the Bastile Pinel walked into the sanitarium of the Salpetriere and
committed the brave act of freeing the insane of the chains that weighed
them down. He demonstrated in practice that the insane, when freed of
their chains, became quieter, instead of creating wild disorder and
destruction. This great revolution of Pinel, Chiarugi, and others,
changed the attitude of the public mind toward the insane. While
formerly insanity had been regarded as a moral sin, the public
conscience, thanks to the enlightening work of science, henceforth had
to adapt itself to the truth that insanity is a disease like all
others, that a man does not become insane because he wants to, but that
he becomes insane through hereditary transmission and the influence of
the environment in which he lives, being predisposed toward insanity and
becoming insane under the pressure of circumstances.

The positive school of criminology accomplished the same revolution in
the views concerning the treatment of criminals that the above named men
of science accomplished for the treatment of the insane. The general
opinion of classic criminalists and of the people at large is that crime
involves a moral guilt, because it is due to the free will of the
individual who leaves the path of virtue and chooses the path of crime,
and therefore it must be suppressed by meeting it with a proportionate
quantity of punishment. This is to this day the current conception of
crime. And the illusion of a free human will (the only miraculous factor
in the eternal ocean of cause and effect) leads to the assumption that
one can choose freely between virtue and vice. How can you still believe
in the existence of a free will, when modern psychology armed with all
the instruments of positive modern research, denies that there is any
free will and demonstrates that every act of a human being is the
result of an interaction between the personality and the environment of
man?

And how is it possible to cling to that obsolete idea of moral guilt,
according to which every individual is supposed to have the free choice
to abandon virtue and give himself up to crime? The positive school of
criminology maintains, on the contrary, that it is not the criminal who
wills; in order to be a criminal it is rather necessary that the
individual should find himself permanently or transitorily in such
personal, physical and moral conditions, and live in such an
environment, which become for him a chain of cause and effect,
externally and internally, that disposes him toward crime. This is our
conclusion, which I anticipate, and it constitutes the vastly different
and opposite method, which the positive school of criminology employs as
compared to the leading principle of the classic school of criminal
science.

In this method, this essential principle of the positive school of
criminology, you will find another reason for the seemingly slow advance
of this school. That is very natural. If you consider the great reform
carried by the ideas of Cesare Beccaria into the criminal justice of
the Middle Age, you will see that the great classic school represents
but a small step forward, because it leaves the penal justice on the
same theoretical and practical basis which it had in the Middle Age and
in classic antiquity, that is to say, based on the idea of a moral
responsibility of the individual. For Beccaria, for Carrara, for their
predecessors, this idea is no more nor less than that mentioned in books
47 and 48 of the Digest: "The criminal is liable to punishment to the
extent that he is morally guilty of the crime he has committed." The
entire classic school is, therefore, nothing but a series of reforms.
Capital punishment has been abolished in some countries, likewise
torture, confiscation, corporal punishment. But nevertheless the immense
scientific movement of the classic school has remained a mere reform.

It has continued in the 19th century to look upon crime in the same way
that the Middle Age did: "Whoever commits murder or theft, is alone the
absolute arbiter to decide whether he wants to commit the crime or not."
This remains the foundation of the classic school of criminology. This
explains why it could travel on its way more rapidly than the positive
school of criminology. And yet, it took half a century from the time of
Beccaria, before the penal codes showed signs of the reformatory
influence of the classic school of criminology. So that it has also
taken quite a long time to establish it so well that it became accepted
by general consent, as it is today. The positive school of criminology
was born in 1878, and although it does not stand for a mere reform of
the methods of criminal justice, but for a complete and fundamental
transformation of criminal justice itself, it has already gone quite a
distance and made considerable conquests which begin to show in our
country. It is a fact that the penal code now in force in this country
represents a compromise, so far as the theory of personal responsibility
is concerned, between the old theory of free will and the conclusions of
the positive school which denies this free will.

You can find an illustration of this in the eloquent contortions of
phantastic logic in the essays on the criminal code written by a great
advocate of the classic school of criminology, Mario Pagano, this
admirable type of a scientist and patriot, who does not lock himself up
in the quiet egoism of his study, but feels the ideal of his time
stirring within him and gives up his life to it. He has written three
lines of a simple nudity that reveals much, in which he says: "A man is
responsible for the crimes which he commits; if, in committing a crime,
his will is half free, he is responsible to the extent of one-half; if
one-third, he is responsible one-third." There you have the
uncompromising and absolute classic theorem. But in the penal code of
1890, you will find that the famous article 45 intends to base the
responsibility for a crime on the simple will, to the exclusion of the
free will. However, the Italian judge has continued to base the exercise
of penal justice on the supposed existence of the free will, and
pretends not to know that the number of scientists denying the free will
is growing. Now, how is it possible that so terrible an office as that
of sentencing criminals retains its stability or vacillates, according
to whether the first who denies the existence of a free will deprives
this function of its foundation?

Truly, it is said that this question has been too difficult for the new
Italian penal code. And, for this reason, it was thought best to base
the responsibility for a crime on the idea that a man is guilty simply
for the reason that he wanted to commit the crime; and that he is not
responsible if he did not want to commit it. But this is an eclectic way
out of the difficulty, which settles nothing, for in the same code we
have the rule that involuntary criminals are also punished, so that
involuntary killing and wounding are punished with imprisonment the same
as voluntary deeds of this kind. We have heard it said in such cases
that the result may not have been intended, but the action bringing it
about was. If a hunter shoots through a hedge and kills or wounds a
person, he did not intend to kill, and yet he is held responsible
because his first act, the shooting, was voluntary.

That statement applies to involuntary crimes, which are committed by
some positive act. But what about involuntary crimes of omission? In a
railway station, where the movements of trains represent the daily whirl
of traffic in men, things, and ideas, every switch is a delicate
instrument which may cause a derailment. The railway management places a
switchman on duty at this delicate post. But in a moment of fatigue, or
because he had to work inhumanly long hours of work, which exhausted all
his nervous elasticity, or for other reasons, the switchman forgets to
set the switch and causes a railroad accident, in which people are
killed and wounded. Can it be said that he intended the first act?
Assuredly not, for he did not intend anything and did not do anything.
The hunter who fires a shot has at least had the intention of shooting.
But the switchman did not want to forget (for in that case he would be
indirectly to blame); he has simply forgotten from sheer fatigue to do
his duty; he has had no intention whatever, and yet you hold him
responsible in spite of all that! The fundamental logic of your
reasoning in this case corresponds to the logic of the things. Does it
not happen every day in the administration of justice that the judges
forget about the neutral expedient of the legislator who devised this
relative progress of the penal code, which pretends to base the
responsibility of a man on the neutral and naive criterion of a will
without freedom of will? Do they not follow their old mental habits in
the administration of justice and apply the obsolete criterion of the
free will, which the legislator thought fit to abandon? We see, then,
as a result of this imperfect and insincere innovation in penal
legislation this flagrant contradiction, that the magistrates assume the
existence of a free will, while the legislator has decided that it shall
not be assumed. Now, in science as well as in legislation, we should
follow a direct and logical line, such as that of the classic school or
the positive school of criminology. But whoever thinks he has solved a
problem when he gives us a solution which is neither fish nor fowl,
comes to the most absurd and iniquitous conclusions. You see what
happens every day. If to-morrow some beastly and incomprehensible crime
is committed, the conscience of the judge is troubled by this question:
Was the person who committed this crime morally free to act or not? He
may also invoke the help of legislation, and he may take refuge in
article 46,[A] or in that compromise of article 47,[B] which admits
a responsibility of one-half or one-third, and he would decide on a
penalty of one-half or one-third.

All this may take place in the case of a grave and strange crime. And on
the other hand, go to the municipal courts or to the police courts,
where the magic lantern of justice throws its rays upon the nameless
human beings who have stolen a bundle of wood in a hard winter, or who
have slapped some one in the face during a brawl in a saloon.
And if they should find a defending lawyer who would demand the
appointment of a medical expert, watch the reception he would get from
the judge. When justice is surprised by a beastly and strange crime, it
feels the entire foundation of its premises shaking, it halts for a
moment, it calls in the help of legal medicine, and reflects before it
sentences. But in the case of those poor nameless creatures, justice
does not stop to consider whether that microbe in the criminal world who
steals under the influence of hereditary or acquired degeneration, or in
the delirium of chronic hunger, is not worthy of more pity. It rather
replies with a mephistophelian grin when he begs for a humane
understanding of his case.

[A] Article 46: "A person is not subject to punishment, if at the moment
of his deed he was in a mental condition which deprived him of
consciousness or of the freedom of action. But if the judge considers it
dangerous to acquit the prisoner, he has to transfer him to the care of
the proper authorities, who will take the necessary precautions."

[B] Article 47: "If the mental condition mentioned in the foregoing
article was such as to considerably decrease the responsibility, without
eliminating it entirely, the penalty fixed upon the crime committed is
reduced according to the following rules:

"I. In place of penitentiary, imprisonment for not less than six years.

"II. In place of the permanent loss of civic rights, a loss of these
rights for a stipulated time.

"III. Whenever it is a question of a penalty of more than twelve years,
it is reduced to from three to ten years; if of more than six years, but
not more than twelve, it is reduced to from one to five years; in other
cases, the reduction is to be one-half of the ordinary penalty.

"IV. A fine is reduced to one-half.

"V. If the penalty would be a restriction of personal liberty, the judge
may order the prisoner to a workhouse, until the proper authorities
object, when the remainder of the sentence is carried out in the usual
manner."

It is true that there is now and then in those halls of justice, which
remain all too frequently closed to the living wave of public sentiment,
some more intelligent and serene judge who is touched by this painful
understanding of the actual human life. Then he may, under the illogical
conditions of penal justice, with its compromise between the exactness
of the classic and that of the positive school of criminology, seek for
some expedient which may restore him to equanimity.

In 1832, France introduced a penal innovation, which seemed to represent
an advance on the field of justice, but which is in reality a denial of
justice: The expedient of _extenuating circumstances_. The judge does
not ask for the advice of the court physician in the case of some
forlorn criminal, but condemns him without a word of rebuke to society
for its complicity. But in order to assuage his own conscience he grants
him extenuating circumstances, which seem a concession of justice, but
are, in reality, a denial of justice. For you either believe that a man
is responsible for his crime, and in that case the concession of
extenuating circumstances is a hypocrisy; or you grant them in good
faith, and then you admit that the man was in circumstances which
reduced his moral responsibility, and thereby the extenuating
circumstances become a denial of justice. For if your conviction
concerning such circumstances were sincere, you would go to the bottom
of them and examine with the light of your understanding all those
innumerable conditions which contribute toward those extenuating
circumstances. But what are those extenuating circumstances? Family
conditions? Take it that a child is left alone by its parents, who are
swallowed up in the whirl of modern industry, which overthrows the laws
of nature and forbids the necessary rest, because steam engines do not
get tired and day work must be followed by night work, so that the
setting of the sun is no longer the signal for the laborer to rest, but
to begin a new shift of work. Take it that this applies not alone to
adults, but also to human beings in the growing stage, whose muscular
power may yield some profit for the capitalists. Take it that even the
mother, during the period of sacred maternity, becomes a cog in the
machinery of industry. And you will understand that the child must grow
up, left to its own resources, in the filth of life, and that its
history will be inscribed in criminal statistics, which are the shame of
our so-called civilization.

Of course, in this first lecture I cannot give you even a glimpse of the
positive results of that modern science which has studied the criminal
and his environment instead of his crimes. And I must, therefore, limit
myself to a few hints concerning the historical origin of the positive
school of criminology. I ought to tell you something concerning the
question of free will. But you will understand that such a momentous
question, which is worthy of a deep study of the many-sided physical,
moral, intellectual life, cannot be summed up in a few short words. I
can only say that the tendency of modern natural sciences, in physiology
as well as psychology, has overruled the illusions of those who would
fain persist in watching psychological phenomena merely within
themselves and think that they can understand them without any other
means. On the contrary, positive science, backed by the testimony of
anthropology and of the study of the environment, has arrived at the
following conclusions: The admission of a free will is out of the
question. For if the free will is but an illusion of our internal being,
it is not a real faculty possessed by the human mind. Free will would
imply that the human will, confronted by the choice of making
voluntarily a certain determination, has the last decisive word under
the pressure of circumstances contending for and against this decision;
that it is free to decide for or against a certain course independently
of internal and external circumstances, which play upon it, according to
the laws of cause and effect.

Take it that a man has insulted me. I leave the place in which I have
been insulted, and with me goes the suggestion of forgiveness or of
murder and vengeance. And then it is assumed that a man has his complete
free will, unless he is influenced by circumstances explicitly
enumerated by the law, such as minority, congenital deaf-muteness,
insanity, habitual drunkenness and, to a certain extent, violent
passion. If a man is not in a condition mentioned in this list, he is
considered in possession of his free will, and if he murders he is held
morally responsible and therefore punished.

This illusion of a free will has its source in our inner consciousness,
and is due solely to the ignorance in which we find ourselves concerning
the various motives and different external and internal conditions which
press upon our mind at the moment of decision.

If a man knows the principal causes which determine a certain
phenomenon, he says that this phenomenon is inevitable. If he does not
know them, he considers it as an accident, and this corresponds in the
physical field to the arbitrary phenomenon of the human will which does
not know whether it shall decide this way or that. For instance, some of
us were of the opinion, and many still are, that the coming and going of
meteorological phenomena was accidental and could not he foreseen. But
in the meantime, science has demonstrated that they are likewise subject
to the law of causality, because it discovered the causes which enable
us to foresee their course. Thus weather prognosis has made wonderful
progress by the help of a network of telegraphically connected
meteorological stations, which succeeded in demonstrating the connection
between cause and effect in the case of hurricanes, as well as of any
other physical phenomenon. It is evident that the idea of accident,
applied to physical nature, is unscientific. Every physical phenomenon
is the necessary effect of the causes that determined it beforehand. If
those causes are known to us, we have the conviction that that
phenomenon is necessary, is fate, and, if we do not know them, we think
it is accidental. The same is true of human phenomena. But since we do
not know the internal and external causes in the majority of cases, we
pretend that they are free phenomena, that is to say, that they are not
determined necessarily by their causes. Hence the spiritualistic
conception of the free will implies that every human being, in spite of
the fact that their internal and external conditions are necessarily
predetermined, should be able to come to a deliberate decision by the
mere fiat of his or her free will, so that, even though the sum of all
the causes demands a no, he or she can decide in favor of yes, and vice
versa. Now, who is there that thinks, when deliberating some action,
what are the causes that determine his choice? We can justly say that
the greater part of our actions are determined by habit, that we make up
our minds almost from custom, without considering the reason for or
against. When we get up in the morning we go about our customary
business quite automatically, we perform it as a function in which we do
not think of a free will. We think of that only in unusual and grave
cases, when we are called upon to make some special choice, the
so-called voluntary deliberation, and then we weigh the reasons for or
against; we ponder, we hesitate what to do. Well, even in such cases, so
little depends on our will in the deliberations which we are about to
take that if any one were to ask us one minute before we have decided
what we are going to do, we should not know what we were going to
decide. So long as we are undecided, we cannot foresee what we are going
to decide; for under the conditions in which we live that part of the
psychic process takes place outside of our consciousness. And since we
do not know its causes, we cannot tell what will be its effects. Only
after we have come to a certain decision can we imagine that it was due
to our voluntary action. But shortly before we could not tell, and that
proves that it did not depend on us alone. Suppose, for instance, that
you have decided to play a joke on a fellow-student, and that you carry
it out. He takes it unkindly. You are surprised, because that is
contrary to his habits and your expectations. But after a while you
learn that your friend had received bad news from home on the preceding
morning and was therefore not in a condition to feel like joking, and
then you say: "If we had known that we should not have decided to spring
the joke on him." That is equivalent to saying that, if the balance of
your will had been inclined toward the deciding motive of no, you would
have decided no; but not knowing that your friend was distressed and not
in his habitual frame of mind, you decided in favor of yes. This
sentence: "If I had known this I should not have done that" is an outcry
of our internal consciousness, which denies the existence of a free
will.

On the other hand, nothing is created and nothing destroyed either in
matter or in force, because both matter and force are eternal and
indestructible. They transform themselves in the most diversified
manner, but not an atom is added or taken away, not one vibration more
or less takes place. And so if is the force of external and internal
circumstances which determines the decision of our will at any given
moment. The idea of a free will, however, is a denial of the law of
cause and effect, both in the field of philosophy and theology. Saint
Augustine and Martin Luther furnish irrefutable theological arguments
for the denial of a free will. The omnipotence of God is irreconcilable
with the idea of free will. If everything that happens does so because a
superhuman and omnipotent power wants it _(Not a single leaf falls to
the ground without the will of God)_, how can a son murder his father
without the permission and will of God? For this reason Saint Augustine
and Martin Luther have written _de servo arbitrio_.

But since theological arguments serve only those who believe in the
concept of a god, which is not given to us by science, we take recourse
to the laws which we observe in force and matter, and to the law of
causality. If modern science has discovered the universal link which
connects all phenomena through cause and effect, which shows that every
phenomenon is the result of causes which have preceded it; if this is
the law of causality, which is at the very bottom of modern scientific
thought, then it is evident that the admission of free thought is
equivalent to an overthrow of this law, according to which every effect
is proportionate to its cause. In that case, this law, which reigns
supreme in the entire universe, would dissolve itself into naught at
the feet of the human being, who would create effects with his free will
not corresponding to their causes! It was all right to think so at a
time when people had an entirely different idea of human beings. But the
work of modern science, and its effect on practical life, has resulted
in tracing the relations of each one of us with the world and with our
fellow beings. And the influence of science may be seen in the
elimination of great illusions which in former centuries swayed this or
that part of civilized humanity. The scientific thought of Copernicus
and Galilei did away with the illusions which led people to believe that
the earth was the center of the universe and of creation.

Take Cicero's book _de Officiís_, or the _Divina Commedia_ of Dante, and
you will find that to them the earth is the center of creation, that the
infinite stars circle around it, and that man is the king of animals: a
geocentric and anthropocentric illusion inspired by immeasurable
conceit. But Copernicus and Galilei came and demonstrated that the earth
does not stand still, but that it is a grain of cosmic matter hurled
into blue infinity and rotating since time unknown around its central
body, the sun, which originated from an immense primitive nebula.
Galilei was subjected to tortures by those who realized that this new
theory struck down many a religious legend and many a moral creed. But
Galilei had spoken the truth, and nowadays humanity no longer indulges
in the illusion that the earth is the center of creation.

But men live on illusions and give way but reluctantly to the progress
of science, in order to devote themselves arduously to the ideal of the
new truths which rise out of the essence of things of which mankind is a
part. After the geocentric illusion had been destroyed, the
anthropocentric illusion still remained. On earth, man was still
supposed to be king of creation, the center of terrestrial life. All
Species of animals, plants and minerals were supposed to be created
expressly for him, and to have had from time immemorial the forms which
we see now, so that the fauna and flora living on our planet have always
been what they are today. And Cicero, for instance, said that the
heavens were placed around the earth and man in order that he might
admire the beauty of the starry firmament at night, and that animals
and plants were created for his use and pleasure. But in 1856 Charles
Darwin came and, summarizing the results of studies that had been
carried on for a century, destroyed in the name of science the superb
illusion that man is the king and center of creation. He demonstrated,
amid the attacks and calumnies of the lovers of darkness, that man is
not the king of creation, but merely the last link of the zoological
chain, that nature is endowed with eternal energies by which animal and
plant life, the same as mineral life (for even in crystals the laws of
life are at work), are transformed from the invisible microbe to the
highest form, man.

The anthropocentric illusion rebelled against the word of Darwin,
accusing him of lowering the human life to the level of the dirt or of
the brute. But a disciple of Darwin gave the right answer, while
propagating the Darwinian theory at the university of Jena. It was
Haeckel, who concluded: "For my part, and so far as my human
consciousness is concerned, I prefer to be an immensely perfected ape
rather than to be a degenerated and debased Adam."

Gradually the anthropocentric illusion has been compelled to give way
before the results of science, and today the theories of Darwin have
become established among our ideas. But another illusion still remains,
and science, working in the name of reality, will gradually eliminate
it, namely the illusion that the nineteenth century has established a
permanent order of society. While the geocentric and anthropocentric
illusions have been dispelled, the illusion of the immobility and
eternity of classes still persists. But it is well to remember that in
Holland in the sixteenth century, in England in the seventeenth, in
Europe since the revolution of 1789, we have seen that freedom of
thought in science, literature and art, for which the bourgeoisie
fought, triumphed over the tyranny of the mediaeval dogma. And this
condition, instead of being a glorious but transitory stage, is supposed
to be the end of the development of humanity, which is henceforth
condemned not to perfect itself any more by further changes. This is the
illusion which serves as a fundamental argument against the positive
school of criminology, since it is claimed that a penal justice
enthroned on the foundations of Beccaria and Carrara would be a
revolutionary heresy. It is also this illusion which serves as an
argument against those who draw the logical consequences in regard to
the socialistic future of humanity, for the science which takes its
departure front the work of Copernicus, Galilei and Darwin arrives
logically at socialism. Socialism is but the natural and physical
transformation of the economic and social institutions. Of course, so
long as the geocentric and anthropocentric illusions dominate, it is
natural that the lore of stability should impress itself upon science
and life. How could this living atom, which the human being is,
undertake to change that order of creation, which makes of the earth the
center of the universe and of man the center of life? Not until science
had introduced the conception of a natural formation and transformation,
of the solar system, as well as of the fauna and flora, did the human
mind grasp the idea that thought and action can transform the world.

For this reason we believe that the study of the criminal, and the
logical consequences therefrom, will bring about the complete
transformation of human justice, not only as a theory laid down in
scientific books, but also as a practical function applied every day to
that living and suffering portion of humanity which has fallen into
crime. We have the undaunted faith that the work of scientific truth
will transform penal justice into a simple function of preserving
society from the disease of crime, divested of all relics of vengeance,
hatred and punishment, which still survive in our day as living
reminders of the barbarian stage. We still hear the "public vengeance"
invoked against the criminal today, and justice has still for its symbol
a sword, which it uses more than the scales. But a judge born of a woman
cannot weigh the moral responsibility of one who has committed murder or
theft. Not until the experimental and scientific method shall look for
the causes of that dangerous malady, which we call crime, in the
physical and psychic organism, and in the family and the environment, of
the criminal, will justice guided by science discard the sword which now
descends bloody upon those poor fellow-beings who have fallen victims to
crime, and become a clinical function, whose prime object shall be to
remove or lessen in society and individuals the causes which incite to
crime. Then alone will justice refrain from wreaking vengeance, after a
crime has been committed, with the shame of an execution or the
absurdity of solitary confinement.

On the one hand, human life depends on the word of a judge, who may err
in the case of capital punishment; and society cannot end the life of a
man, unless the necessity of legitimate self-defense demands it. On the
other hand, solitary confinement came in with the second current of the
classic school of criminology, when at the same time, in which Beccaria
promulgated his ideas, John Howard traveled all over Europe describing
the unmentionable horrors of mass imprisonment, which became a center of
infection for society at large. Then the classic school went to the
other extreme of solitary confinement, after the model of America,
whence we adopted the systems of Philadelphia and Harrisburg in the
first half of the nineteenth century. Isolation for the night is also
our demand, but we object to continuous solitary confinement by day and
night. Pasquale Mancini called solitary confinement "a living grave," in
order to reassure the timorous, when in the name of the classic school,
whose valiant champion he was, he demanded in 1876 the abolition of
capital punishment. Yet in his swan song he recognized that the future
would belong to the positive school of criminology. And it is this
"living grave" against which we protest. It cannot possibly be an act of
human justice to bury a human being in a narrow cell, within four walls,
to prevent this being from having any contact with social life, and to
say to him at the end of his term: Now that your lungs are no longer
accustomed to breathing the open air, now that your legs are no longer
used to the rough roads, go, but take care not, to have a relapse, or
your sentence will be twice as hard.

In reality, solitary confinement makes of a human being either a stupid
creature, or a raving beast. And "s'io dico il vero, l'effeto nol
nasconde"--if I speak the truth, the facts will also reveal it--for
criminality increases and expands, honest people remain unprotected, and
those who are struck by the law do not improve, but become ever more
antisocial through the repeated relapses. And so we have that contrast
which I mentioned in the beginning of my lecture, that the theoretical
side of criminal science is so perfected, while criminal conditions are
painfully in evidence. The inevitable conclusion is the necessity of a
progressive transformation of the science of crime and punishment.




OF CRIMINOLOGY.


II.

We saw yesterday in a short historical review that the classic cycle of
the science of crime and punishment, originated by Cesare Beccaria more
than a century ago, was followed in our country, some twenty years
since, by the scientific movement of the positive school of criminology.
Let us see today how this school studied the problem of criminality,
reserving for tomorrow the discussion of the remedies proposal by this
school for the disease of criminality.

When a crime is committed in some place, attracting public attention
either through the atrocity of the case or the strangeness of the
criminal deed--for instance, one that is not connected with bloodshed,
but with intellectual fraud--there are at once two tendencies that make
themselves felt in the public conscience. One of them, pervading the
overwhelming majority of individual consciences, asks: How is this? What
for? Why did that man commit such a crime? This question is asked by
everybody and occupies mostly the attention of those who do not look
upon the case from the point of view of criminology. On the other hand,
those who occupy themselves with criminal law represent the other
tendency, which manifests itself when acquainted with the news of this
crime. This is a limited portion of the public conscience, which tries
to study the problem from the standpoint of the technical jurist. The
lawyers, the judges, the officials of the police, ask themselves: What
is the name of the crime committed by that man under such circumstances?
Must it be classed us murder or patricide, attempted or incompleted
manslaughter, and, if directed against property, is it theft, or illegal
appropriation, or fraud? And the entire apparatus of practical criminal
justice forgets at once the first problem, which occupies the majority
of the public conscience, the question of the causes that led to this
crime, in order to devote itself exclusively to the technical side of
the problem which constitutes the juridical anatomy of the inhuman and
antisocial deed perpetrated by the criminal.

In these two tendencies you have a photographic reproduction of the two
schools of criminology. The classic school, which looks upon the crime
as a juridical problem, occupies itself with its name, its definition,
its juridical analysis, leaves the personality of the criminal in the
background and remembers it only so far as exceptional circumstances
explicitly stated in the law books refer to it: whether he is a minor, a
deaf-mute, whether it is a case of insanity, whether he was drunk at the
time the crime was committed. Only in these strictly defined cases does
the classic school occupy itself theoretically with the personality of
the criminal. But ninety times in one hundred these exceptional
circumstances do not exist or cannot be shown to exist, and penal
justice limits itself to the technical definition of the fact. But when
the case comes up in the criminal court, or before the jurors, practice
demonstrates that there is seldom a discussion between the lawyers of
the defense and the judges for the purpose of ascertaining the most
exact definition of the fact, of determining whether it is a case of
attempted or merely projected crime, of finding out whether there are
any of the juridical elements defined in this or that article of the
code. The judge is rather face to face with the problem of ascertaining
why, under what conditions, for what reasons, the man has committed the
crime. This is the supreme and simple human problem. But hitherto it has
been left to a more or less perspicacious, more or less gifted,
empiricism, and there have been no scientific standards, no methodical
collection of facts, no observations and conclusions, save those of the
positive school of criminology. This school alone makes an attempt to
solve in every case of crime the problem of its natural origin, of the
reasons and conditions that induced a man to commit such and such a
crime.

For instance, about 3,000 cases of manslaughter are registered every
year in Italy. Now, open any work inspired by the classic school of
criminology, and ask the author why 3,000 men are the victims of
manslaughter every year in Italy, and how it is that there are not
sometimes only as many as, say, 300 cases, the number committed in
England, which has nearly the same number of inhabitants as Italy; and
how it is that there are not sometimes 300,000 such cases in Italy
instead of 3,000?

It is useless to open any work of classical criminology for this
purpose, for you will not find an answer to these questions in than. No
one, from Beccaria to Carrara, has ever thought of this problem, and
they could not have asked it, considering their point of departure and
their method. In fact, the classic criminologists accept the phenomenon
of criminality as an accomplished fact. They analyze it from the point
of view of the technical jurist, without asking how this criminal fact
may have been produced, and why it repeats itself in greater or smaller
numbers from year to year, in every country. The theory of a free will,
which is their foundation, excludes the possibility of this scientific
question, for according to it the crime is the product of the fiat of
the human will. And if that is admitted as a fact, there is nothing left
to account for. The manslaughter was committed, because the criminal
wanted to commit it; and that is all there is to it. Once the theory of
a free will is accepted as a fact, the deed depends on the fiat, the
voluntary determination, of the criminal, and all is said.

But if, on the other hand, the positive school of criminology denies, on
the ground of researches in scientific physiological psychology, that
the human will is free and does not admit that one is a criminal because
he wants to be, but declares that a man commits this or that crime only
when he lives in definitely determined conditions of personality and
environment which induce him necessarily to act in a certain way, then
alone does the problem of the origin of criminality begin to be
submitted to a preliminary analysis, and then alone does criminal law
step out of the narrow and arid limits of technical jurisprudence and
become a true social and human science in the highest and noblest
meaning of the word. It is vain to insist with such stubbornness as that
of the classic school of criminology on juristic formulas by which the
distinction between illegal appropriation and theft, between fraud and
other forms of crime against property, and so forth, is determined, when
this method does not give to society one single word which would throw
light upon the reasons that make a man a criminal and upon the
efficacious remedy by which society could protect itself against
criminality.

It is true that the classic school of criminology has likewise its
remedy against crime--namely, punishment. But this is the only remedy of
that school, and in all the legislation inspired by the theories of that
school in all the countries of the civilized world there is no other
remedy against crime but repression.

But Bentham has said: Every time that punishment is inflicted it proves
its inefficacy, for it did not prevent the committal of that crime.
Therefore, this remedy is worthless. And a deeper study of the cause of
crime demonstrates that if a man does not commit a certain crime, this
is due to entirely different reasons, than a fear of the penalty, very
strong and fundamental reasons which are not to be found in the threats
of legislators. These threats, if nevertheless carried out by police and
prison keepers, run counter to those conditions. A man who intends to
commit a crime, or who is carried away by a violent passion, by a
psychological hurricane which drowns his moral sense, is not checked by
threats of punishment, because the volcanic eruption of passion prevents
him from reflecting. Or he may decide to commit a crime after due
premeditation and preparation, and in that case the penalty is
powerless to check him, because he hopes to escape with impunity. All
criminals will tell you unanimously that the only thing which impelled
them when they were deliberating a crime was the expectation that they
would go scot free. If they had but the least suspicion that they might
be detected and punished they would not have committed the crime. The
only exception is the case in which a crime is the result of a mental
explosion caused by a violent outburst of passion. And if you wish to
have a very convincing illustration of the psychological inefficacy of
legal threats, you have but to think of that curious crime which has now
assumed a frequency never known to former centuries, namely the making
of counterfeit money. For since paper money--from want or for reasons of
expediency--has become a substitute of metal coin in the civilized
countries, the making of counterfeit paper money has become very
frequent in the nineteenth century. Now a counterfeiter, in committing
his crime, must compel his mind to imitate closely the inscription of
the bill, letter for letter, including that threatening passage, which
says: _"The law punishes counterfeiting_ ..." etc. Can you see before
your mind's eye a counterfeiter, in the act of engraving on the stone or
the others may ignore the penalty that awaits them, but he cannot. This
illustration is convincing, for in cases of other crimes one may always
assume that the criminal acted without thinking of the future, even when
he was not in a transport of passion. But in the case of the
counterfeiter the very act of committing the crime reminds him of the
threat of the law, and yet he is imperturbable while perpetrating it.

Crime has its natural causes, which lie outside of that mathematical
point called the free will of the criminal. Aside from being a juridical
phenomenon, which it would be well to examine by itself, every crime is
above all a natural and social phenomenon, and should be studied
primarily as such. We need not go through so hard a course of study
merely for the purpose of walking over the razor edge of juristic
definitions and to find out, for instance, that from the time Romagnosi
made a distinction between incompleted and attempted crime rivers of ink
have been spilled in the attempt to find the distinguishing elements of
these two degrees of crime. And finally, when the German legislator
concluded to make no distinction between incompleted and attempted crime
and to recognize only the completed crime in his code of 1871, we
witnessed the spectacle of Carrara praising that legislator for leaving
that subtile distinction out of his code. A strange conclusion on the
part of a science, which cudgels its brains for a century to find the
marks of distinction between attempted and incompleted crime, and then
praises the legislator for ignoring it. And another classic jurist,
Buccellati, proposed to do away with the theory of attempted crime by
simply defining it as a crime by itself, or as--a violation of police
laws! A science which comes to such conclusions is a science which moves
in metaphysical abstractions, and we shall see that all these finespun
questions which abound in classical science lose all practical value
before the necessity of saving society from the plague of crime.

The method which we, on the other hand, have inaugurated is the
following: Before we study crime from the point of view of a juristic
phenomenon, we must study the causes to which the annual recurrence of
crimes in all countries is due. These are natural causes, which I have
classified under the three heads of anthropological, telluric and
social. Every crime, from the smallest to the most atrocious, is the
result of the interaction of these three causes, the anthropological
condition of the criminal, the telluric environment in which he is
living, and the social environment in which he is born, living and
operating. It is a vain beginning to separate the meshes of this net of
criminality. There are still those who would maintain the one-sided
standpoint that the origin of crime may be traced to only one of these
elements, for instance, to the social element alone. So far as I am
concerned, I have combatted this opinion from the very inauguration of
the positive school of criminology, and I combat it today. It is
certainly easy enough to think that the entire origin of all crime is
due to the unfavorable social conditions in which the criminal lives.
But an objective, methodical, observation demonstrates that social
conditions alone do not suffice to explain the origin of criminality,
although it is true that the prevalence of the influence of social
conditions is an incontestable fact in the case of the greater number
of crimes, especially of the lesser ones. But there are crimes which
cannot be explained by the influence of social conditions alone. If you
regard the general condition of misery as the sole source of
criminality, then you cannot get around the difficulty that out of one
thousand individuals living in misery from the day of their birth to
that of their death only one hundred or two hundred become criminals,
while the other nine hundred or eight hundred either sink into
biological weakness, or become harmless maniacs, or commit suicide
without perpetrating any crime. If poverty were the sole determining
cause, one thousand out of one thousand poor ought to become criminals.
If only two hundred become criminals, while one hundred commit suicide,
one hundred end as maniacs, and the other six hundred remain honest in
their social condition, then poverty alone is not sufficient to explain
criminality. We must add the anthropological and telluric factor. Only
by means of these three elements of natural influence can criminality be
explained. Of course, the influence of either the anthropological or
telluric or social element varies from case to case. If you have a case
of simple theft, you may have a far greater influence of the social
factor than of the anthropological factor. On the other hand, if you
have a case of murder, the anthropological element will have a far
greater influence than the social. And so on in every case of crime, and
every individual that you will have to judge on the bench of the
criminal.

The anthropological factor. It is precisely here that the genius of
Cesare Lombroso established a new science, because in his search after
the causes of crime he studied the anthropological condition of the
criminal. This condition concerns not only the organic and anatomical
constitution, but also the psychological, it represents the organic and
psychological personality of the criminal. Every one of us inherits at
birth, and personifies in life, a certain organic and psychological
combination. This constitutes the individual factor of human activity,
which either remains normal through life, or becomes criminal or insane.
The anthropological factor, then, must not be restricted, as some laymen
would restrict it, to the study of the form of the skull or the bones
of the criminal. Lombroso had to begin his studies with the anatomical
conditions of the criminal, because the skulls may be studied most
easily in the museums. But he continued by also studying the brain and
the other physiological conditions of the individual, the state of
sensibility, and the circulation of matter. And this entire series of
studies is but a necessary scientific introduction to the study of the
psychology of the criminal, which is precisely the one problem that is
of direct and immediate importance. It is this problem which the lawyer
and the public prosecutor should solve before discussing the juridical
aspect of any crime, for this reveals the causes which induced the
criminal to commit a crime. At present there is no methodical standard
for a psychological investigation, although such an investigation was
introduced into the scope of classic penal law. But for this reason the
results of the positive school penetrate into the lecture rooms of the
universities of jurisprudence, whenever a law is required for the
judicial arraignment of the criminal as a living and feeling human
being. And even though the positive school is not mentioned, all profess
to be studying the material furnished by it, for instance, its analyses
of the sentiments of the criminal, his moral sense, his behavior before,
during and after the criminal act, the presence of remorse which people,
judging the criminal after their own feelings, always suppose the
criminal to feel, while, in fact, it is seldom present. This is the
anthropological factor, which may assume a pathological form, in which
case articles 46 and 47 of the penal code remember that there is such a
thing as the personality of the criminal. However, aside from insanity,
there are thousands of other organic and psychological conditions of the
personality of criminals, which a judge might perhaps lump together
under the name of extenuating circumstances, but which science desires
to have thoroughly investigated. This is not done today, and for this
reason the idea of extenuating circumstances constitutes a denial of
justice.

This same anthropological factor also includes that which each one of us
has: the race character. Nowadays the influence of race on the destinies
of peoples and persons is much discussed in sociology, and there are
one-sided schools that pretend to solve the problems of history and
society by means of that racial influence alone, to which they attribute
an absolute importance. But while there are some who maintain that the
history of peoples is nothing but the exclusive product of racial
character, there are others who insist that the social conditions of
peoples and individuals are alone determining. The one is as much a
one-sided and incomplete theory as the other. The study of collective
society or of the single individual has resulted in the understanding
that the life of society and of the individual is always the product of
the inextricable net of the anthropological, telluric and social
elements. Hence the influence of the race cannot be ignored in the study
of nations and personalities, although it is not the exclusive factor
which would suffice to explain the criminality of a nation or an
individual. Study, for instance, manslaughter in Italy, and, although
you will find it difficult to isolate one of the factors of criminality
from the network of the other circumstances and conditions that produce
it, yet there are such eloquent instances of the influence of racial
character, that it would be like denying the existence of daylight if
one tried to ignore the influence of the ethnical factor on
criminality.

In Italy there are two currents of criminality, two tendencies which are
almost diametrically opposed to one another. The crimes due to hot blood
and muscle grow in intensity from northern to southern Italy, while the
crimes against property increase from south to north. In northern Italy,
where movable property is more developed, the crime of theft assumes a
greater intensity, while crimes due to conditions of the blood are
decreasing on account of the lesser poverty and the resulting lesser
degeneration of the people. In the south, on the other hand, crimes
against property are less frequent and crimes of blood more frequent.
Still there also are in southern Italy certain cases where criminality
of the blood is less frequent, and you cannot explain this in any other
way than by the influence of racial character. If you take a
geographical map of manslaughter in Italy, you will see that from the
minimum, from Lombardy, Piedmont, and Venice, the intensity increases
until it reaches its maximum in the insular and peninsular extreme of
the south. But even there you will find certain cases in which
manslaughter shows a lesser intensity.

For instance, the province of Benevent is surrounded by other provinces
which show a maximum of crimes due to conditions of blood, while it
registers a smaller number. Naples, again, shows a considerably smaller
number of such cases than the provinces surrounding it, but it has a
greater number of unpremeditated cases of manslaughter. Messina, Catania
and Syracuse have a remarkably smaller number of blood crimes than
Trapani, Girgenti and Palermo. It has been attempted to claim that this
difference in criminality is due to social condition's, because the
agricultural conditions in eastern Sicily are less degrading than those
of Girgenti and Trapani, where the sulphur mines compel the miners to
live miserably. But we should like to ask the following question in
opposition to this idea: Why and in what respect are the agricultural
conditions in some provinces better than in others? This condition is
merely itself a result, not a cause of the first degree.

Since the theory of historical materialism, which I prefer to call
economic determinism, has demonstrated that political, moral and
intellectual phenomena are reactions on the economic conditions of any
time and place, the attempt has been made to interpret this theory very
narrowly and to pretend that the economic condition of a nation is a
primary cause and not determined by any other. For my part, ever since I
have demonstrated the perfect accord between the Marxian and the
Darwinian theories, I have said: Very well, the economic conditions of a
nation explain its political, moral, intellectual conditions, but the
economic condition is in its turn the result of other factors. For
instance, how can the industrialism of England in the nineteenth century
be explained? Take away the coal mines (the telluric environment), and
you could not have the economic conditions of England as they are. For
the economic conditions are a result of favorable or unfavorable
telluric conditions which are acted upon by the intelligence and energy
of a certain race. Catania, Messina, Syracuse, are in a better economic
condition, because they have better geographical conditions and a
different race (of Grecian blood) than the other Sicilian provinces. So
it is in Apulia and Naples, which have likewise a considerable mixture
of Grecian blood. The northern tourists are still attracted by our art
and visit the ruins of Taormina or Pesto, which are the relics of the
Grecian race. And it is the Grecian blood which explains the lesser
frequency of bloody crimes in those provinces. This is therefore
evidently the influence of the race. And I maintain that the same fact
is due in the province of Benevent to the admixture of Langobardian
blood. For the Duchy of Benevent has had an influx of Langobardian
elements since the seventh century. And as we know that the German and
Anglo-Saxon race has the smallest tendency towards bloody crimes, the
beneficial influence of this racial character in Benevent explains
itself. On the other hand, there is much Saracen blood in the western
and southern provinces of Sicily, and this explains the greater number
of bloody crimes there. It is evident that the organic character of the
inhabitants of that island, where you may still see the brutal and
barbarian features of the Saracen by the side of those of the blond,
cool and quiet Norman, contains a transfusion of the blood of diverse
races. But it is also true that wherever a certain race has been
predominant, there its influence is left behind in the individual and
collective life.

Let this be enough so far as the anthropological factor of criminality
is concerned. There are, furthermore, the telluric factors, that is to
say, the physical environment in which we live and to which we pay no
attention. It requires much philosophy, said Rousseau, to note the
things with which we are in daily contact, because the habitual
influence of a thing makes it more difficult to be aware of it. This
applies also to the immediate influence of the physical conditions on
human morality, notwithstanding the spiritualist prejudices which still
weigh upon our daily lives. For instance, if it is claimed in the name
of supernaturalism and psychism that a man is unhappy because he is
vicious, it is equivalent to making a one-sided statement. For it is
just as true to say that a man becomes vicious because he is unhappy.
Want is the strongest poison for the human body and soul. It is the
fountain head of all inhuman and antisocial feeling. Where want spreads
out its wings, there the sentiments of love, of affection, of
brotherhood, are impossible.

Take a look at the figures of the peasant in the far-off arid Campagna,
the little government employee, the laborer, the little shop-keeper.
When work is assured, when living is certain, though poor, then want,
cruel want, is in the distance, and every good sentiment can germinate
and develop in the human heart. The family then lives in a favorable
environment, the parents agree, the children are affectionate. And when
the laborer, a bronzed statue of humanity, returns from, his smoky shop
and meets his white-haired mother, the embodiment of half a century of
immaculate virtue and heroic sacrifices, then he can, tired, but assured
of his daily bread, give room to feelings of affection, and he will
cordially invite his mother to share his frugal meal. But let the same
man, in the same environment, be haunted by the spectre of want and lack
of employment, and you will see the moral atmosphere in his family
changing as from day into night. There is no work, and the laborer comes
home without any wages. The wife, who does not know how to feed the
children, reproaches her husband with the suffering of his family. The
man, having been turned away from the doors of ten offices, feels his
dignity as an honest laborer assailed in the very bosom of his own
family, because he has vainly asked society for honest employment. And
the bonds of affection and union are loosened in that family. Its
members no longer agree. There are too many children, and when the poor
old mother approaches her son, she reads in his dark and agitated mien
the lack of tenderness and feels in her mother heart that her boy,
poisoned by the spectre of want, is perhaps casting evil looks at her
and harboring the unfilial thought: "Better an open grave in the
cemetery than one mouth more to feed at home!"

It is true, that want alone is not sufficient to prepare the soil in the
environment of that suffering family for the roots of real crime and to
develop it. Want will weaken the love and mutual respect among the
members of that family, but it will not be strong enough alone to arm
the hands of the man for a matricidal deed, unless he should get into a
pathological mental condition, which is very exceptional and rare. But
the conclusions of the positive school are confirmed in this case as in
any other. In order that crime may develop, it is necessary that
anthropological, social and telluric factors should act together.

We generally forget the conditions of the physical environment in which
we live, because supernatural prejudice tells us that the body is a
beast which we must forget in order to elevate ourselves into a
spiritual life. Manzoni could designate the Middle Ages by the term
"dirty." because they neglected the demands of elementary hygiene, and
thus of human morality. For where the requirements of our physical body
are neglected or offended, there no flower can bloom. The telluric
environment has a great influence on our physical activity, by way of
our nervous system. We feel differently disposed, according to whether a
south or a north wind blows. When Garibaldi was on the Pampas, he
observed that his companions were irascible and prone to violent
quarrels, when the Pampero blew, and that their behavior changed, when
this wind ceased. The great founders of criminal statistics, Quetelet
and Guerry, observed that the change of seasons carried with it a change
in criminality. Sexual crimes are less frequent in winter than in spring
and summer. And with reference to this point I have maintained, and
still maintain, that it is due to the combined effects of temperature
and social conditions, if crimes against property increase in winter.
For lack of employment, the want of food and shelter, intensify the
misery and lead to attacks on property. On the other hand, the cold by
itself reduces sexual crimes and personal assaults. And those who claim
that the longer intercourse between people in summer time has also a
social influence, are also partly in the right.

The most eloquent fact in this respect was mentioned by Murro, when he
pointed out that this change in the frequency of bloody crimes, greater
in the warm months than in winter, applied also to prisoners. Statistics
show that breach of discipline is most frequent in hot seasons. The
social factor does not enter there, because the social life is there the
same in winter and in summer. This is, therefore, a practical proof of
the influence of climate, and it is re-enforced by the fact that
delirium and epilepsy in insane asylums are also more frequent in hot
than in cold months. The influence of the telluric factors, then, cannot
be denied, and the influence of the social factor intensifies it, as I
have already shown by its most drastic and characteristic example, that
of want. One can, therefore, understand that a man, whose morality has
been shaken by the pressure of increasing want, may be led to commit a
crime against property or persons.

It is certainly quite evident, that economic misery has an undeniable
influence on criminality. And if you consider, that about 300,000
criminals are sentenced in Italy every year, 180,000 of them for minor
crimes, and 120,000 for crimes which belong to the gravest class, you
can easily see that the greater part of them due mainly to social
conditions, for which it should not be so very difficult to find a
remedy. The work of the legislator may be slow, difficult, and
inadequate, so far as the telluric and anthropological factors are
concerned. But it could surely be rapid, efficacious and prompt, so far
as the social factors influencing criminality are concerned.

We have now demonstrated that crime has its natural source in the
combined interaction of three classes of causes, the anthropological
(organic and psychological) factor, the telluric factor, and the social
factor. And by this last factor we must not only mean want, but any
other condition of administrative instability in political, moral, and
intellectual life. Every social condition which makes the life of man in
society insincere and imperfect is a social factor contributing towards
criminality. The economic factor is in evidence in our civilization
wherever the law of free competition, which is but a form of disguised
cannibalism, establishes the rule: _Your death is my life_. The
competition of laborers for a limited number of places is equivalent to
saying that those who secure a living do so at the expense of those who
do not. And this is a disguised form of cannibalism. While it does not
devour the competitor as primitive mankind did, it paralyzes him by
calumnies, recommendations, protection, money, which, secure the place
for the best bargainer and leave the most honest, talented, and
self-respecting to the pangs of starvation.

Moreover, the economic factor exerts its crime-breeding influence also
under the form of a superabundance of wealth. Indeed, in our present
society, which is in the downward stage of transition from glorious
bourgeois civilization, which constituted a golden page of human
history in the 19th century, wealth itself is a source of crime. For the
rich, who do not enjoy the advantage of manual or intellectual work,
suffer from the corruption of leisure and vice. Gambling throws them
into an unhealthy fever; the struggle and race for money poison their
daily lives. And although the rich may keep out of reach of the penal
code, still they have condemned themselves to a life devoted to
hypocritical ceremonies, which are devoid of moral sentiment. And this
life leads them to a sportive form of criminality. To cheat at gambling
is the inevitable fate of these parasites. In order to kill time they
give themselves up to games of chance, and those who do not care for
that devote themselves to the sport of adultery, which in that class is
a pastime even among the best friends, on account of sheer mental
poverty. And all because man's mind unoccupied is the devil's own forge,
as the English poet says.

We have now surveyed briefly the natural genesis of crime, as a natural
social phenomenon, brought about by the interaction of anthropological,
telluric, and social influences, which in any determined moment act
upon a personality standing on the cross road of vice and virtue, crime
and honesty. This scientific deduction gives rise to a series of
investigations which satisfy the mind and supply it with a real
understanding of things, far better than the theory that a man is a
criminal because he wants to be. No, a man commits crime because he
finds himself in certain physical and social conditions, from which the
evil plant of crime takes life and strength. Thus we obtain the origin
of that sad human figure which is the product of the interaction of
those factors, an abnormal man, a man not adapted to the conditions of
the social environment in which he is born, so that emigration becomes
an ever more permanent phenomenon for the greater portion of men, for
whom the accident of birth will less and less determine the course of
their future life. And the abnormal man who is below the minimum of
adaptability to social life and bears the marks of organic degeneration,
develops either a passive or an aggressive form of abnormality and
becomes a criminal.

Among these abnormal human beings, two groups must be particularly
distinguished. Limiting our observations to those who are true
aggressively antisocial abnormals, that is to say, who are not adapted
to a certain social order and attack it by crimes, we must distinguish
those who for egoistic or ferocious reasons attack society by atavistic
forms of the struggle for existence by committing socalled common crimes
in the shape of fraud or violence, thereby opposing or abolishing
conditions in which their fellow beings may live. This is the atavistic
type of criminals which represents an involutionary, or retrogressive,
form of abnormality, due to an arrested development or an atavistic
reversion to a savage and primitive type. These constitute the majority
in the world of criminals and must be distinguished from the minority,
who are evolutionary, or progressive, abnormals, that may also commit
crime in a violent form, but must not be confounded with the others,
because they do not act from egoistic motives, but rebel from altruistic
motives against the injustice of the present order. These altruistic
criminals feel the sufferings and horrors due to the injustice
surrounding them and may go so far as to commit murder, which must
always be condemned, but which must not be confounded with atavistic or
egoistic murder. Recourse to personal violence is always objectionable
from the point of view of higher manhood, which desires that human life
should always be held in respect. But the reasons for such a crime are
different, being egoistic in the one, and altruistic in the other case.
The evolutionary abnormal is often an instrument of human progress, not
in the form of criminality, but in that of intellectual and moral
rebellion against conditions which are sanctioned by laws that
frequently punish such an evolutionary rebellion harder than atavistic
crime, as they do in Russia, where capital punishment has been abolished
for common crimes, but retained for political violations of the law! We
are living in an epoch of transition from the old to the new, and
contemporaneous humanity has an uneasy moral conscience in this critical
time. The ruling classes are losing their clearness of vision, so that
they promise monuments to those political murderers who promoted their
own historical victories, but would condemn like any common criminal him
who now devotes his soul to a revolutionary ideal, would throw into
prison the pioneer of new human ideals, just as Russia is
excommunicating the rebel Tolstoi. I mention Leo Tolstoi advisedly for
the purpose of giving a precise illustration of my heterodox thought in
reference to this question. We are opposed to any form of personal
violence (with the sole exception of self-defense), we cannot approve of
any form of personal assault, no matter what may be its motive.
Therefore we cannot have words of praise or excuse for political murder,
though it may be inspired by altruistic motives. We can demand that the
legislator should distinguish between the psychological sources of these
two forms of murder, the egoistic and the altruistic form. But we
condemn them both, because they are inhuman forms of violence. Ideas do
not make victorious headway by force of arms. Ideas must be combatted by
ideas, and it is only by the propaganda of the idea that we can prepare
humanity for its future. Violence is always a means of preventing the
sincere and fruitful diffusion of an idea. We do not say this merely for
the abnormals of the lower classes. We refer with scientific serenity
also to the upper classes, who would suppress by violence every
manifestation of revolt against the social iniquities, every affirmation
of faith in a better future.

This is the conception of our science, which thus succeeds in
distinguishing traits of character even among the unlucky and forlorn
people of the criminal world, while the classic school of criminology
regards a criminal as a sort of abstract and normal man, with the
exception of cases of minors, deaf mutes, inebriates, and maniacs.

In fact, the classic school of criminology regards all thieves as THE
thief, all murderers as THE murderer, and the human shape disappears in
the mind of the legislator, while it re-appears before the judge. Before
the essayist and legislator, the criminal is a sort of moving dummy, on
whose hack the judge may paste an article of the penal code. If you
leave out of consideration the established cases of exceptional and rare
human psychology mentioned in the penal code, all other cases serve the
judge merely as an excuse to select from the criminal code the number of
that article which will fit the criminal dummy, and if he should paste
404 instead of 407 on its back, the court of appeals would resist, any
change of numbers. And if this dummy came to life and said: "The
question of my number may be very important for you, but if you would
study all the conditions that compelled me to take other people's
things, you would realize that this importance is very diagrammatic,"
the judge would answer: "That's all right for the justice of the future,
but it isn't now. You are number 404 of the criminal code, and after
leaving this court room with this number pasted legally on your back,
you will receive another number, for you will enter prison as number 404
and will exchange it for entry number 1525, or some other, because your
personality as a man disappears entirely before the enactment of social
justice!" And then it is pretended that this man, whose personality is
thus absurdly ignored, should leave prison cured of all degeneration,
and if he falls back into the path of thorns of his misery and commits
another crime, the judge simply pastes another article over the other,
by adding number 80 or 81, which refer to cases of relapse, to number
404!

In this way the classic school of criminology came to its unit of
punishment, which it heralded as its great progress. In the Middle
Ages, the diversity of punishment was greater. But in the 19th century
the classic school of criminology combatted dishonoring punishment,
corporeal punishment, confiscation, professional punishment, capital
punishment, with its ideal of one sole penalty, the only panacea for
crime and criminals, _prison_.

We have, indeed, prohibitory measures and fines even today. But in
substance the whole punitive armory is reduced to imprisonment, since
fines are likewise convertible into so many days or months of
imprisonment. Solitary confinement is the ideal of the classic school of
criminology. But experience proves that this penalty has as much effect
on the disease of criminality, as the remedy of a physician would have,
who would sit in the door of a hospital and tell every patient seeking
relief: "Whatever may be your disease, I have only one medicine and that
is a decoction of rhubarb. You have heart trouble? Well, then, the
problem for me is simply--how big a dose of rhubarb decoction shall I
give you?"

And measuring doses of penalty is the foundation of the criminal code.
That is so true that this code is in its last analysis but a table of
criminal logarithms for figuring out penalties. Woe to the judge who
makes a mistake in sentencing a 19 year old offender who was drunk when
he sinned, but had premeditated his deed. Woe to the judge, if he misses
his calculation in adding or subtracting the third, or sixth, or one
half, corresponding to the prescribed extenuating or aggravating
circumstances! If he makes a miscalculation, the court of appeals is
invoked by the defendant, and the inexorable court of appeals tells the
judge: "Figure this over again. You have been unjust." The only question
for the judge is this: Add your sums and subtract your deductions, and
the prisoner is sentenced to one year, seven months, and thirteen days.
Not one day more or less! But the human spectator asks: "If the criminal
should happen to be reformed before the expiration of his term, should
he be retained in prison?" The judge replies: "I don't care, he stays in
one year, seven months, and thirteen days!"

Then the human spectator says: "But suppose the criminal should not yet
be fit for human society at the expiration of his term?" The judge
replies: "At the expiration of his term he leaves prison, for when he
has absolved his last day, he has paid his debt!"

This is the same case as that of the imaginary physician who says: "You
have heart trouble? Then take a quart of rhubarb decoction and stay
twelve days in the hospital." Another patient says: "I have broken my
leg." And the doctor: "All right, take a pint of rhubarb decoction and
17 days in the hospital." A third has inflammation of the lungs, and the
doctor prescribes three quarts of rhubarb decoction and three months in
the hospital. "But if my inflammation is cured before that time?" "No
matter," says the doctor, "you stay in three months." "But if I am not
cured of my lung trouble after three months?" "No matter," says the
doctor, "you leave after three months."

To such results have wise men been led by a system of penal justice,
which is a denial of all elementary common sense. They have forgotten
the personality of the criminal and occupied themselves exclusively with
crime as an abstract juristic phenomenon. In the same manner, the old
style medicine occupied itself with disease as such, as an abstract
pathological phenomenon, without taking into account the personality of
the patient. The ancient physicians did not consider whether a patient
was well or ill nourished, young or old, strong or weak, nervous or
fullblooded. They cured fever as fever, pleurisy as pleurisy. Modern
medicine, on the other hand, declares that disease must be studied in
the living person of the patient. And the same disease may require
different treatment, if the condition of the patient is different.

Criminal justice has taken the same historical course of development as
medicine. The classic school of criminology is still in the same stage,
in which medicine was before the middle of the 19th century. It deals
with theft, murder, fraud, as such. But that which claims so much of the
attention of society has been forgotten by the classic school. For that
school has forgotten to study the murderer, the thief, the forger, and
without that study their crimes cannot be understood.

Crime is one of the conditions required for the study of the criminal.
But, the same crime may require the application of different remedies
to the personalities of different criminals, according to the different
anthropological and social conditions of the various criminals. There is
a fundamental distinction between the anthropological and social types
of criminals, whom I have divided into five categories, which are today
unanimously accepted by criminalist anthropologists, since the Geneva
congress offered an opportunity to explain the misapprehension which led
some foreign scientists to believe that the Italian school regarded one
of these types (the born criminal) merely as an organic anomaly.

Just a word concerning each one of these five types.

The _born criminal_ is a victim of that which I will call (seeing that
science has not yet solved this problem) criminal neurosis, which is
very analogous to epileptic neurosis, but which is not in itself
sufficient to make one a criminal. Our adversaries had the idea that the
mere possession of a crooked nose or a slanting skull stamped a man as
predisposed by birth to murder or theft. But a man may he a born
criminal, that is to say, he may have some congenital degeneration which
predisposes him toward crime, and yet he may die at the age of 80
without having committed any crime, because he was fortunate enough to
live in an environment which did not offer him any temptation to commit
crime. Again, are not many predisposed toward insanity without ever
becoming insane? If the same individual were to live under unfavorable
conditions, without any education, if he were to find himself in
unhealthy telluric surroundings, in a mine, a rice field, or a miasmatic
swamp, he would become insane. But if instead of living in conditions
that condemn him to lunacy he were to be under no necessity to struggle
for his daily bread, if he could live in affluence, he might exhibit
some eccentricity of character, but would not cross the threshold of an
insane asylum. The same happens in the case of criminality. One may have
a congenital predisposition toward crime, but if he lives in favorable
surroundings, he will live to the end of his natural life without
violating any criminal or moral law. At any rate we must drop the
prejudice that only those are criminals on whose backs the judge has
pasted a number. For there are many scoundrels at large who commit crime
with impunity, or who brush the edge of the criminal law in the most
repulsive immorality without violating it.

This misunderstanding was explained at the congress of Geneva by the
statement that the interaction of the social and telluric environment is
required also in the case of the born criminal. And now we may take it
for granted that my classification of five types is everywhere accepted.
These are the following: The _born criminal_ who has a congenital
predisposition for crime; the _insane criminal_ suffering from some
clinical form of mental alienation, and whom even our existing penal
code had to recognize; the _habitual criminal_, that is to say one who
has acquired the habit of crime mainly through the ineffective measures
employed by society for the prevention and repression of crime. A common
figure in our large industrial centers is that of the abandoned child
which has to go begging from its earliest youth in order to collect an
income for the enterprising boss or for its poor family, without an
opportunity to educate its moral sense in the filth of the streets. It
is punished for the first time by the law and sent to prison or to a
reformatory, where it is inevitably corrupted. Then, when such an
individual comes out of prison, he is stigmatized as a thief or forger,
watched by the police, and if he secures work in some shop, the owner is
indirectly induced to discharge him, so that he must inevitably fall
back upon crime.

Thus one acquires crime as a habit, a product of social rottenness, due
to the ineffective measures for the prevention and repression of crime.
There is furthermore the _occasional criminal_, who commits very
insignificant criminal acts, more because he is led astray by his
conditions of life than because the aggressive energy of a degenerate
personality impels him. If he is not made worse by a prison life, he may
find an opportunity to return to a normal life in society. Finally there
is the _passionate criminal,_ who, like the insane criminal, has
received attention from the positive school of criminology; which,
however, did not come to any definite conclusions regarding him, such as
may be gathered by means of the experimental method through study in
prisons, insane asylums, or in freedom. The relations between passion
and crime have so far been studied on a field in which no solution was
possible. For the classic school considers such a crime according to
the greater or smaller intensity and violence of passion and comes to
the conclusion that the degree of responsibility decreases to the extent
that the intensity of a passion increases, and vice versa. The problem
cannot be solved in this way. There are passions which may rise to the
highest degree of intensity without reducing the responsibility. For
instance, is one who murders from motives of revenge a passionate
criminal who must be excused?

The classic school of criminology says "No," and for my part I agree
with them. Francesco Carrara says: "There are blind passions, and others
which are reasonable. Blind passions deprive one of free will,
reasonable ones do not. Blind and excusable passions are fear, honor,
love, reasonable and inexcusable ones are hatred and revenge." But how
so? I have studied murderers who killed for revenge and who told me that
the desire for revenge took hold of them like a fever, so that they
"forgot even to eat." Hate and revenge can take possession of a man to
such an extent that he becomes blind with passion. The truth is that
passion must be considered not so far as its violence or quantity are
concerned, but rather as to its quality. We must distinguish between
social and anti-social passion, the one favoring the conditions of life
for the species and collectivity, the other antagonistic to the
development of the collectivity. In the first case, we have love,
injured honor, etc, which are passions normally useful to society, and
aberrations of which may be excused more or less according to individual
cases. On the other hand, we have inexcusable passions, because their
psychological tendency is to antagonize the development of society. They
are antisocial, and cannot be excused, and hate and revenge are among
them.

The positive school therefore admits that a passion is excusable, when
the moral sense of a man is normal, when his past record is clear, and
when his crime is due to a social passion, which makes it excusable.

We shall see tomorrow what remedies the positive school of criminology
proposes for each one of these categories of criminals, in distinction
from the measuring of doses of imprisonment advocated by the classic
school.

We have thus exhausted in a short and general review the subject of the
natural origin of criminality.--To sum up, crime is a social
phenomenon, due to the interaction of anthropological, telluric, and
social factors. This law brings about what I have called criminal
saturation, which means that every society has the criminality which it
deserves, and which produces by means of its geographical and social
conditions such quantities and qualities of crime as correspond to the
development of each collective human group.

Thus the old saying of Imetelet is confirmed: "There is an annual
balance of crime, which must be paid and settled with greater regularity
than the accounts of the national revenue." However, we positivists give
to this statement a less fatalistic interpretation, since we have
demonstrated that crime is not our immutable destiny, even though it is
a vain beginning to attempt to attenuate or eliminate crime by mere
schemes. The truth is that the balance of crime is determined by the
physical and social environment. But by changing the condition of the
social environment, which is most easily modified, the legislator may
alter the influence of the telluric environment and the organic and
psychic conditions of the population, control the greater portion of
crimes, and reduce them considerably. It is our firm conviction that a
truly civilized legislator can attenuate the plague of criminality, not
so much by means of the criminal code, as by means of remedies which are
latent in the remainder of the social life and of legislation. And the
experience of the most advanced countries confirms this by the
beneficent and preventive influence of criminal legislation resting on
efficacious social reforms.

We arrive, then, at this scientific conclusion: In the society of the
future, the necessity for penal justice will be reduced to the extent
that social justice grows intensively and extensively.


III.

In the preceding two lectures, I have given you a short review of the
new current in scientific thought, which studies the painful and
dangerous phenomena of criminality. We must now draw the logical
conclusions, in theory and practice, from the teachings of experimented
science, for the removal of the gangrenous plague of crime. Under the
influence of the positive methods of research, the old formula "Science
for science's sake" has given place to the new formula "Science for
life's sake." For it would be useless for the human mind to retreat into
the vault of philosophical concentration, if this intellectual mastery
did not produce as a counter-effect a beneficent wave of real
improvement in the destinies of the human race.

What, then, has the civilized world to offer in the way of remedies
against criminality? The classic school of criminology, being unable to
locate in the course of its scientific and historical mission the
natural causes of crime, as I have shown in the preceding lectures, was
not in a position to deal in a comprehensive and far-seeing manner with
this problem of the remedy against criminality. Some of the classic
criminologists, such as Bentham, Romagnosi, or Ellero, with a more
positive bent of mind than others, may have given a little of their
scientific activity to the analysis of this problem, namely the
prevention of crime. But Ellero himself had to admit that "the classic
school of criminology has written volumes concerning the death penalty
and torture, but has produced but a few pages on the prevention of
criminality." The historical mission of that school consisted in a
reduction of punishment. For being born on the eve of the French
revolution in the name of individualism and natural rights, it was a
protest against the barbarian penalties of the Middle Ages. And thus the
practical and glorious result of the classic school was a propaganda for
the abolition of the most brutal penalties of the Middle Ages, such as
the death penalty, torture, mutilation. We in our turn now follow up the
practical and scientific mission of the classic school of criminology
with a still more noble and fruitful mission by adding to the problem of
the _diminution of penalties_ the problem of the _diminution of crimes_.
It is worth more to humanity to reduce the number of crimes than to
reduce the dread sufferings of criminal punishments, although even this
is a noble work, after the evil plant of crime has been permitted to
grow in the realm of life. Take, for instance, the philanthropic
awakening due to the Congress of Geneva in the matter of the Red Cross
Society, for the care, treatment and cure of the wounded in war. However
noble and praiseworthy this mission may be, it would be far nobler and
better to prevent war than to heal the mutilated and wounded. If the
same zeal and persistence, which have been expended in the work of the
Red Cross Society, had been devoted to the realization of international
brotherhood, the weary road of human progress would show far better
results.

It is a noble mission to oppose the ferocious penalties of the Middle
Ages. But it is still nobler to forestall crime. The classic school of
criminology directed its attention merely to penalties, to repressive
measures after crime had been committed, with all its terrible moral
and material consequences. For in the classic school, the remedies
against criminality have not the social aim of improving human life, but
merely the illusory mission of retributive justice, meeting a moral
delinquency by a corresponding punishment in the shape of legal
sentences. This is the spirit which is still pervading criminal
legislation, although there is a sort of eclectic compromise between the
old and the new. The classic school of criminology has substituted for
the old absolutist conceptions of justice the eclectic theory that
absolute justice has the right to punish, but a right modified by the
interests of civilized life in present society. This is the point
discussed in Italy in the celebrated controversy between Pasquale
Stanislao Mancini and Terencio Mamiani, in 1847. This is in substance
the theory followed by the classic criminologists who revised the penal
code, which public opinion considers incapable of protecting society
against the dangers of crime. And we have but to look about us in the
realities of contemporaneous life in order to see that the criminal code
is far from being a remedy against crime, that it remedies nothing,
because either premeditation or passion in the person of the criminal
deprive the criminal law of all prohibitory power. The deceptive faith
in the efficacy of criminal law still lives in the public mind, because
every normal man feels that the thought of imprisonment would stand in
his way, if he contemplated tomorrow committing a theft, a rape, or a
murder. He feels the bridle of the social sense. And the criminal code
lends more strength to it and holds him back from criminal actions. But
even if the criminal code did not exist, he would not commit a crime, so
long as his physical and social environment would not urge him in that
direction. The criminal code serves only to isolate temporarily from
social intercourse those who are not considered worthy of it. And this
punishment prevents the criminal for a while from repeating his criminal
deed. But it is evident that the punishment is not imposed until after
the deed has been done. It is a remedy directed against effects, but it
does not touch the causes, the roots, of the evil.

We may say that in social life penalties have the same relation to crime
that medicine has to disease. After a disease has developed in an
organism, we have recourse to a physician. But he cannot do anything
else but to reach the effects in some single individual. On the other
hand, if the individual and the collectivity had obeyed the rules of
preventive hygiene, the disease would have been avoided 90 times in 100,
and would have appeared only in extreme and exceptional cases, where a
wound or an organic condition break through the laws of health. Lack of
providence on the part of man, which is due to insufficient expression
of the forces of the intellect and pervades so large a part of human
life, is certainly to blame for the fact that mankind chooses to use
belated remedies rather than to observe the laws of health, which demand
a greater methodical control of one's actions and more foresight,
because the remedy must be applied before the disease becomes apparent.
I say occasionally that human society acts in the matter of criminality
with the same lack of forethought that most people do in the matter of
tooth-ache. How many individuals do not suffer from tooth-ache,
especially in the great cities? And yet any one convinced of the
miraculous power of hygiene could easily clean his teeth every day and
prevent the microbes of tooth rot from thriving, thereby saving his
teeth from harm and pain. But it is tedious to do this every day. It
implies a control of one's self. It cannot be done without the
scientific conviction that induces men to acquire this habit. Most
people say: "Oh well, if that tooth rots, I'll bear the pain." But when
the night comes in which they cannot sleep for toothache, they will
swear at themselves for not having taken precautions and will run to the
dentist, who in most cases cannot help them any more.

The legislator should apply the rules of social hygiene in order to
reach the roots of criminality. But this would require that he should
bring his mind and will to bear daily on a legislative reform of
individual and social life, in the field of economics and morals as well
as in that of administration, politics, and intelligence. Instead of
that, the legislators permit the microbes of criminality to develop
their pathogenic powers in society. When crimes become manifest, the
legislator knows no other remedy but imprisonment in order to punish an
evil which he should have prevented. Unfortunately this scientific
conviction is not yet rooted and potent in the minds of the legislators
of most of the civilized countries, because they represent on an
average the backward scientific convictions of one or two previous
generations. The legislator who sits in parliament today was the
university student of 30 years ago. With a few very rare exceptions he
is supplied only with knowledge of outgrown scientific research. It is a
historical law that the work of the legislator is always behind the
science of his time. But nevertheless the scientist has the urgent duty
to spread the conviction that hygiene is worth as much on the field of
civilization as it is in medicine for the public health.

This is the fundamental conviction at which the positive school arrives:
That which has happened in medicine will happen in criminology. The
great value of practical hygiene, especially of social hygiene, which is
greater than that of individual hygiene, has been recognized after the
marvelous scientific discoveries concerning the origin and primitive
causes of the most dangerous diseases. So long as Pasteur and his
disciples had not given to the world their discovery of the pathogenic
microbes of all infectious diseases, such as typhoid fever, cholera,
diphtheria, tuberculosis, etc, more or less absurd remedies were
demanded of the science of medicine. I remember, for instance, that I
was compelled in my youth, during an epidemic of cholera, to stay in a
closed room, in which fumigation was carried on with substances
irritating the bronchial tubes and lungs without killing the cholera
microbes, as was proved later on. It was not until the real causes of
those infectious diseases were discovered, that efficient remedies could
be employed against them. An aqueduct given to a center of population
like Naples is a better protection against cholera than drugs, even
after the disease has taken root in the midst of the people of Naples.
This is the modern lesson which we wish to teach in the field of
criminology, a field which will always retain its repressive functions
as an exceptional and ultimate refuge, because we do not believe that we
shall succeed in eliminating all forms of criminality. Hence, if a crime
manifests itself, repression may be employed as one of the remedies of
criminology, but it should be the very last, not the exclusively
dominating one, as it is today.

It is this blind worship of punishment which is to blame for the
spectacle which we witness in every modern country, the spectacle that
the legislators neglect the rules of social hygiene and wake up with a
start when some form of crime becomes acute, and that they know of no
better remedy than an intensification of punishment meeted out by the
penal code. If one year of imprisonment is not enough, we'll make it ten
years, and if an aggravation of the ordinary penalty is not enough,
we'll pass a law of exception. It is always the blind trust in
punishment which remains the only remedy of the public conscience and
which always works to the detriment of morality and material welfare,
because it does not save the society of honest people and strikes
without curing those who have fallen a prey to guilt and crime.

The positive school of criminology, then, aside from the greater value
attributed to daily and systematic measures of social hygiene for the
prevention of criminality, comes to radically different conclusions also
in the matter of repressive justice. The classic school has for a
cardinal remedy against crime a preference for one kind of punishment,
namely imprisonment, and gives fixed and prescribed doses of this
remedy. It is the logical conclusion of retributive justice that it
travels by way of an illusory purification from moral guilt to the legal
responsibility of the criminal and thence on to a corresponding dose of
punishment, which has been previously prescribed and fixed.

We, on the other hand, hold that even the surviving form of repression,
which will be inevitable in spite of the application of the rules of
social prevention, should be widely different, on account of the
different conception which we have of crime and of penal justice.

In the majority of cases composed of minor crimes committed by people
belonging to the most numerous and least dangerous class of occasional
or passionate criminals, the only form of civil repression will be _the
compensation of the victim for his loss_. According to us, this should
he the only form of penalty imposed in the majority of minor crimes
committed by people who are not dangerous. In the present practice of
justice the compensation of the victim for his loss has become a
laughing stock, because this victim is systematically forgotten. The
whole attention of the classic school has been concentrated on the
juridical entity of the crime. The victim of the crime has been
forgotten, although this victim deserves philanthropic sympathy more
than the criminal who has done the harm. It is true, every, judge adds
to the sentence the formula that the criminal is responsible for the
injury and the costs to another authority. But the process of law puts
off this compensation to an indefinite time, and if the victim succeeds
a few years after the passing of the sentence in getting any action on
the matter, the criminal has in the meantime had a thousand legal
subterfuges to get away with his spoils. And thus the law itself becomes
the breeding ground of personal revenge, for Filangieri says aptly that
an innocent man grasps the dagger of the murderer, when the sword of
justice does not defend him.

Let us say at this point that the rigid application of compensation for
damages should never be displaced by imprisonment, because this would be
equivalent to sanctioning a real class distinction, for the rich can
laugh at damages, while the proletarian would have to make good a
sentence of 1000 lire by 100 days in prison, and in the meantime the
innocent family that tearfully waits for him outside, would be plunged
into desperate straits. Compensation for damages should never take
place in any other way than by means of the labor of the prisoner to an
extent satisfactory to the family of the injured. It has been attempted
to place this in an eclectic way on our law books, but this proposition
remains a dead letter and is not applied in Italy, because a stroke of
legislator's pen is not enough to change the fate of an entire nation.

These practical and efficient measures would be taken in the case of
lesser criminals. For the graver crimes committed by atavistic or
congenital criminals, of by persons inclining toward crime from acquired
habit or mental alienation, the positive school of criminology reserves
segregation for an indefinite time, for it is absurd to fix the time
beforehand in the case of a dangerous degenerate who has committed a
grave crime.

The question of indeterminate sentences has been recently discussed also
by Pessina, who combats it, of course, because the essence of the
classic school of criminology is retribution for a fault by means of
corresponding punishment. We might reply that no human judge can use any
other but the grossest scale by which to determine whether you are
responsible to the extent of the whole, one half, or one third. And
since there is no absolute or objective criterion by which the ratio of
crime to punishment can be determined, penal justice becomes a game of
chance. But we content ourselves by pointing out that segregation for an
indefinite time has so much truth in it, that even the most orthodox of
the classic school admit it, for instance in the case of criminals under
age. Now, if an indeterminate sentence is a violation of the principles
of the classic school, I cannot understand why it can be admitted in the
case of minors, but not in the case of adults. This is evidently an
expedient imposed by the exigencies of practical life, and only the
positive school of criminology can meet them by a logical
systematization. For the rest, indefinite segregation, such as we
propose for the most dangerous atavistic criminals, is a measure which
is already in use for ordinary lunatics as well us for criminal
lunatics. But it may be said that this is an administrative measure, not
a court sentence. Well, if any one is so fond of formulas as to make
this objection, he may get all the fun out of them that he likes. But it
is a fact that an insane person who has committed a crime is sent to a
building with iron bars on its gates such as a prison has. You may call
it an administrative building or a penal institute, the name is
unessential, for the substance alone counts. We maintain that congenital
or pathological criminals cannot be locked up for a definite term in any
institution, but should remain there until they are adapted for the
normal life of society.

This radical reform of principles carries with it a radical
transformation of details. Given an indeterminate segregation, there
should be organs of guardianship for persons so secluded, for instance
permanent committees for the periodical revision of sentences. In the
future, the criminal judge will always secure ample evidence to prove
whether a defendant is really guilty, for this is the fundamental point.
If it is certain that he has committed the crime, he should either be
excluded from social intercourse or sentenced to mate good the damage,
provided the criminal is not dangerous and the crime not grave. It is
absurd to sentence a man to five or six days imprisonment for some
insignificant misdemeanor. You lower him in the eyes of the public,
subject him to surveillance by the police, and send him to prison from
whence he will go out more corrupted than he was on entering it. It is
absurd to impose segregation in prison for small errors. Compensation
for injuries is enough. For the segregation of the graver criminals, the
management must be as scientific as it is now in insane asylums. It is
absurd to place an old pensioned soldier or a hardened bureaucrat at the
head of a penal institution. It is enough to visit one of those
compulsory human beehives and to see how a military discipline carries a
brutal hypocrisy into it. The management of such institutions must be
scientific, and the care of their inmates must be scientific, since a
grave crime is always a manifestation of the pathological condition of
the individual. In America there are already institutions, such as the
Elmira Reformatory, where the application of the methods of the positive
school of criminology has been solemnly promised. The director of the
institution is a psychologist, a physician. When a criminal under age is
brought in, he is studied from the point of view of physiology and
psychology. The treatment serves to regenerate the plants who, being
young, may still be straightened up. Scientific therapeutics can do
little for relapsed criminals. The present repression of crime robs the
prisoner of his personality and reduces him to a number, either in mass
imprisonment which corrupts him completely, or in solitary confinement,
which will turn him into a stupid or raving beast.

These methods are also gradually introduced in the insane asylums. I
must tell you a little story to illustrate this. When I was a professor
in Pisa, eight years ago, I took my students to the penitentiaries and
the asylum for the criminal insane in Montelupo, as I always used to do.
Dr. Algieri, the director of this asylum, showed us among others a very
interesting case. This was a man of about 45, whose history was shortly
the following: He was a bricklayer living in one of the cities of
Toscana. He had been a normal and honest man, a very good father, until
one unlucky day came, in which a brick falling from a factory broke a
part of his skull. He fell down unconscious, was picked up, carried to
the hospital, and cured of his external injury, but lost both his
physical and moral health. He became an epileptic.

And the lesion to which the loss of the normal function of his nervous
system was due transformed him from the docile and even-tempered man
that he had been into a quarrelsome and irritable individual, so that
he was less regular in his work, less moral and honest in his family
life, and was finally sentenced for a grave assault in a saloon brawl.
He was condemned as a common criminal to I don't know how many years of
imprisonment. But in prison, the exceptional conditions of seclusion
brought on a deterioration of his physical and moral health, his
epileptic fits became more frequent, his character grew worse. The
director of the prison sent him to the asylum for the insane criminals
at Montelupo, which shelters criminals suspected of insanity and insane
criminals.

Dr. Algieri studied the interesting case and came to the diagnosis that
there was splinter of bone in the man's brain which had not been noticed
in the treatment at the hospital, and that this was the cause of the
epilepsy and demoralization of the prisoner. He trepanned a portion of
the skull around the old wound and actually found a bone splinter lodged
in the man's brain. He removed the splinter, and put a platinum plate
over the trepanned place to protect the brain. The man improved, the
epileptic fits ceased, his moral condition became as normal as before,
and this bricklayer (how about the free will?) was dismissed from the
asylum, for he had given proofs of normal behavior for about five or six
months, thanks to the wisdom of the doctor who had relieved him of the
lesion which had made him epileptic and immoral. If this asylum for
insane criminals had not been in existence, he would have ended in a
padded cell, the same as another man whom I and my students saw a few
years ago in the Ancona penitentiary. The director, an old soldier, said
to me: "Professor, I shall show you a type of human beast. He is a man
who passes four fifths of the year in a padded cell." After calling six
attendants, "because we must be careful," we went to the cell, and I
said to that director: "Please, leave this man to me. I have little
faith in the existence of human beasts. Keep the attendants at a
distance." "No," replied the director, "my responsibility does not
permit me to do that."

But I insisted. The cell was opened, and the man came out of it really
like a wild beast with bulging eyes and distorted face. But I met him
with a smile and said to him kindly: "How are you?" This change of
treatment immediately changed the attitude of the man. He first had a
nervous fit and then broke into tears and told me his story with the
eloquence of suffering. He said that he had some days in which he was
not master of himself, but he recognized that he was good whenever the
attacks of temper were over. Without saying so, he thus invoked the
wisdom of human psychology for better treatment. There is indeed a
physician in those prisons, but he treats generally only the ordinary
diseases and is not familiar with special psychological knowledge. There
may be exceptions, and in that case it is a lucky coincidence. But the
prison doctor has also his practice outside and hurries through his
prison work. "They simulate sickness in order to get out of prison," he
says. And this will be so all the more that the physicians of our time
have not sufficient training in psychology to enable them to do justice
to the psychology of the criminal.

You must, therefore, give a scientific management to these institutions,
and you will then render humane even the treatment of those grave and
dangerous criminals, whose condition cannot be met by a simple
compensation of the injury they have done to others.

This is the function of repression as we look upon it, an inevitable
result of the positive data regarding the natural origin of crime.

We believe, in other words, that repression will play but an unimportant
role in the future. We believe that every branch of legislation will
come to prefer the remedies of social hygiene to those symptomatic
remedies and apply them from day to day. And thus we come to the theory
of the prevention of crime. Some say: "it is better to repress than to
prevent." Others say: "It is better to prevent than to repress." In
order to solve this conflict we must remember that there are two widely
different kinds of repression. There is the immediate, direct empirical
repression, which does not investigate the cause of criminality, but
waits until the crime is about to be committed. That is police
prevention. There is on the other hand a social prevention which has an
indirect and more remote function, which does not wait until crime is
about to be committed, but locates the causes of crime in poverty,
abandoned children, trampdom, etc, and seeks to prevent these
conditions by remote and indirect means. In Italy, prevention is
anonymous with arrest. That is to say, by repression is understood only
police repression. Under these circumstances, it is well to take it for
granted that some of the expected crimes will be carried out, for crimes
are not committed at fixed periods after first informing the police. The
damage done by criminality, and especially by political and social
criminality, against which police repression is particularly directed,
will be smaller than that done by the abuse inseparably connected with
police power. In the case of atavistic criminality, prevention does not
mean handcuffing of the man who is about to commit a crime, but devising
such economic and educational measures in the family and administration
as will eliminate the causes of crime or attenuate them, precisely
because punishment is less effective than prevention.

In other words, in order to prevent crime, we must have recourse to
measures which I have called "substitutes for punishment," and which
prevent, the development of crime, because they go to the source in
order to do away with effects.

Bentham narrates that the postal service in England, in the 18th
century, was in the hands of stage drivers, but this service was not
connected with the carrying of passengers, as became the custom later.
And then it was impossible to get the drivers to arrive on time,
because they stopped too often at the inns. Fines were imposed,
imprisonment was resorted to, yet the drivers arrived late. The
penalties did not accomplish any results so long as the causes remained.
Then the idea was conceived to carry passengers on the postal stages,
and that stopped the drivers from being late, because whenever they made
a halt, the passengers, who had an interest in arriving on time, called
the drivers and did not give them much time to linger. This is an
illustration of a substitute for punishment.

Another illustration. In the Middle Ages, up to the eve of our modern
civilization, piracy was in vogue. Is there anything that was not tried
to suppress piracy? The pirates were persecuted like wild beasts.
Whenever they were caught they were condemned to the most terrible forms
of death. Yet piracy continued. Then came the application of steam
navigation, and piracy disappeared as by magic. And robbery and
brigandage? They withstood the death penalty and extraordinary raids by
soldiers. And we witness today the spectacle of a not very serious
contest between the police who wants to catch a brigand, Musolino; and
a brigand who does not wish to be caught.

Wherever the woods are not traversed by railroads or tramways,
brigandage carries on its criminal trade. But wherever railroads and
tramways exist, brigandage is a form of crime which disappears. You may
insist on death penalties and imprisonment, but assault and robbery will
continue, because it is connected with geographical conditions. Use on
the other hand the instrument of civilization, without sentencing any
one, and brigandage and robbery will disappear before its light. And if
human beings in large industrial centers are herded together in
tenements and slum hotels, how can a humane judge aggravate the
penalties against sexual crimes? How can the sense of shame develop
among people, when young and old of both sexes are crowded together in
the same bed, in the same corrupted and corrupting environment, which
robs the human soul of every noble spark?

I might stray pretty far, if I were to continue these illustrations of
social hygiene which will be the true solution of the problem and the
supreme systematic, daily humane, and bloodless remedy against the
disease of criminality. However, we have not the simple faith that in
the near or far future of humanity crimes can ever be wholly eradicated.
Even Socialism, which looks forward to a fundamental transformation of
future society on the basis of brotherhood and social justice, cannot
elevate itself to the absolute and naive faith that criminality,
insanity, and suicide can ever fully disappear from the earth. But it is
our firm conviction that the endemic form of criminality, insanity, and
suicide will disappear, and that nothing will remain of them but rare
sporadic forms caused by lesion or telluric and other influences.

Since we have made the great discovery that malaria, which weighs upon
so many parts in Italy, is dependent for its transmission on a certain
mosquito, we have acquired the control of malarial therapeutics and are
enabled to protect individuals and families effectively against malaria.
But aside from this function of protecting people, there must be a
social prevention, and since those malarial insects can live only in
swampy districts, it is necessary to bring to those unreclaimed lands
the blessing of the hoe and plow, in order to remove the cause and do
away with the effects. The same problem confronts us in criminology. In
the society of the future we shall undertake this work of social
hygiene, and thereby we shall remove the epidemic forms of criminality.
And nine-tenths of the crimes will then disappear, so that nothing will
remain of them but exceptional cases. There will remain, for instance,
such cases as that of the bricklayer which I mentioned, because there
may always be accidents, no matter what may be the form of social
organization, and nervous disorders may thus appear in certain
individuals. But you can see that these would be exceptional cases of
criminality, which will be easily cured under the direction of science,
that will be the supreme and beneficent manager of institutes for the
segregation of those who will be unfit for social intercourse. The
problem of criminality will thus be solved as far as possible, because
the gradual transformation of society will eliminate the swamps in which
the miasma of crime may form and breed.

If we wish to apply these standards to an example which today attracts
the attention of all Italy to this noble city, if we desire to carry our
theories into the practice of contemporaneous life, if science is to
respond to the call of life, let us throw a glance at that form of
endemic criminality known as the Camorra in this city, which has taken
root here just as stabbing affrays have in certain centers of Turin, and
the Mafia in certain centers of Sicily. In the first place, we must not
be wilfully blind to facts and refuse to see that the citizens will
protect themselves, if social justice does not do so. And from that to
crime there is but a shot step. But which is the swampy soil in which
this social disease can spread and persist like leprosy in tin
collective organism? It is the economic poverty of the masses, which
lends to intellectual and moral poverty.

You have lately had in Naples a very fortunate struggle, which seems to
have overcome one of the representatives of the high Camorra. But can we
believe that the courageous work of a few public writers has touched the
roots of the Camorra in this city? It would be self-deception to think
so. For we see that plants blossom out again, even after the most
destructive hurricane has passed over them.

The healing of society is not so easy, that a collective plague may be
cured by the courageous acts of one or more individuals. The process is
much slower and more complicated. Nevertheless these episodes are
milestones of victory in the onward march of civilization, which will
paralyze the historical manifestations of social criminality. Here,
then, we have a city in which some hundred thousand people rise every
morning and do not know how to get a living, who have no fixed
occupation, because there is not enough industrial development to reach
that methodical application of labor which lifted humanity out of the
prehistoric forests. Truly, the human race progresses by two uplifting
energies: War and labor.

In primitive and savage society, when the human personality did not know
the check of social discipline, a military discipline held the members
of the tribe together. But war, while useful in primitive society, loses
its usefulness more and more, because it carries within itself the
cancer that paralyzes it.

While war compels collective groups to submit to the co-ordinating
discipline of human activity, it also decreases the respect for human
life. The soldier who kills his fellow man of a neighboring nation by a
stroke of his sword will easily lose the respect for the life of
members of his own social group. Then the second educational energy
interferes, the energy of labor, which makes itself felt at the decisive
moment of prehistoric development, when the human race passes from a
pastoral, hunting, and nomadic life Into an agriculture and settled
life. This is the historic stage, in which the collective ownership of
land and instruments of production is displaced by communal property,
family property, and finally individual property. During these stages,
humanity passes from individual and isolated labor in collective,
associated, co-ordinated labor. The remains of the neolithic epoch show
us the progress of the first workshops, in which our ancestors gathered
and fashioned their primitive tools and arms. They give us an idea of
associated and common labor, which then becomes the great uplifting
energy, because, unlike war, it does not carry within itself a disdain
or violation of the rights of others. Labor is the sole perennial energy
of mankind which leads to social perfection. But if you have 100,000
persons in a city like Naples who do not enjoy the certainty and
discipline of employment at methodical and common labor, you need not
wonder that the uncertainty of daily life, an illfed stomach, and an
anemic brain, result in the atrophy of all moral sentiment, and that the
evil plant of the Camorra spreads out over everything. The processes in
the law courts may attract the fleeting attention of public opinion, of
legislation, of government, to the disease from which this portion of
the social organism is suffering, but mere repression will not
accomplish anything lasting.

The teaching of science tells us plainly that in such a case of endemic
criminality social remedies must be applied to social evils. Unless the
remedy of social reforms accompanies the development and protection of
labor; unless justice is assured to every member of the collectivity,
the courage of this or that citizen is spent in vain, and the evil plant
will continue to thrive in the jungle.

Taught by the masterly and inflexible logic of facts, we come to the
adoption of the scientific method in criminal research and conclude that
a simple and uniform remedy like punishment is not adequate to cure such
a natural and social phenomenon as crime, which has its own natural and
social causes. The measures for the preservation of society against
criminality must be manifold, complex and varied, and must be the
outcome of persevering and systematic work on the part of legislators
and citizens on the solid foundation of a systematic collective economy.

Let me take leave of you with this practical conclusion, and give my
heart freedom to send to my brain a wave of fervent blood, which shall
express my enduring gratitude for the reception which you have given me.
Old in years, but young in spirit and energetic aspiration to every high
ideal, I tender you my sincere thanks. As a man and a citizen, I thank
you, because these three lectures have been for me a fountain of youth,
of faith, of enthusiasm. Thanks to them I return to the other fields of
my daily occupation with a greater faith in the future of my country and
of humanity. To you, young Italy, I address these words of thanks, glad
and honored, if my words have aroused in your soul one breath which will
make you stronger and more confident in the future of civilization and
social justice.






Produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed Proofreaders





CRIME

ITS CAUSE AND TREATMENT

BY

CLARENCE DARROW




1922




PREFACE


This book comes from the reflections and experience of more than forty
years spent in court. Aside from the practice of my profession, the
topics I have treated are such as have always held my interest and
inspired a taste for books that discuss the human machine with its
manifestations and the causes of its varied activity. I have endeavored
to present the latest scientific thought and investigation bearing upon
the question of human conduct. I do not pretend to be an original
investigator, nor an authority on biology, psychology or philosophy. I
have simply been a student giving the subject such attention as I could
during a fairly busy life. No doubt some of the scientific conclusions
stated are still debatable and may finally be rejected. The scientific
mind holds opinions tentatively and is always ready to reexamine, modify
or discard as new evidence comes to light.

Naturally in a book of this sort there are many references to the human
mind and its activities. In most books, whether scientific or not, the
mind has generally been more closely associated with the brain than any
other portion of the body. As a rule I have assumed that this view of
mind and brain is correct. Often I have referred to it as a matter of
course. I am aware that the latest investigations seem to establish the
mind more as a function of the nervous system and the vital organs than
of the brain. Whether the brain is like a telephone exchange and is only
concerned with automatically receiving and sending out messages to the
different parts of the body, or whether it registers impressions and
compares them and is the seat of consciousness and thought, is not
important in this discussion. Whatever mind may be, or through whatever
part of the human system it may function, can make no difference in the
conclusions I have reached.

The physical origin of such abnormalities of the mind as are called
"criminal" is a comparatively new idea. The whole subject has long been
dealt with from the standpoint of metaphysics. Man has slowly banished
chance from the material world and left behavior alone outside the realm
of cause and effect. It has not been long since insanity was treated as
a moral defect. It is now universally accepted as a functional defect of
the human structure in its relation to environment.

My main effort is to show that the laws that control human behavior are
as fixed and certain as those that control the physical world. In fact,
that the manifestations of the mind and the actions of men are a part of
the physical world.

I am fully aware that this book will be regarded as a plea or an
apology for the criminal. To hold him morally blameless could be nothing
else. Still if man's actions are governed by natural law, the sooner it
is recognized and understood, the sooner will sane treatment be adopted
in dealing with crime. The sooner too will sensible and humane remedies
be found for the treatment and cure of this most perplexing and painful
manifestation of human behavior. I have tried conscientiously to
understand the manifold actions of men and if I have to some degree
succeeded, then to that extent I have explained and excused. I am
convinced that if we were all-wise and all-understanding, we could not
condemn.

I have not thought it best to encumber the book with references and
foot-notes, for the reason that statistics and opinions on this subject
are conflicting and imperfect, and the results after all must rest on a
broad scientific understanding of life and the laws that control human
action. Although the conclusions arrived at are in variance with popular
opinions and long-settled practice, I am convinced that they are old
truths and are in keeping with the best thought of the time.

I am aware that scientifically the words "crime" and "criminal" should
not be used. These words are associated with the idea of uncaused and
voluntary actions. The whole field is a part of human behavior and
should not be separated from the other manifestations of life. I have
retained the words because they have a popular significance which is
easy to follow.

CLARENCE DARROW.

Chicago, August 1, 1922.




CONTENTS


Chapter

     I.  WHAT IS CRIME?
    II.  PURPOSE OF PUNISHMENT
   III.  RESPONSIBILITY FOR CRIME
    IV.  ENVIRONMENT
     V.  ADJUSTING HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT
    VI.  PSYCHOLOGY OF CRIMINAL CONDUCT
   VII.  THE CRIMINAL
  VIII.  THE FEMALE CRIMINAL
    IX.  THE JUVENILE CRIMINAL
     X.  HOMICIDE
    XI.  SEX CRIMES
   XII.  ROBBERY AND BURGLARY
  XIII.  MAN AS A PREDATORY ANIMAL
   XIV.  CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY
    XV.  ATTITUDE OF THE CRIMINAL
   XVI.  THE LAW AND THE CRIMINAL
  XVII.  REPEALING LAWS
 XVIII.  IS CRIME INCREASING?
   XIX.  MEDICAL EXPERTS
    XX.  PUNISHMENT
   XXI.  EFFECT OF PUNISHMENT ON OTHERS
  XXII.  EVOLUTION OF PUNISHMENT
 XXIII.  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
  XXIV.  STIGMATA OF THE CRIMINAL
   XXV.  THE GOOD IN CRIMINALS
  XXVI.  THE DEFECTIVE AND INSANE
 XXVII.  SOCIAL CONTROL
XXVIII.  INDUSTRIALISM AND CRIME
  XXIX.  WAR AND CRIME
   XXX.  CIVILIZATION AND CRIME
  XXXI.  THE CONVICT
 XXXII.  ISOLATION AND STERILIZATION
XXXIII.  CRIME, DISEASE AND ACCIDENT
 XXXIV.  LUCK AND CHANCE
  XXXV.  PARDONS AND PAROLES
 XXXVI.  REMEDIES

         INDEX




CRIME

ITS CAUSE AND TREATMENT




I

WHAT IS CRIME?


There can be no sane discussion of "crime" and "criminals" without an
investigation of the meaning of the words. A large majority of men, even
among the educated, speak of a "criminal" as if the word had a clearly
defined meaning and as if men were divided by a plain and distinct line
into the criminal and the virtuous. As a matter of fact, there is no
such division, and from the nature of things, there never can be such a
line.

Strictly speaking, a crime is an act forbidden by the law of the land,
and one which is considered sufficiently serious to warrant providing
penalties for its commission. It does not necessarily follow that this
act is either good or bad; the punishment follows for the violation of
the law and not necessarily for any moral transgression. No doubt most
of the things forbidden by the penal code are such as are injurious to
the organized society of the time and place, and are usually of such a
character as for a long period of time, and in most countries, have
been classed as criminal. But even then it does not always follow that
the violator of the law is not a person of higher type than the majority
who are directly and indirectly responsible for the law.

It is apparent that a thing is not necessarily bad because it is
forbidden by the law. Legislators are forever repealing and abolishing
criminal statutes, and organized society is constantly ignoring laws,
until they fall into disuse and die. The laws against witchcraft, the
long line of "blue laws," the laws affecting religious beliefs and many
social customs, are well-known examples of legal and innocent acts which
legislatures and courts have once made criminal. Not only are criminal
statutes always dying by repeal or repeated violation, but every time a
legislature meets, it changes penalties for existing crimes and makes
criminal certain acts that were not forbidden before.

Judging from the kind of men sent to the State legislatures and to
Congress, the fact that certain things are forbidden does not mean that
these things are necessarily evil; but rather, that politicians believe
there is a demand for such legislation from the class of society that is
most powerful in political action. No one who examines the question can
be satisfied that a thing is intrinsically wrong because it is forbidden
by a legislative body.

Other more or less popular opinions of the way to determine right or
wrong are found to be no more satisfactory. Many believe that the
question of whether an act is right or wrong is to be settled by a
religious doctrine; but the difficulties are still greater in this
direction. First of all, this involves a thorough and judicial inquiry
into the merits of many, if not all, forms of religion, an investigation
which has never been made, and from the nature of things cannot be made.
The fact is, that one's religious opinions are settled long before he
begins to investigate and quite by other processes than reason. Then,
too, all religious precepts rest on interpretation, and even the things
that seem the plainest have ever been subject to manifold and sometimes
conflicting construction. Few if any religious commands can be, or ever
were, implicitly relied on without interpretation. The command, "Thou
shalt not kill," seems plain, but does even this furnish an infallible
rule of conduct?

Of course this commandment could not be meant to forbid killing animals.
Yet there are many people who believe that it does, or at least should.
No Christian state makes it apply to men convicted of crime, or against
killing in war, and yet a considerable minority has always held that
both forms of killing violate the commandment. Neither can it be held to
apply to accidental killings, or killings in self-defense, or in defense
of property or family. Laws, too, provide all grades of punishment for
different kinds of killing, from very light penalties up to death.
Manifestly, then, the commandment must be interpreted, "Thou shalt not
kill when it is wrong to kill," and therefore it furnishes no guide to
conduct. As well say: "Thou shalt do nothing that is wrong." Religious
doctrines do not and clearly cannot be adopted as the criminal code of a
state.

In this uncertainty as to the basis of good and bad conduct, many appeal
to "conscience" as the infallible guide. What is conscience? It
manifestly is not a distinct faculty of the mind, and if it were, would
it be more reliable than the other faculties? It has been often said
that some divine power implanted conscience in every human being. Apart
from the question of whether human beings are different in kind from
other organisms, which will be discussed later, if conscience has been
placed in man by a divine power, why have not all peoples been furnished
with the same guide? There is no doubt that all men of any mentality
have what is called a conscience; that is, a feeling that certain things
are right, and certain other things are wrong. This conscience does not
affect all the actions of life, but probably the ones which to them are
the most important. It varies, however, with the individual. What reason
has the world to believe that conscience is a correct guide to right
and wrong?

The origin of conscience is easily understood. One's conscience is
formed as his habits are formed--by the time and place in which he
lives; it grows with his teachings, his habits and beliefs. With most
people it takes on the color of the community where they live. With some
people the eating of pork would hurt their conscience; with others the
eating of any meat; with some the eating of meat on Friday, and with
others the playing of any game of chance for money, or the playing of
any game on Sunday, or the drinking of intoxicating liquors. Conscience
is purely a matter of environment, education and temperament, and is no
more infallible than any habit or belief. Whether one should always
follow his own conscience is another question, and cannot be confounded
with the question as to whether conscience is an infallible guide to
conduct.

Some seek to avoid the manifold difficulties of the problem by saying
that a "criminal" is one who is "anti-social." But does this bring us
nearer to the light? An anti-social person is one whose life is hostile
to the organization or the society in which he lives; one who injures
the peace, contentment, prosperity or well-being of his neighbors, or
the political or social organization in which his life is cast.

In this sense many of the most venerated men of history have been
criminals; their lives and teachings have been in greater or lesser
conflict with the doctrines, habits and beliefs of the communities where
they lived. From the nature of things the wise man and the idealist can
never be contented with existing things, and their lives are a constant
battle for change. If the anti-social individual should be punished,
what of many of the profiteers and captains of industry who manipulate
business and property for purely selfish ends? What of many of our great
financiers who use every possible reform and conventional catch word as
a means of affecting public opinion, so that they may control the
resources of the earth and exploit their fellows for their own gain?

No two men have the same power of adaptation to the group, and it is
quite plain that the ones who are the most servile and obedient to the
opinions and life of the crowd are the greatest enemies to change and
individuality. The fact is, none of the generally accepted theories of
the basis of right and wrong has ever been the foundation of law or
morals. The basis that the world has always followed, and perhaps always
will accept, is not hard to find.

The criminal is the one who violates habits and customs of life, the
"folk-ways" of the community where he lives. These customs and folk-ways
must be so important in the opinion of the community as to make their
violation a serious affair. Such violation is considered evil regardless
of whether the motives are selfish or unselfish, good or bad. The
folk-ways have a certain validity and a certain right to respect, but no
one who believes in change can deny that they are a hindrance as well as
a good. Men did not arrive at moral ideas by a scientific or a religious
investigation of good and bad, of right and wrong, of social or
anti-social life.

Man lived before he wrote laws, and before he philosophized. He began
living simply and automatically; he adopted various "taboos" which to
him were omens of bad luck, and certain charms, incantations and the
like, which made him immune from ill-fortune.

All sorts of objects, acts and phenomena have been the subjects of
taboo, and just as numerous and weird have been the charms and amulets
and ceremonies that saved him from the dangers that everywhere beset his
way. The life of the primitive human being was a journey down a narrow
path; outside were infinite dangers from which magic alone could make
him safe.

All animal life automatically groups itself more or less closely into
herds. Buffaloes, horses and wolves run in packs. Some of these groups
are knit closely together like ants and bees, while the units of others
move much more widely apart. But whatever the group may be, its units
must conform. If the wolf gets too far from the pack it suffers or dies;
it matters not whether it be to the right or the left, behind or ahead,
it must stay with the pack or be lost.

Men from the earliest time arranged themselves into groups; they
traveled in a certain way; they established habits and customs and ways
of life. These "folk-ways" were born long before human laws and were
enforced more rigidly than the statutes of a later age. Slowly men
embodied their "taboos," their incantations, their habits and customs
into religions and statutes. A law was only a codification of a habit or
custom that long ago was a part of the life of a people. The legislator
never really makes the law; he simply writes in the books what has
already become the rule of action by force of custom or opinion, or at
least what he thinks has become a law.

One class of men has always been anxious to keep step with the crowd.
The way is easier and the rewards more certain. Another class has been
skeptical and resentful of the crowd. These men have refused to follow
down the beaten path; they strayed into the wilderness seeking new and
better ways. Sometimes others have followed and a shorter path was made.
Often they have perished because they left the herd. In the sight of the
organized unit and the society of the time and place, the man who kept
the path did right. The man who tried to make a new path and left the
herd did wrong. In its last analysis, the criminal is the one who leaves
the pack. He may lag behind or go in front, he may travel to the right
or to the left, he may be better or worse, but his fate is the same.

The beaten path, however formed or however unscientific, has some right
to exist. On the whole it has tended to preserve life, and it is the way
of least resistance for the human race. On the other hand it is not the
best, and the way has ever been made easier by those who have violated
precepts and defied some of the concepts of the time. Both ways are
right and both ways are wrong. The conflict between the two ways is as
old as the human race.

Paths and customs and institutions are forever changing. So are ideas of
right and wrong, and so, too, are statutes. The law, no doubt, makes it
harder for customs and habits to be changed, for it adds to the inertia
of the existing thing.

Is there, then, nothing in the basis of right and wrong that answers to
the common conception of these words? There are some customs that have
been forbidden longer and which, it seems, must necessarily be longer
prohibited; but the origin of all is the same. A changing world has
shown how the most shocking crimes punished by the severest penalties
have been taken from the calendar and no longer even bear the suspicion
of wrong. Religious differences, witchcraft and sorcery have probably
brought more severe punishments than any other acts; yet a change of
habit and custom and belief has long since abolished all such crimes.
So, too, crimes come and go with new ideals, new movements and
conditions. The largest portion of our criminal code deals with the
rights of property; yet nearly all of this is of comparatively modern
growth. A new emotion may take possession of man which will result in
the repeal of many if not all of these statutes, and place some other
consideration above property, which seems to be the controlling emotion
of today.

Crime, strictly speaking, is only such conduct or acts as are forbidden
by the law and for which penalties are prescribed. The classification of
the act does not necessarily have relation to moral conduct. This cannot
be fixed by any exact standard. There is no straight clear line between
the good and bad, the right and wrong. The general ways of determining
good and bad conduct are of little value. The line between the two is
always uncertain and shifting. And, in the last analysis, good or bad
conduct rests upon the "folk-ways," the habits, beliefs and customs of a
community. While this is the real basis of judging conduct, it is
always changing, and from the nature of things, if it could be made
stable, it would mean that society was stratified and all hope of
improvement dead.




II

PURPOSE OF PUNISHMENT


Neither the purpose nor the effect of punishment has ever been
definitely agreed upon, even by its most strenuous advocates. So long as
punishment persists it will be a subject of discussion and dispute. No
doubt the idea of punishment originated in the feeling of resentment and
hatred and vengeance that, to some extent at least, is incident to life.
The dog is hit with a stick and turns and bites the stick. Animals repel
attack and fight their enemies to death. The primitive man vented his
hatred and vengeance on things animate and inanimate. In the tribes no
injury was satisfied until some member of the offending tribe was
killed. In more recent times family feuds have followed down the
generations and were not forgotten until the last member of a family was
destroyed. Biologically, anger and hatred follow fear and injury, and
punishment follows these in turn. Individuals, communities and whole
peoples hate and swear vengeance for an injury, real or fancied.
Punishments, even to the extent of death, are inflicted where there can
be no possible object except revenge. Whether the victim is weak or
strong, old or young, sane or insane, makes no difference; men and
societies react to injury exactly as animals react.

That vengeance is the moving purpose of punishment is abundantly shown
by the religious teachings that shape the ethical ideas of the Western
world. The Old Testament abounds in the justification of vengeance. A
few quotations amply show the Biblical approval of this doctrine:

    Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
    Genesis 9;6.

    No expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed
    therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. Numbers 35;33.

    Wherefore should the nations [Gentiles] say, Where is their [the
    Jews'] God? Let the avenging of the blood of thy servants which is
    shed, be known among the nations in our sight. Psalms 79;10.

    The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance; he shall
    wash his feet in the blood of the wicked; so that men shall say,
    Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God
    that judgeth in the earth. Psalms 58;10.

    And I [God] will execute vengeance in anger and wrath upon the
    nations which hearkened not. Micah 5;15.

    All things are cleansed with blood, and apart from the shedding of
    blood there is no remission. Hebrews 9;22.

    For we know him that said, Vengeance belongeth unto me. ... It is a
    fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Hebrews
    10;30.

True it is often claimed that Jesus repudiated the doctrine of
vengeance. The passage of 5th Matthew, 38-30 is often quoted in proof of
this assertion--"Ye have heard that it hath been said, an eye for an
eye and a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, that ye resist not
evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also." But the gospels and the other books of the New Testament
show plainly that non-resistance was not laid down as a rule for the
guidance of mankind, but only as a policy by one sect of the Jews and
Christians to save themselves from the Romans. The reason for the
doctrine was the belief that resistance was hopeless, and that God who
had the power would in his own time visit on the oppressors the
vengeance that the Jews and Christians were too weak to inflict. Jesus
and the early Christians knew of no people beyond their immediate
territory, and they did not appeal to mankind as a whole, or to future
generations.

The early Christians believed in judging and in punishment as vengeance,
the same as the Jews and other peoples believed in it. (See 13 Matthew
41-43, 23 Matthew 33, 25 Matthew 46.) They believed that the end of the
world was at hand; that the coming of the Lord was imminent; that some
of that generation would not taste death, and that God would punish
sinners in his own time. The New Testament is replete with this
doctrine, which was stated and elaborated in the so-called "Revelations
of St. Peter."

Probably this document was composed about the year 150 A.D. and by the
year 200 it was read as "Scripture" in some Christian communities.
Subsequently it disappeared and was known only by name until a
substantial fragment of the document was discovered at Akhmim in Egypt,
in the year 1887. A portion of it represents a scene in which the
disciples of Jesus ask him to show them the state of the righteous dead,
in order that this knowledge may be used to encourage people to accept
Christianity. The request is granted and the disciples are shown not
only a vision of the delightful abodes of the righteous, but also a
vivid picture of the punishments that are being meted out to the wicked.
It is interesting to note how the punishments are devised to balance in
truly retributive fashion the crimes mentioned. It is this type of
tradition that furnished Dante and Milton the basis for their pictures
of hell.

The following is the more interesting portion of this document:

    And the Lord showed me [Peter] a very great country outside of this
    world, exceeding bright with light, and the air there lighted with
    rays of the sun, and the earth itself blooming with unfading flowers
    and full of spices and plants, fair-flowering and incorruptible and
    bearing blessed fruit. And so great was the perfume that it was
    borne thence even unto us. And the dwellers in that place were clad
    in the raiment of shining angels and their raiment was like unto
    their country; and angels hovered about them there. And the glory of
    the dwellers there was equal, and with one voice they sang praises
    alternately to the Lord God, rejoicing in that place. The Lord said
    to us, This is the place of your brethren the righteous.

    And over against that place I saw another, exceedingly parched, and
    it was the place of punishment. And those who were being punished
    there and the angels who punished them wore dark raiment like the
    air of the place.

    Certain persons there were hanging by the tongue. These were they
    who blaspheme the way of righteousness, and under them lay a fire
    whose flames tortured them.

    Also there was a great lake full of flaming mire in which were
    certain men that pervert righteousness, and tormenting angels
    afflicted them.

    And there were also others, women, hanged by their hair over that
    mire that flamed up, and these were they who adorned themselves for
    adultery. And the men who mingled with them in the defilement of
    adultery, were hanging by the feet with their heads in that mire,
    and they exclaimed in a loud voice: We did not believe that we
    should come to this place.

    And I saw the murderers and their accomplices cast into a certain
    narrow place full of evil snakes where these evil beasts smote them
    while they turned to and fro in that punishment, and worms like
    great black clouds afflicted them. And the souls of those who had
    been murdered said, as they stood and looked upon the punishment of
    their murderers, O God, just is thy judgment.

    And other men and women were aflame up to the middle, and were cast
    into a dark place and were beaten by evil spirits, and their inwards
    were eaten by restless worms. These were they who persecuted the
    righteous and delivered them up to the authorities.

    And over against these were other men and women gnawing their
    tongues and having flaming fire in their mouths. These were false
    witnesses.

    And in a certain other place there were pebbles sharper than swords
    or any needle, red hot, and women and men in tattered and filthy
    raiment, rolled about on them in punishment. These were the rich who
    trusted in their riches and had no pity for orphans and widows and
    despised the commandment of God.

    And in another great lake full of boiling pitch and blood and mire
    stood men and women up to their knees. These were the usurers and
    those who take compound interest.

The noted preacher, scholar and president of Princeton College, Jonathan
Edwards, in his famous sermon, "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God,"
put in forcible and picturesque language the religious and legal view of
punishment as vengeance:

    They [sinners] deserve to be cast into hell; so that divine justice
    never stands in the way, it makes no objection against God's using
    His power at any moment to destroy them. Yea, on the contrary,
    justice calls aloud for an infinite punishment on their sins. Divine
    justice says of the tree that brings forth such grapes of Sodom,
    "Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground?" Luke xiii. 7. The sword
    of divine justice is every moment brandished over their heads, and
    it is nothing but the hand of arbitrary mercy, and God's mere will,
    that holds it back.

    They are now the objects of that very same anger and wrath of God,
    that is expressed in the torments of hell: and the reason why they
    do not go down to hell at each moment, is not because God, in whose
    power they are, is not then very angry with them; as angry as He is
    with many of those miserable creatures that He is now tormenting in
    hell, and do there feel and bear the fierceness of His wrath. Yea,
    God is a great deal more angry with great numbers that are now on
    earth; yea, doubtless, with many that are now in this congregation,
    that, it may be, are at ease and quiet, than He is with many of
    those that are now in the flames of hell.

    So that it is not because God is unmindful of their wickedness and
    does not resent it, that He does not let loose His hand and cut them
    off. God is not altogether such a one as themselves, though they
    imagine Him to be so. The wrath of God burns against them; their
    damnation does not slumber; the pit is prepared; the fire is made
    ready; the furnace is now hot; ready to receive them; the flames
    rage and glow. The glittering sword is whet and held over them, and
    the pit hath opened her mouth under them.

    The God that holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a
    spider, or some loathsome insect over the fire, abhors you, and is
    dreadfully provoked; His wrath towards you burns like fire; He looks
    upon you as worthy of nothing else, but to be cast into the fire; He
    is of purer eyes than to bear to have you in His sight; you are ten
    thousand times more abominable in His eyes than the most hateful and
    venomous serpent is in ours. You have offended Him infinitely more
    than ever a stubborn rebel did his prince: and yet it is nothing but
    His hand that holds you from falling into the fire every moment; it
    is ascribed to nothing else, that you did not go to hell the last
    night; that you was suffered to awake again in this world, after you
    closed your eyes to sleep; and there is no other reason to be given,
    why you have not dropped into hell since you arose in the morning,
    but that God's hand has held you up; there is no other reason to be
    given why you have not gone to hell, since you have sat here in the
    house of God provoking His pure eyes by your sinful, wicked manner
    of attending His solemn worship; yea, there is nothing else that is
    to be given as a reason why you do not this very moment drop down
    into hell.

    O sinner! consider the fearful danger you are in: it is a great
    furnace of wrath, a wide and bottomless pit, full of the fire of
    wrath, that you are held over in the hand of that God whose wrath is
    provoked and incensed as much against you as against many of the
    damned in hell: you hang by a slender thread, with the flames of
    divine wrath flashing about it, and ready every moment to singe it
    and burn it asunder; and you have no interest in any Mediator, and
    nothing to lay hold of to save yourself, nothing to keep off the
    flames of wrath, nothing of your own, nothing that you ever have
    done, nothing that you can do, to induce God to spare you one
    moment.

    Consider this, you that are here present, that yet remain in an
    unregenerate state. That God will execute the fierceness of His
    anger, implies that He will inflict wrath without any pity.

Even though increasing knowledge may have somewhat softened the language
of vengeance, still both religion and the law have found their chief
justification for punishment in the doctrine of revenge.

The church has constantly taught from the first that God would punish
the sinner with everlasting torment. It has taught that all are bad from
birth and can be saved only by grace. The punishment to be suffered was
as terrible as man's mind could conceive. It would continue infinitely
beyond the time when it might be needed for correction or example. In
spite of a few humane or over-sensitive ministers, the doctrine persists
and is carefully preserved by the church. That the State likewise holds
fast to the idea of vengeance, punishment for the sake of suffering, is
just as evident. One needs only to note the force and degree of hatred
of the good to the one accused of crime, and the zeal that is shown for
a man hunt, to realize how deeply the feeling of vengeance is planted in
the structure of man. The truth is that it was a part of life before
religion and political institutions were evolved.

Still, most people are now ashamed to admit that punishment is based on
vengeance and, for that reason, various excuses and apologies have been
offered for the cruelty that goes with it. Some of the more humane, or
"squeamish," who still believe in punishment, contend that the object of
this infliction is the reformation of the victim. This, of course,
cannot be urged of the death penalty or even punishment for life, or for
very long-term sentences. In these cases there is neither inducement to
reform nor any object in the reformation. No matter how thorough the
reform, the prisoner never goes back to society, or he returns after
there is no longer a chance for him to be of use to the world or to
enjoy life.

Those who say that punishment is for the purpose of reforming the
prisoner are not familiar with human psychology. The prison almost
invariably tends to brutalize men and breeds bitterness and blank
despair. The life of the ordinary prisoner is given over to criticism
and resentment against existing things, especially to settled hatred of
those who are responsible for his punishment. Only a few, and these are
the weakest, ever blame themselves for their situation. Every man of
intelligence can trace the various steps that led him to the prison
door, and he can feel, if he does not understand, how inevitable each
step was. The number of "repeaters" in prison shows the effect of this
kind of a living death upon the inmates. To be branded as a criminal and
turned out in the world again leaves one weakened in the struggle of
life and handicapped in a race that is hard enough for most men at the
best. In prison and after leaving prison, the man lives in a world of
his own; a world where all moral values are different from those
professed by the jailer and society in general. The great influence that
helps to keep many men from committing crime--the judgment of his
fellows--no longer deters him in his conduct. In fact, every person who
understands penal institutions--no matter how well such places are
managed--knows that a thousand are injured or utterly destroyed by
service in prison, where one is helped.

Very few persons seriously believe that offenders are sent to prison out
of kindness to the men. If there were any foundation for this idea, each
prisoner would be carefully observed, and when he was fit would be
returned to the world. Not even the parole laws, which provide various
reasons and ways for shortening sentences, ever lay down the rule that
one may be released when he has reformed.

A much larger class of people offers the excuse that punishment deters
from crime. In fact, this idea is so well rooted that few think of
questioning it. The idea that punishment deters from crime does not mean
that the individual prisoner is prevented from another criminal act. A
convicted man is kept in jail for as long a time as in the judgment of
the jury, the court, or the parole board, will make him atone, or at
least suffer sufficiently for the offence. If the terms are not long
enough, they can be made longer. The idea that punishment deters, means
that unless A shall be punished for murder, then B will kill; therefore
A must be punished, not for his own sake, but to keep B from crime. This
is vicarious punishment which can hardly appeal to one who is either
just or humane. But does punishing A keep B from the commission of
crime? It certainly does not make a more social man of B. If it operates
on him in any way it is to make him afraid to commit crime; but the
direct result of scaring B is not to keep him from the commission of
crime, but to make him use precautions that will keep him safe from
discovery. How far the fear of detection and punishment prevents crime
is, of course, purely theoretical and cannot be settled either by
statistics or logic. One thing is sure, that if B is kept from crime, it
is through fear, and of all the enemies of man, fear is the one which
causes most misery and pain.

There are many facts that show that the punishment of one does not deter
others. Over and over again crimes are committed, by the young
especially, that resemble in every detail a previous crime which has
received large publicity through the newspapers, often through the
hanging of some culprit. Even the unthinking public, always clamoring
for severe penalties, does not believe that the example of punishment
deters. The public forbids the exhibition of pictures of hangings and of
crimes. Somehow, vaguely and dimly as most men see everything, the
public realizes that instead of punishments preventing crime,
punishments suggest crime. In the olden days when men admitted that
vengeance and punishment went together, they were at least more logical,
for executions were in the open light of day so all might see and be
deterred.

But this sort of punishment was abolished long ago. Now executions are
behind tightly-closed doors, often before day-break, with no one present
but a doctor to pronounce the victim dead, a preacher to try to save his
soul, and a few favored guests. The most humane individuals advocate
suppressing the stories in the newspapers, beyond an obituary notice for
the deceased, and forbidding the publication of the details of the crime
and its penalty. So far as this succeeds, it is a confession that
punishment does not deter, but instead suggests and encourages crime.
The idea that crime is prevented by punishment, if believed, would be
followed by requirements that the young should visit prisons that they
might realize the consequences of crime, and that all executions should
be public and should be performed on the highest hill.

So much has been written about the decrease of crime that follows the
reduction of penalties, and likewise about the numerous crimes of
violence which generally follow public hangings, that it is hardly
necessary to recall it to the reader. The fact is, those who say that
punishment deters have no confidence in their own statement.

The operations of the human mind have always been clouded in mystery and
obscurity. The effect of what is seen and heard and felt has never been
certain. The great power of suggestion, especially with the young, is
only now beginning to be understood. Many things can be done by
suggestion. The immature brain records everything that the senses carry
to it through the nerves; these records, through lively imagination, are
constantly suggesting and urging to action. All good teachers and
observing parents know its power and, so far as such matters can be
proved, it seems clear that the details of crime and punishment
reproduce themselves over and over again by the suggestion carried to
the mind, especially with the young. There is every reason to think that
suggestions of crime will affect the mind as much as suggestions of
adventure, love or war.

Does it then follow that no one shall be restrained from freedom on
account of either his actions or his nature? It is really idle to ask
this question. No matter what one may think of the so-called criminal
and his responsibility, or quite regardless of whether we feel pity or
hatred, the great mass of the community will not suffer one who has
little self-control to interfere seriously and directly with the peace
and happiness of the community in which he lives. Whether by the action
of the law or by vigilance committees, some men will not be allowed to
be at large. Doubtless under proper treatment and environment most of
this sort of anti-social conduct would disappear, but for many years to
come it will remain.

Taking away the liberty of another has only one justification. The great
mass of people in any community must and will act for self-defense. It
needs no fine-spun theories to justify it. Hatred should have nothing to
do with it. The conduct of man in this regard is only like that of the
animal which destroys the one that is inimical to the pack or herd. The
self-protection of the group is the same as the self-protection of the
individual. Both the group and the man will save their lives against a
lunatic or any other menace, regardless of the nature of the menace.

Punishment, in the proper meaning of the term, cannot be justified by
any reasoning. Punishment really means the infliction of pain because
the individual has wilfully transgressed. Its supposed justification is
that somehow the evil done is atoned for, or made good, or balanced if
the author of the evil shall suffer pain. Punishment means that the
suffering by the victim is the end, and it does not mean that any good
will grow out of the suffering. It seems as if the question only needed
to be stated for right-thinking men to deny the validity of punishment.

It may be argued that whether the victim is punished or simply
restrained can make no difference. In this lies the whole difference
between scientific and humane treatment of the unfortunate, and the
vengeful punishments that have always been visited by the strong upon
the helpless and the weak. Society restrains the imbecile, the
dangerously insane, the victims of deadly, contagious diseases. All
these are restrained without any feeling of hatred, but with pity and
understanding. Society does not keep one of these persons under
restraint after he has sufficiently recovered to make it safe to return
him to the community; neither does it release one until he is safe. It
uses the best methods for his treatment that may make him fit to live
with his fellows, and the best efforts to place him in a proper
environment when discharged. Neither does any disgrace nor humiliation
nor handicap attach to the unfortunate when discharged. In a sense, the
attitude of mind held by the group toward the "criminal" is the whole
question. From this everything follows, and without it change or
humanity or hope is not possible.

It is true that insane asylums, homes for the feeble-minded, and
hospitals are not what they should be, nor what they will be some day.
All of this is not due to the attitude of the mind of the public, but is
due to the method of administration which is not within the scope of
this book. If justice and humanity shall ever have to do with the
treatment of the criminal, and if science shall ever be called upon in
this, one of the most serious and painful questions of the ages, it is
necessary, first, that the public shall have a better understanding of
crime and criminals.




III

RESPONSIBILITY FOR CRIME


It is only lately that we are beginning to find out anything about the
origin and nature of man. Laws have come down to us from old customs and
folk-ways based on primitive ideas of man's origin, capacity and
responsibility. It has been generally assumed that man was created
different from all the rest of animal life; that man alone was endowed
with a soul and with the power to tell good from evil; that in the
beginning man was perfect but yielded to temptation, and since then has
been the subject of an everlasting contest between the powers of light
and the powers of darkness for the possession of his soul; that man not
only knew good from evil, but was endowed with "free will," and had the
power to choose between good and evil; and that when he did wrong he
deliberately chose to do so out of an abandoned and malignant heart; and
that all men alike were endowed with this power and all alike were
responsible for their acts.

The old indictments charged that: "John Smith, being a wicked, malicious
and evil disposed person, not having the fear of God before his eyes,
but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil etc." It
followed, of course, that John Smith should be punished or made to
suffer, for he had purposely brought all the evil on himself. The old
idea is still the foundation of the world's judgment of men, in court
and out. Of course this idea leaves no room for mercy and understanding.
Neither does it leave any chance to give the criminal the proper
treatment for his defects which might permit him to lead a normal life.

As a matter of fact, every scientific man knows that the origin of life
is quite different from this; that the whole current conception of the
individual and his responsibility is a gross error; and that no correct
judgments can be based on the old foundation; that no sane treatment of
crime can follow this assumption of man's origin and nature; that the
result of this foundation is almost infinite injustice and cruelty to a
large and constantly growing number of men and women; and that it tends
to endless injury and evil to society. The conception of man and the
treatment of crime and criminals by the courts is not better nor more
scientific than was the old-time doctors' treatment of physical ailments
by magic, incantations and sorcery.

The origin and development of all animal life is the same. In fact, the
development of plant life is on a similar pattern. The origin of a
human being is a simple cell, an egg. This cell is fertilized and
through growth after fertilization begins dividing and building and
taking on the form and semblance of a human being. All children have the
same origin, the same development and the same pattern, yet no two are
alike. Each has a distinct and different equipment from any of the
others. The size of the body, real and potential; the size and fineness
of the brain; the delicacy and sensitiveness of the nervous system; the
innate instincts upon which conduct mainly rests; the emotions which
control action and which flow from the structure--in short, the degree
of perfection and imperfection of the machine is all hidden in the
original cell. No well-informed person now thinks of questioning the
fact that the main characteristics of the human being, as of every other
animal and plant, are hidden in the germ or seed from which it sprang.

The laws of growth and development which govern organic matter were not
made for man and do not except man. Life begins with the cell and
evolves according to pattern. If the cell is that of a human being, it
will be black or white, male or female, tall or short, intelligent or
stupid, sensitive or stolid; it will develop a large or a small brain, a
fine one or a poor one, a sensitive nervous system or a defective one;
it will be ruled by instincts that are all-powerful and controlling,
and even the color of the hair and eyes are in the pattern. The whole
structure, potentially, is in the original cell, and infinite knowledge
could tell how the structure would respond to sensations as it passed
through life.

It is obvious that the kinds and differences of human structures are
infinite. It is no more possible for all men to respond equally to the
same stimulus, than it is for all machines or all animals to respond
alike. It is apparent that not one of the structures can ever work
perfectly, and that from the best down to the poorest structures are
infinite degrees of perfection, even down to the machine that has no
capacity for any kind of work.

No ordinarily intelligent farmer doubts for a moment that all of this is
true in the breeding of stock. He would never expect the same results
from various breeds of cattle or even from all cattle of the same breed.

There is no exception to the rule that the whole life, with every
tendency, is potential in the original cell. An acorn will invariably
produce an oak tree. It can produce no other tree, and it will always
develop true to its own pattern. The tree may be larger or smaller, more
or less symmetrical, stronger or weaker, but always true to the general
pattern of the oak. Variations will be certain, due in part to heredity
and in part to environment.

That the baby had nothing to do with its equipment will readily be
admitted by everyone. The child is born with a brain of a certain size
and fineness. It is born with a nervous system made up of an infinite
number of fine fibers reaching all parts of the body, with fixed
stations or receivers like the central stations of a telephone system,
and with a grand central exchange in the brain. If one can imagine all
of the telephone wires in the world centered in one station, he may have
some sort of a conception of the separate nerves that bring impressions
to the brain and send directions out from it, which together make up the
nervous system of man. None of these systems is perfect. They are of all
degrees of imperfection down to the utterly useless or worse than
useless system. These nerves are of all degrees of sensitiveness and
accuracy in receiving and transmitting messages. Some may work well,
others imperfectly. No one is much surprised when an automobile,
equipped with a mechanism much simpler than the nervous system, refuses
to respond properly.

The child is born without knowledge but with certain tendencies,
instincts, capacities and potential strength or weakness. His nervous
system and his brain may be good or bad--most likely neither very good
nor very bad. All of his actions both as a child and as a man are
induced by stimulation from without. He feels, tastes, sees, hears or
smells some object, and his nerves carry the impression to his brain
where a more or less correct registration is made. Its correctness
depends largely upon the perfection of the nervous system and the
fineness of the material on which the registration is made. Perfect or
imperfect, the child begins to gather knowledge and it is stored in this
way. To the end of his days he receives impressions and stores them in
the same manner. All of these impressions are more or less imperfectly
received, imperfectly conveyed and imperfectly registered. However, he
is obliged to use the machine he has. Not only does the machine register
impressions but it sends out directions immediately following these
impressions: directions to the organism as to how to run, to walk, to
fight, to hide, to eat, to drink, or to make any other response that the
particular situation calls for.

Then, too, stimulated by these impressions, certain secretions are
instantly emptied from the ductless glands into the blood which, acting
like fuel in an engine, generate more power in the machine, fill it with
anger or fear and prepare it to respond to the directions to fight or
flee, or to any type of action incident to the machine. It is only
within a few years that biologists have had any idea of the use of
these ductless glands or of their importance in the functions of life.
Very often these ductless glands are diseased, and always they are more
or less imperfect; but in whatever condition they are, the machine
responds to their flow.

The stored-up impressions are more or less awakened under stimulation.
As life goes on, these stored impressions act as inhibitions or
stimulations to action, as the case may be. These form the material for
comparisons and judgments as to conduct. Not only are the impressions
imperfect and the record imperfect, but their value and effect depend on
the brain which compares and considers the impressions. From all this
mechanism, action is born.

That man is the product of heredity and environment and that he acts as
his machine responds to outside stimuli and nothing else, seem amply
proven by the evolution and history of man. But, quite aside from this,
logic and philosophy must lead to the same conclusions. This is not a
universe where acts result from chance. Law is everywhere supreme. Every
process of nature and life is a continuous sequence of cause and effect.
No intelligent person would ever think of an effect in the physical
world which did not follow a cause or causes. It has taken man a long
time to find this out. The recurrence of the seasons, the seed-time and
harvest, the common phenomena of Nature, were once supposed to be
outside the realm of cause and effect and due to the whim of some
powerful being. But the laws of matter are now coming to be understood.
Chance, accident and whim have been banished from the physical world.
The acts of men alone are supposed to be outside the realm of law. There
is a cause for the eternal revolution of the earth around the sun, for
the succession of seed-time and harvest, for growth and decay; but not
for the thoughts and actions of man.

All the teaching of the world is based on the theory that there is no
free will. Why else should children be trained with so much care? Why
should they be taught what is right and what is wrong? Why should so
much pains be taken in forming habits? To what effect is the storing of
knowledge in the brain of the child, except that it may be taught to
avoid the wrong and to do the right? Man's every action is caused by
motive. Whether his action is wise or unwise, the motive was at least
strong enough to move him. If two or more motives pulled in opposite
directions, he could not have acted from the weakest but must have
obeyed the strongest. The same motives applied to some other machine
might have produced an opposite result, but to his particular structure
it was all-controlling. How any special motive will affect any special
machine must depend upon the relative strength of the motive and make of
the machine. It is for this reason that intelligent people have always
taken so much pains to fortify the machine, so that it would respond to
what they believed was right. To say that one could ever act from the
weakest motive would bring chaos and chance into a world of method and
order. Even punishment could have no possible effect to deter the
criminal after release, or to influence others by the example of the
punishment. As well might the kernel of corn refuse to grow upward to
the sunlight, and grow downward instead.

Before any progress can be made in dealing with crime the world must
fully realize that crime is only a part of conduct; that each act,
criminal or otherwise, follows a cause; that given the same conditions
the same result will follow forever and ever; that all punishment for
the purpose of causing suffering, or growing out of hatred, is cruel and
anti-social; that however much society may feel the need of confining
the criminal, it must first of all understand that the act had an
all-sufficient cause for which the individual was in no way responsible,
and must find the cause of his conduct, and, so far as possible, remove
the cause.




IV

ENVIRONMENT


The acorn will inevitably produce the oak tree and it will grow true to
its pattern. All seeds and cells will do likewise. Still if the acorn is
planted in good soil, where it is properly nourished and in a spot where
it is sufficiently sheltered, the tree will be more likely to become
large and symmetrical, than if it is planted in poor soil or in an
exposed spot.

In one sense heredity is the seed, and environment the soil. The whole
structure and pattern and inherent tendencies and potentiality are in
the seed and cannot be changed. The child has nothing to do with its
early environment during the period when impressions sink the deepest
and when habits are formed. It is then that the meaning of facts is
interpreted. At this time the child is fashioned by the teachings and
environment in which it is placed. As the child receives its first
impressions, and all along through its development, it is forming habits
from those about it. These habits come to be strong, dominating forces
in its life. Very few people, if any, can trace definite views of
conduct or thought to their conscious effort, but these are born of
their structure and the environment that formed their habits after
birth.

The fact that an individual's political and religious faith depends
almost entirely on his place of birth and early youth, shows the
strength of environment in forming and shaping opinions and beliefs.

As the child grows and develops, it is influenced by all that surrounds
it. The human machine moves in response to outside stimulation. How it
will move depends upon two things, the character of the stimulant and
the machine to which it is applied. No two machines will act exactly
alike from the same stimulus. Sometimes they act in diametrically
opposite ways. For instance, under the same stimulation, one may run and
another may fight, depending perhaps on the secretions that the ductless
glands empty into the blood.

No machine can act except according to its make-up. Even an ignorant
person, who finds that the same stimulant produces different results on
different machines, would know that the structures are not the same.

Endless discussions have been devoted to the relative importance of
heredity and environment in human conduct. This is a fruitless task. In
a sense, each one is of supreme importance in the outcome of a life. It
is obvious that some structures are so perfect that almost no
environment will overcome them. Instances of strong men developing out
of poor environment are not rare. Many of these may be subject to doubt
as to whether the heredity caused the strength, for the smallest
particle of luck at some special or vital time may make all the
difference possible in the outcome of a life. While some heredities
withstand a poor environment, others are so poor that, no matter how
good the environment, the machine cannot survive. An idiot is an
illustration of one whom environment cannot change. No heredity will
overcome the hardest environment. The old saying, "every man has his
price," is true in this sense, that every machine will stand just so
much and no more. Some machines reach the breaking point soon and some
later, but all have their limit. Most people have a heredity that is not
the best nor yet the worst. Given an imperfect machine, they are thrown
into a certain environment, and then up to the capacity of their
machines the outcome depends entirely on the environment. Given an
environment easy enough they will succeed, or at least "get by." Given a
hard environment they will fail, or "go down." Tens of thousands of men
live in a comparatively easy environment and pass their lives as useful
citizens with no taint of criminality to their names, who under a hard
environment would be found in prison. On the other hand, perhaps most of
the inmates of prisons would have lived as respected citizens if their
environment had not been so hard. Heredity has everything to do with
making the machine strong and capable, or weak and useless; but when the
machine is made and thrown on the world in its imperfect shape,
environment has everything to do in determining what its fate shall be.




V

ADJUSTING HEREDITY AND
ENVIRONMENT


Most people live a narrow existence. Perhaps the great majority of men
and women find their safety in this kind of a life. The adjustment of
heredity and environment is not an easy task to one who lives an
unsheltered life. The ordinary person, thrown on his own resources, is
poorly equipped for existence. His opinions on most matters are not
sound. He uses poor judgment as to how he shall spend the little money
he gets. He is generally driven by debts and harassed in all his efforts
to get a living. A large family adds to his trouble and his existence is
a constant struggle with what, to him, is an almost hopeless fate.

Industrial conditions for the most part are relentless and hard. The
poor man is thrown into competition with his fellows for work. He may
get along when work is easy to get and wages are good, but in dull times
he falls behind, and is in hopeless trouble. His life is a long, hard
struggle to make adjustments to his environment, and it is not strange
that he goes down so often before the heavy task. Failure to make proper
adjustments directly and indirectly often means prison to him.

Again, the ordinary and especially the weak man is hopelessly puzzled by
his environment. It must never be overlooked that man has a lowly
origin. The marks of his humble birth are in his whole structure and
life. His make-up has been the work of the ages. He is a late
development of a life that knew nothing of law, as law is understood
today. His ancestors were hungry and went out after food, they killed
their prey and took their food by main strength whenever they had the
power. They were subject to certain customs which were very strict, but
which were few and did not seriously complicate life. They knew only the
law of force. Their existence was simple and primal, and they were
governed by no "rights," except such simple ones as were made by might
and custom.

Civilization is a constant building-up of limitations around heredity; a
persistent growth of environmental control as it progresses, or at least
moves along. This structure, especially the legal structure, is built by
the more intelligent and always by the strong men. It is always shifting
and moving, and it is impossible for the inferior man to adjust his
emotions and his life rapidly to the changes. Things which are not
condemned by his feelings of right and wrong are condemned by laws that
meet with no response from his emotions and moral ideas. To him at least
these are not different from the things that are done by others with
impunity and without rebuke. Especially is this true of the rapidly
growing class of property laws that have had no counterpart in the early
history of man. This list has grown so fast that it is beyond the power
of a large class of men to find in their feelings any response to many
of these criminal statutes. The ever-growing social restrictions are of
the same modern growth, and it is equally impossible to feel and
understand them. What we call civilization has moved so fast that the
structure and instincts of man have not been able to become adjusted to
it. The structure is too cumbersome, too intense, too hard, and if not
breaking down of its own weight, it is at least destroying thousands who
cannot adjust themselves to its changing demands. Not only are the
effects of this growing body of social and legal restrictions shown
directly by their constant violation, generally by the inferior and the
poor, but indirectly in their strain on the nervous system; by the
irritation and impatience that they generate, and which, under certain
conditions cause acts of violence.




VI

PSYCHOLOGY OF CRIMINAL CONDUCT


No one can understand conduct without knowing something of the
psychology of human action. First of all, it must be understood that
reason, which so many have idealized and placed in control of the human
machine, has little to do with the actions of men. It is a common habit
with most men to find fault with and bewail the fact that human beings
do not act from reason. However much the truth is impressed upon us, we
never seem to realize that the basis of action is in instinct and
emotion. It is really useless to quarrel with Nature. Whether it would
have been better to have made man some other way is not worth
discussing. He has been evolved in a certain way and we must take him as
he is. Our impatience with the method that Nature has provided for
influencing human conduct is largely due to our idea of the meaning of
life.

Man has fancied himself in a position in the animal world that facts of
life and nature do not sustain. We seem to feel that man has some high
calling; that he should make something of himself which cannot be
accomplished; that he should form some sort of a perfect order that he
never can reach; in short that man has a purpose and a mission. It is
manifest that all we know is but a mite compared with the unknown, and
it may be that sometime a purpose will be revealed of which man never
dreamed. Still from all that we can see and understand, Nature has but
one desire, and that is the preservation and perpetuation of life. This
is its purpose or, rather, its strongest urge not only with men but with
all animal life. Sometimes to create one fish a million eggs are
spawned. Nature is profligate both in spawning life and compassing its
destruction. In the human species the capacity for life is immeasurably
beyond its fruition. A large portion of those who are born die an early
death. And that human life shall not be extinct, Nature plants the
life-giving desire deep in the constitution of man. The creation of life
comes from an instinct so profound and absorbing that it carries a train
of evils in its wake. Many are overweighted by the sex instinct to their
positive harm. Nature somehow did not trust such a fundamental duty as
the preservation of the race to reason. If intellectual processes were
responsible for life, the world no doubt would soon be bare of animate
things. Neither could the care of the young be trusted to anything but
the deep-seated instinct that causes the mother to forget her own life
in the preservation of the life of her child.

The functions of body, on which life is founded, do not depend upon
reason. The heart begins to beat before birth; it continues to beat
until the end of life. The reason has nothing to do with the heart
performing its function. Man goes to sleep at night confident that it
will still be beating in the morning. The blood circulates in the veins
independent of the thoughts of man. The digestive processes go on
whether he sleeps or is awake. Many of his muscles never rest from birth
to death. Life could not be preserved through the intellectual
processes.

Human action is governed largely by instinct and emotion. These
instincts and emotions are incident to every living machine and are the
motor forces that impel the organism. They do not think. They act, and
act at once. All the mind can do is to place some restraint on such
instincts and emotions through experience, education and settled habits.
If the actions are never inhibited, the machine will tear itself to
pieces. If too easily inhibited, it will do no work. It is manifest that
the perfect machine does not exist.

Man is moved by his instinct of flight and his emotion of fear, which
are set in motion by apprehended dangers and by unaccustomed sights or
sounds. Terror sometimes becomes so intense that it prevents flight and
brings convulsions and death. It is idle to reason with one in terror.
It is idle to reason with a mob in terror or a nation in terror. One
might as well expect to calm a tempestuous sea with soft words.

The instinct of repulsion brings hatred and dislike and, combined with
the instinct of pugnacity, may lead to crimes of violence. When these
instincts are strong enough, the weak and superficial barriers cannot
stand against them. An electrical flash showing the scaffold with the
noose above it would have no force to stop an instinct and emotion fully
aroused. Through seeing, feeling, hearing, tasting or smelling, some
instinct is called into action. Many times several conflicting instincts
are aroused. The man is like a tree bent back and forth by the storm. If
the storm is hard enough, sooner or later it will break. Which way the
tree falls has nothing to do with the consciousness of the tree, but has
to do only with the direction of the prevailing and controlling force.

The instinct of gregariousness draws animals or men together into
communities and close relations. This is one of the strongest instincts
and not only preserves life but is fundamental to those human
associations that are the basis of civilization. Except for this,
animals would live a lonely life and probably perish from the earth.
Through this instinct, man builds his villages and cities and organizes
his states and nations. With the gregarious instinct and the parental
instinct drawing men together, and the instincts and emotions of flight,
fear and pugnacity, repelling and pushing them apart, conflict is
inevitable. All that can be done is to create and cultivate as strong
habits, customs and laws as possible to stand against the power of
instinct and emotion in time of need, and to remove the main inciting
causes so far as man has the intelligence and power to remove them. It
is evident that this can never be complete. There are too many weak
machines, too many defective nervous systems, too many badly organized
brains. Accidents are inevitable, and some accidents are called
"crimes." When the accident is international or world-wide, it means
war. Those who believe that there is any power to stop all the harmful
manifestations of man's instincts, either individually or _en masse_, do
not understand the fundamental nature of man.

Many and probably all instincts work both for good and ill. Flight,
pugnacity, repulsion, sex--all are life-preserving or life-destroying,
as the case may be. A certain degree of excitation brings life and
pleasure. A stronger or weaker may bring calamity and death. The
parental instinct, with the instinct of reproduction, is fundamental to
life. It is the basis of tenderness and sympathy, and is likewise the
foundation of jealousy and often of hatred and pugnacity. At one time it
may mean the deepest and most abiding pleasures of life, and at another
it may bring death. Life cannot exist without it, and yet, that it may
persist, Nature seriously overloads many machines with disastrous
results. History is replete with the helplessness of reason and judgment
in dealing with these emotions. Neither when they act for good nor for
ill can reason and judgment have the slightest weight when these
instincts and emotions are stirred to the depths.

The emotion to acquire and keep property is very strong and perhaps at
the base of the deep desire for wealth. This emotion is probably of a
comparatively late growth, but today it seems to have taken its place as
one of the strongest that move men. This emotion, like all others,
prompts man to get what he wants. It of course does not suggest the way,
but is simply an urge to acquire and possess. It is modified and hedged
about by customs and habits but, like all instincts, its strength is
always seeking ways to accomplish results regardless of the rules laid
down and thus urging their violation. With weak machines and imperfect
systems, where not only are the restrictions imperfect, the habits not
well defined, but where it is impossible to satisfy the instinct under
the rules laid down, there can be but one result; a large number will
take property wherever and however they can get it.

The instinct for acquisition is so strong that men are constantly
contriving new and improved methods for getting property. Often the new
methods come under restraint of the law. The enactment of the law does
not give man the feeling that a thing is wrong which before was right
and many continue their ways of getting property, regardless of the law.
The instinct is too strong, the needs too great, and the barriers too
weak.

Instincts are primal to man. He has inherited them from the animal
world. Their strength and weakness depend on the make-up of the machine.
Some are very strong and some abnormally weak, and there are no two
machines that emphasize or repress the same instincts to the same
degree. One need but look at his family and neighbors to see the various
manifestations of these instincts. Some are quarrelsome and combative
and will fight on the slightest provocation. Others are distinctively
social; the gregarious instinct is pronounced in many people. These are
always seen in company and cannot be alone. They readily adapt
themselves to any sort of associations. Others are solitary. They choose
to be alone. They shrink from and avoid the society of others. In some
the instinct at the basis of sex association is over-strong; they like
children; they are generally sympathetic and emotional, and the strength
of the instinct often leads them to excesses. Others are entirely
lacking in this instinct; they neither care for children nor want them;
they habitually avoid association with the other sex. The difference is
constituent in the elements that make up the machine.

Everyone is familiar with the varying strength and weakness of the
instincts of getting and hoarding as shown by his neighbors and
acquaintances. Some seem to have no ambition or thought for getting or
keeping money. Some can get it but cannot keep it. Some have in them
from childhood the instinct for getting the better of every trade; for
hoarding what they get, and accumulating property all their lives. In
this, as in all other respects, no two individuals are alike. History is
filled with examples of men who had the instinctive power of getting
money combined with the instinct for keeping it. Their names are
familiar, all the way from Midas and Croesus down to the prominent
captains of industry today. It is common for them and their adherents
who criticise new schemes of social organization to remark with the
greatest assurance that before wealth can be equal, brains must be
equal. The truth is that brains have little to do with either the making
or accumulating of money. This depends mainly, like all other
activities, on the strength or weakness of the instincts involved. One's
brain capacity cannot be measured by his bank account, any more than by
the strength of his body or the color of his hair. His bank account
simply shows his innate tendencies. There is no doubt that brain
capacity as well as physical perfection adds to power, but it is the
instinct that determines the tendency and strength of the activity.

To say that the one who gets money the most easily and keeps it the most
safely has the best brain is no more reasonable than to say that the
foxhound is more intelligent than the bull-dog because it can run
faster. Nature formed one for running and the other for holding on. The
brain power is not involved.

There are manifold ways of gratifying all these instincts. The desire
for property calls simply for getting it and keeping it. It does not
involve the method to be used. The way is determined by other faculties,
by education, by opportunities, by the strength and weakness of
inhibitions. It does not follow that all legal ways are morally right
and all illegal ones morally wrong. Society in its development has
established certain ways in which it may be done. These ways are easy
for some, they are hard for others, and for many quite impossible.

Still the instinct for getting is always present, leading and urging to
acquire and to keep. Endless are the ways that men have contrived to
gratify this instinct. If, perchance, a law stands in the way, means are
always sought to get around the law. Every desire is always seeking its
own gratification or satisfaction. This means life. Most men believe
that the way they adopt for getting money or gratifying other instincts
is really no worse than some other person's way. The man who uses the
confidence game contends with great assurance that his methods are like
other business methods; that all men are using every means to get the
largest return for the least effort, and one way is no better than
another. A considerable portion of society has always supported him in
these ideas. The law is full of shadowy lines which divide legal
acquisition from the illegal, some of which are so fine that no one can
see more than a technical difference. For instance, under an indictment
for obtaining money by false pretenses, one may make all sorts of
statements as to the quality, value, style and desirability of the
article sold, if he does not make a specific statement of a fact
regarding the material contained in them or the amount, number, quality
or the like. He may lie, but to be safe he must know the kind of lie the
law permits. Many lies pass as "puffing goods" and are within the pale.
A trader is not expected to tell the truth. What he can and cannot say
may be determined only by a careful examination of the law, and not
always then.

Infinite are the reasons men give for doing the things that their
instincts bid them do. All depends upon the strength of the instinct and
the character of the machine; the restrictions and habits formed; and
many other factors of which the man knows nothing. In fact, all depends
upon his endowment and the outside forces that move to action, and for
none of these is he in any way to be praised or blamed.

Society seems to be almost oblivious to the emotional life of man. The
great masses of men have no capacity or chance to prepare a proper
environment in the intense commercialism and mad rush of today. The laws
of trade and commerce give most men food, clothing and shelter but
nothing more. There is no beauty in their homes or surroundings; no
music or art; no adventure or speculation. Existence is a dead thing, a
dreary round. To many such people crime furnishes the only chance for
adventure. Take away emotions and life is hopelessly dull and
commonplace. The emotions of men must be fed just as the body must be
fed. To many religion has furnished this emotional life. Churches have
provided some art and some music. But aside from the Catholic Church
almost none of this is for the poor. To many if not most people religion
cannot take the place of joy. Dogma and creed deaden and cannot appeal
to the reason of man. Still they have furnished a large part of the
emotional life to great masses of men, without which existence would
hold no hope or joy. But this is not enough to fill most lives. The
element of joy is largely lacking. To many it makes no appeal, although
music and art and beauty do. In no country has society so utterly
neglected and ignored the emotional side of man as in America. This has
led many men to a life of adventure that for them has been possible only
in crime. Many others found this life in the saloon, mixed with
influences not conducive to a normal life. The closing of the saloons
has added to the already serious need of providing for the innate
feelings of men. This is all the more important for America, as a large
part of our population has come from lands where beauty and art and
music have for generations been made a part of the common life of all.




VII

THE CRIMINAL


Those who have had no experience in the courts and no knowledge of what
is known as the "criminal class" have a general idea that a criminal is
not like other men. The people they know are law-abiding, conventional
believers in the State and the Church and all social customs and
relations; they have strict ideas of property rights, and regard the law
as sacred. True they have no more acquaintance with law-makers and
politicians in general than with the criminal class, which, of course,
is one reason why they have such unbounded confidence in the law. Such
persons are surprised and shocked when some member of the family or some
friend is entangled in the courts, and generally regard it as a
catastrophe that has come upon him by accident or a terrible mistake. As
a rule, they do all in their power to help him whether he is acquitted
or convicted. They never think that he and everyone else they know is
not materially different from the ordinary criminal. As a matter of
fact, the potential criminal is in every man, and no one was ever so
abandoned that some friend would not plead for him, or that some one who
knew him would not testify to his good deeds.

The criminal is not hard to understand. He is one who, from inherited
defects or from great misfortune or especially hard circumstances, is
not able to make the necessary adjustments to fit him to his
environment. Seldom is he a man of average intelligence, unless he
belongs to a certain class that will be discussed later. Almost always
he is below the normal of intelligence and in perhaps half of the cases
very much below. Nearly always he is a person of practically no
education and no property. One who has given attention to the subject of
crime knows exactly where the criminal comes from and how he will
develop. The crimes of violence and murder, and the lesser crimes
against property, practically all come from those who have been reared
in the poor and congested districts of cities and large villages. The
robbers, burglars, pickpockets and thieves are from these surroundings.
In a broad sense, some criminals are born and some are made. Nearly all
of them are both born and made. This does not mean that criminality can
be inherited, or even that there is a criminal type. It means that with
certain physical and mental imperfections and with certain environment
the criminal will be the result.

Seldom does one begin a criminal life as a full-grown man. The origin
of the typical criminal is an imperfect child, suffering from some
defect. Usually he was born with a weak intellect, or an unstable
nervous system. He comes from poor parents. Often one or both of these
died or met misfortune while he was young. He comes from the crowded
part of a poor district. He has had little chance to go to school and
could not have been a scholar, no matter how regularly he attended
school. Some useful things he could have learned had society furnished
the right teachers, surroundings and opportunities to make the most of
an imperfect child. Early in life he does some desultory work in casual
occupations. This of course is not steady, but he picks up what he can
and keeps the job for a short time, sometimes quitting work because he
is discharged and sometimes because, like most boys and men, he does not
like to work. His playground is the street, the railroad yards or vacant
lots too small for real play, and fit only for a loafing place for boys
like himself. These gather nightly and talk of the incidents that
interest most people, mainly the abnormal things of life and generally
the crimes that the newspapers make so prominent to satisfy the public
demand. He learns to go into vacant buildings, steals the plumbing, and
he early learns where to sell it. From this it is only a short step to
visiting occupied buildings at night. In this way he learns to be a
burglar as other boys learn to play baseball or golf.

Naturally he has no strong sense of property rights. He has always had a
hard time to get enough to eat and wear, and he has grown up
unconsciously to see the inequality of distribution and to believe that
it is not fair and that there is little or no justice in the world. As a
child he learned to get things the best way he could, and to think
nothing about it. In short, his life, like all other lives, moves along
the lines of least resistance. He soon comes to feel that the police are
his natural enemies and his chief business is to keep from getting
caught. Inevitably he is brought into the Juvenile Court. He may be
reprimanded at first. He comes again and is placed on probation. The
next time he goes to a Juvenile Prison where he can learn all the things
he has not found out before. He is known to the police, known to the
Court, known to the neighbors. His status is fixed. When released from
prison, he takes his old heredity back into his old environment. It is
the easiest to him, for he has learned to make his adjustments to this
environment. From fifteen to twenty-five years of age, he has the added
burden of adolescence, the trying time in a boy's life when sex feelings
are developing, when he is passing from childhood to manhood. This is a
very difficult time at best to the type of boy from which a criminal
grows; he meets it without preparation or instruction. What he knows he
learns from others like himself. He gets weird, fantastic, neurotic
ideas, which only add to his natural wonderment.

Every person who has not inherited property must live by some trade or
calling. Very few people in jail or out choose their profession. Even if
one selects his profession it does not follow that he has chosen the
calling for which he is best adapted. So far as a person can and does
follow his desires, he generally means to choose the calling which will
bring him the greatest amount of return for the least exertion. He may
have strong inclinations in certain directions, as, for instance, to
paint or to write or to investigate or to philosophize, but, as a rule,
he does not make his living from following these ambitions. If he does,
it is generally a poor living. But usually his aim is to make money at
something else so that he can give free rein to his real ambitions.

Most men start to make a living as boys from the ages of fifteen to
eighteen. They have no idea of what they ought to do or even of what
they want to do. Usually, so far as they have an ambition, it is to do
something more or less spectacular that seems to have an element of
adventure and not too disagreeable or hard; something like the work of
a policeman, a chauffeur, or an employee in a garage. Still, first and
last, most boys and most men have no opportunity for choosing an
occupation. In fact, the boy is told that he is a man and must get a job
long before he knows that he is a man or begins to feel
responsibilities, while he still has all the emotions and dreams of a
boy.

When he is told he must go to work he looks for a job. He does not wait
until he can find the one that fits him. He cannot afford to wait and if
he could, he does not know what job would fit. He takes automatically
the first place he can get, hoping to find a better one, which generally
means an easier one, before very long. It is hard for a boy to stick to
work; too many things are calling him away. Every instinct and emotion
is urging him to play. New feelings and desires are coaxing him from
work. His companions and the boy life in which he has a place urge him
to leave his task. Usually he keeps his job no longer than he can help
and later looks for something else. The chances are great that he will
never find what he wants; that he has not had the preparation or
training for a successful workingman's career, whatever that might be.
He is a doer of odd jobs and of poorly paid work all his life.

He must have some calling and takes the easiest one, which is often a
life of crime. From this start comes the professional criminal
so-called. He may make a business of picking pockets. If this comes to
be his trade it is very hard for him to give it up. There is so strong
an element of chance--he never knows what a pocket will contain--it
gratifies a spirit of adventure. Then it is easy. The wages are much
greater than he could get in any other calling; the hours are short and
it never interferes with his amusements. It is not so dangerous as being
a burglar or a switchman, for he can find an excuse for jostling one in
the street-cars or in a crowd and thus reaching into a pocket.

The burglar is not so apt to be a professional; his is a bolder and more
hazardous trade; if he is caught he is taken from his occupation for a
longer time. The great hazard involved in this trade and also the
physical strength and fitness of those who follow it lead to its
abandonment more frequently than is the case with a pickpocket or a
petty thief. Robbery is seldom a profession. It is usually the crime of
the young and venturesome and almost surely leads to early disaster.
Murder, of course, is never a profession. In a broad way it is the
result of accident or passion, or of relations which are too hard to
endure.

In prison and out, I have talked with scores of these men and boys. I am
sure they rarely tried to deceive me. I have very seldom seen one who
felt that he had done wrong, or had any thought of what the world calls
reformation. A very few have used the current language of those who
talk of reform, but generally they were the weakest and most hopeless of
the lot and usually adopted this attitude to deceive. In almost every
instance where you meet any sign of intelligence, excuses and
explanations are freely made, and these explanations fully justify their
points of view. Often too they tell you in sincerity that they believe
their way of life is too hard and does not pay; that while they cannot
see how they could have done any differently in the past, they believe
their experience has taught them to stick by the rules of the game.

The boy delinquent grows naturally and almost inevitably into the man
criminal. He has generally never learned a trade. No habits have been
formed in his youth to keep him from crime. A life of crime is the only
one open to him, and for this life he has had ample experience,
inclination and opportunity. Then too for this kind of young man the
life of a criminal has a strong appeal. Life without opportunity and
without a gambler's chance to win a considerable prize is not attractive
to anyone. The conventional man who devotes his life to business or to a
profession always has before him the prizes of success--to some honor
and glory, and to most of them wealth. Imagine the number of lawyers,
doctors and business men who could stick to a narrow path if they knew
that life offered no opportunity but drudgery and poverty! Nearly all
of these look forward to the prizes of success. Most of them expect
success and many get it. For the man that I have described, a life of
toil offers no chance of success. His capacity, education and
environment deny him the gambler's chance of a prize. As an honest man,
he may raise a family, always be in debt, live a life of poverty and
hardship and see nothing ahead but drudgery and defeat. This is why so
many mediocre men are found in the mountains and oil fields prospecting
for hidden wealth. With the chance of a fortune just before them, and no
other opportunity to win, they spend their lives without a family or
home, urged on by the hope of luck.

The man grown from boyhood into ways of vice and crime sees this hope
and this hope only to make a strike. He has no strong convictions and no
well-settled habits to hold him back. The fear of the law only means
greater caution, and after all he has nothing to lose. In his world
arrest and conviction do not mean loss of caste; they mean only bad
luck. With large numbers of men crime becomes a trade. It grows to be a
business as naturally as any other calling comes to be a trade.

There are other criminals who do not come from the class I have
described, but the habitual visitor to criminal courts knows that they
are very few. Of the others, some are born of parents who could care
for them and have done their best and yet, in spite of this, they have
repeatedly been entangled in the law; these are often the only ones of a
large family who have not lived according to the rules of the game. They
are different from the other members of the family. For the most part
they have some specific congenital defect, or an unstable system that
prevents the correct registration of the experiences that produce safe
habits, or makes them unable to withstand temptation or suggestion.

Everyone knows how easy it is, especially for children, to react to
suggestion. The whole life of a child is a response to suggestion. This
is about all there is to education. Even older men constantly and
readily yield to suggestion. The results gained by quack doctors,
lightning-rod agents, promoters and dealers in oil stocks, mining stocks
and an endless number of other stocks, show that the right kind of
suggestion is bound to produce results. The dressing of the windows of
department stores and the writing of catchy advertisements are a
constant recognition of the power of suggestion. So well known is this
weakness of human character that schools of salesmanship are regularly
organized and promoted to teach the art of getting victims to part with
money for things they do not want or need.

Every right-feeling person does everything in his power to educate the
child. He is ever watchful through the child's youth and early manhood
to equip him with the capacity to make a living. He seeks to build up
around him and within him the strongest kind of habits and beliefs. He
carefully teaches the child that the only way to live is to observe all
the rules laid down by experience and custom, so that he may not react
to the temptations that life holds out at every step. Every wise person
feels almost certain that if his children are reared without education,
without discipline, without training or opportunities, they will almost
inevitably swell the ranks of the criminal classes. And it is especially
certain that if one of his children is defective or has an unstable
nervous system, such a child should never be left without protection and
care.

There are professional criminals of a different grade, like the forger
and the confidence man. Both of these have generally had some education
and a fair degree of intelligence, and have had some advantages in life.
The forger, as a rule, is a bookkeeper or an accountant who grows expert
with the pen. He works for a small salary and sees nothing better. He
grows familiar with signatures. Sometimes he is a clerk in a bank and
has the opportunity to study signatures; he begins to imitate them,
often with no thought of forging paper. He does it because it is an art
and probably the only thing he can do well. Perhaps some hard luck or an
unfortunate venture on the Board of Trade, or in a faro bank, makes him
write a check or note. He easily convinces himself that he is not
getting the salary he earns and that less worthy men prosper while he is
poor. Then too his business calls for better clothes and better
surroundings than those of the workingman, and gives him many glimpses
of easy lives. For a time he may escape. If the amount is not too large
it is often passed by without an effort to detect. Sometimes it escapes
notice altogether. Some business men write so many checks that they take
no pains at the end of the month to figure up their account and examine
every check, and never notice it unless the balance given by the bank is
so far out of the way that it attracts attention. After a forger grows
to be an expert, he can move from town to town. If he is taken and put
in prison and finally released, he is hard to cure. Forgery is too easy
and he knows of no other trade so good. A large percentage of these men
never would have forged, had their wages been higher. Many others are
the victims of the get-rich-quick disease; they haunt the gambling
houses, brokers' offices and the like. Often when they begin they expect
to make the check good; generally, they would have made good if the
right card had only turned up in the faro bank, or the right quotation
on the stock exchange.

There is another class of forgers, generally bankers, who speculate with
trust funds. To cover up the shortage they sign notes expecting that
they will never be presented and will deceive no one but the bank
examiner. If luck goes against them too long, the bank fails and the
forgery is discovered. These are really not forgers, as they never
intend to get money on the note. It is only a part of a means to cover
up the use of trust funds. Of course, these men are never professional
forgers, and are much more apt to die from suicide or a broken heart
than to repeat.

But with few exceptions, the criminal comes from the walks of the poor
and has no education or next to none. For this society is much to blame.
Sometimes he is obliged to go to work too soon, but often he cannot
learn at school. This is not entirely the fault of the boy's heredity;
it is largely the fault of the school. A certain course of study has
been laid out. With only slight changes this course has come down from
the past and is fixed and formal. Much of it might be of value to a
professional man, but most of it is of no value to the man in other
walks of life. Because a boy cannot learn arithmetic, grammar or
geography, or not even learn to read and write, it does not follow that
he cannot learn at all. He may possibly have marked mechanical ability;
he may have more than the ordinary powers of adaptation to many kinds of
work. These he could be taught to do and often to do well. Under proper
instruction he might become greatly interested in some kind of work, and
in the study to prepare him for the work. Then too it is more or less
misleading to say that an uneducated man commits crime because he is
uneducated. Often his lack of education as well as his crime comes from
poverty. Crime and poverty may come from something else. All come
because he had a poor make-up or an insufficient chance.

After all, the great majority of men must do some kind of manual labor.
Until the time shall come when this kind of work is as easy and as well
paid as other employment, no one will do manual labor if he can do any
other kind. Perhaps the time may come when the hardest and most
disagreeable work will be the best paid. There are too many unskilled
workers in proportion to the population to make this seem very near. In
the meantime--and that is doubtless a long time--some one must do this
work. Much of it is done under supervision and requires no great skill
and need not be very disagreeable or hard. In a complex civilization
there is room for everyone to contribute to the whole. If our schools
are some day what they should be, a large part of their time, in some
cases all of it, will be devoted to manual training and will be given to
producing skilled workmen. This sort of school work can be made
attractive to thousands of boys who can do nothing else. And if easier
conditions of life under fairer social surroundings could be added to
this kind of education, most boys who now drift into crime would
doubtless find the conventional life more profitable and attractive.




VIII

THE FEMALE CRIMINAL


Women furnish only one-fifth to one-tenth of the population of penal
institutions. Probably the percentage would be still lower if among
these were not a number of rather common convictions for acts which are
peculiar to women, like abortion, infanticide, child abandonment and the
like. As to the other crimes, few women are burglars or robbers, or
guilty of other crimes of violence, except murder. Women steal and
poison and blackmail and extort money and lie and slander and gossip,
and probably cause as much unhappiness as men; but their crimes, like
their lives, are not on so large or adventurous a scale. They do not so
readily take a chance; they lack the imagination that makes big
criminals or lays broad schemes. In many of their crimes they are often
the accomplices of men and take rather a minor part, although sometimes
a quite important one. For this reason they are often not detected and
frequently not prosecuted, a fact which leaves the percentage smaller
than it otherwise would be. Then too, juries are apt to acquit women of
crime even when they are indicted and tried. It must be a positive case
and one which calls for no possible feeling of sympathy or where there
is no personal appeal that will work the conviction of a woman. Men have
so long adopted an attitude of chivalry toward women that very few
juries will convict them. This too has much to do with the small number
of female convicts.

Some writers claim that the small number of women in penal institutions
shows that women are better than men; but this is a hasty conclusion
arrived at from insufficient facts. There are fewer female prisoners
because women have lived a more protected life; they have not been
engaged so generally in business; they have not been so constantly
obliged to fight their way in the world; their lives have been more
quiet and smooth; they have been surrounded by strong conventions and
closely watched. Especially is this true with regard to the girl as
compared with the boy. Such protection naturally keeps them from the
commission of crime. The great consideration shown to them by
prosecuting witnesses, prosecuting officers, judges and juries,
supplements the protected life and is an added reason for the showing
made by statistics. It is notorious that a woman is seldom convicted of
murder. This has been the subject of much complaint on the part of the
public; still a man may condemn such acquittals and when placed on a
jury will himself vote for acquittal.

After all, the juries are right. Most of the cases of murder against
women involve sex relations. Nature has made the bearing and rearing of
children first of all the woman's part, and this fact so dominates her
life that nothing else seems important to her in comparison. She is not
able to judge in a broad and scientific way matters so clearly affecting
life. It may even be possible that in the evolution and preservation of
life, her judgments are right. At least they are the natural judgments
for a large number of women, or these tragedies would not occur. No
doubt as woman enters the field of industry formerly monopolized by man,
and as she takes her part in politics and sits on juries, the percentage
of female criminals will rapidly increase. In fact, the percentage of
women prisoners has been climbing for many years. As she takes her place
with men she will be more and more judged as men are judged, and will
commit the crimes that men commit, and perhaps furnish her fair quota to
the penitentiaries and jails.

Whether this will be better or worse for the race is no part of the
discussion, and can only be told by long experience. Women must accept
the facts and make their choice of activities in view of these facts.
Quite apart from any sentiment, I think that it is a mistake to believe
that men and women should be judged alike. The structure and nervous
system of women cause physical and mental disturbances which affect
their judgment and life. If there were any justice in human judgment and
civilization, then each human being would be judged according to his
make-up, his tendencies, his inclinations and his capacities, and no two
would be judged alike.

Any sudden change in the treatment of women in the courts will work a
great injustice that will leave its effect on both women and men, and
still more on the life of the race.




IX

JUVENILE CRIMINALS


This subject would scarcely have been noted a few years ago. True, there
was in the past a small mixture of children in the grist ground out in
the criminal courts. Usually they received some leniency, and were
viewed with more curiosity than alarm. The juvenile criminal was
regarded as a prodigy with a capacity for crimes far beyond his years.
Something of the attitude obtained in regard to him which attaches to
the child chess player or the child mathematician. The child criminal is
now common, and for the most part is a product of the city.

All crime is doubtless much more common in the city than the country,
and the young criminal especially is a product of the crowded community.
To those who look for natural causes for all phenomena the reason is not
far to seek. The city itself is an abnormal thing. Primitive man and his
ancestors were never huddled together in great multitudes, as are the
dwellers in cities today. To a degree almost all animals are gregarious,
but the units of organization are much smaller with them than with man,
excepting possibly in the case of the ant and the bee, insects which
seem specially adapted to live a highly automatic and cooperative life,
such as human beings cannot possibly reach. But primitive men and their
direct ancestors lived in small groups. They could not have preserved
their life in any other way. They lived by fishing and hunting and by
gathering roots, berries and herbs. Later they tended their flocks and
cultivated the fields in a simple way.

With the introduction of the modern machine, the factory system and the
railroads, in the last century, our great modern cities were evolved. As
they grew more complicated, new problems arose. The life of the crowded
city is most difficult even for normal men and women. The adjustments
are too numerous and too complex for an animal made with simple tastes
and for a pastoral life. But, if it is hard for men, it is almost
hopeless for children, especially the children of the poor who fill our
prisons, asylums and almshouses.

Every child needs the open air and the open life of the country. He
needs, first of all, exercise which should be in the form of outdoor
play. No healthy boy wants to live indoors, even though his home may be
a convenient city "flat." The woods, the fields, the streams, the lakes,
the wide common with plenty of room, have always made their natural
appeal to the young. And as sunlight kills most of the deadly germs, so
outdoor life with exercise and play takes care of most of the unhealthy
thoughts, habits and ideas of child-life. In the past, our schools both
in the city and country have done little to help the young. For the most
part healthy children have always looked on them more or less as
prisons. Here they have been confined and kept from exercise and play,
to study useless and unrelated facts and to commit to memory dry rules
which are forgotten as soon as their minds are ready to retain anything
worth while.

Schools should be made to fit the needs of children, and not children to
fit schools. The school that does not provide work and play for the
child which he is glad to do, has learned little of the psychology and
needs of youth. Botany, Zoölogy, Geology and even Chemistry can be
taught to children before they learn to read, and taught so that it will
seem like play, and through this the pupil will acquire a natural taste
for books. It is only within the last few years that the modern school
has really begun to educate the child. It has been a hard fight that
scientific teachers have waged with conventional education for the right
of the child. What has been done is too recent and scattering to show
material results.

Nothing is so important to the child as education. The early life is the
time that character is formed, habits are made, rules of conduct
taught, and it is almost impossible to up-root old habits and
inhibitions and implant new ones in later years.

It is true that "the child is father to the man," and he is the father
of the criminal as well as the useful citizen. Outside of the hopelessly
defective, or those who have very imperfect nervous or physical systems,
there is no reason why a child who has had proper mental and physical
training and any fair opportunity in life should ever be a criminal.
Even most of the mentally defective and those suffering from imperfect
nervous systems could be useful to society in a sheltered environment.
Poor as the country schools have always been, the outdoor life of the
country child is still so great an influence that he generally escapes
disaster. He is not sent to a factory, but lives in a small community
where he has fresh air and exercise.

Of course here as everywhere we must allow for the defective, the
imperfect, the subnormals and the children of the very poor. These
unfortunates furnish a large percentage of the inmates of prison, and
most of the victims for the scaffold which civilization so fondly
preserves.

The growth of the big cities has produced the child criminal. He is
clearly marked and well defined. He is often subnormal even down to
idiocy. In most cases he is the result of heredity. Many times he may
have fair intelligence, but this is usually attached to an unstable,
defective nervous system that cannot do its proper work, and he has had
no expert treatment and attention. He is always poor. Generally he has
lost one or both parents in youth and has lived in the crowded districts
where the home was congested. He has no adequate playground and he runs
the streets or vacant, waste places. He associates and combines with
others of his kind. He cannot or does not go to school. If he goes to
school, he dreads to go and cannot learn the lessons in the books. He
likes to loaf, just as all children like to play. He is often set to
work. He has no trade and little capacity for skilled work that brings
good wages and steady employment. He works no more than he needs to
work. Every night and all the days that he can get are spent in idleness
on the street with his "gang." He seldom reads books. He lacks the taste
for books, and such teachers as he knew had not the wit to cultivate a
taste for good reading. Such books as he gets only add to his unhealthy
thoughts.

Many writers have classified the crimes that the boy commits. It is
scarcely worth the while. He learns to steal or becomes a burglar
largely for the love of adventure; he robs because it is exciting and
may bring large returns. In his excursions to pilfer property he may
kill, and then for the first time the State discovers that there is
such a boy and sets in action the machinery to take his life. The city
quite probably has given him a casual notice by arresting him a number
of times and sending him to a juvenile prison, but it has rarely
extended a hand to help him. Any man or woman who has fairly normal
faculties, and can reason from cause to effect, knows that the crimes of
children are really the crimes of the State and society which by neglect
and active participation have made him what he is. When it is remembered
that the man is the child grown up, it is equally easy to understand the
adult prisoner.




X

HOMICIDE


Crimes against persons are not always as easy to classify and understand
as crimes against property. These acts are so numerous and come from so
many different emotions and motives, that often the cause is obscure and
the explanation not easy to find. Still here, as everywhere in Nature,
nothing can happen without a cause, and even where limited knowledge
does its best and cannot find causes, our recognition of the connection
between cause and effect and the all-inclusiveness of law can leave no
doubt that complete knowledge would bring complete understanding.

It is always to be borne in mind in considering this class of crimes
that the motive power of life is not reason but instinct. If men lived
by reason the race would not survive. The primal things that preserve
the race, the hunger for food, drink, sex, are instinctive and not only
are not awakened or satisfied by reason, but oftentimes in violation of
it. Nature, first of all, sees to the preservation of the species, and
acts in a broad way that life may not perish. Nature knows nothing about
right and wrong in the sense in which man uses these words. All of our
moral conceptions are purely of social origin and hence not instinctive
in human life, and are forever giving way to the instincts on which
Nature depends. The preservation of life has called for the emotions of
hate, fear and love, among the other emotions that move men. The animal
fears danger and runs away, and thus life is preserved. The weaker
animal is almost entirely dependent for life upon his fear. He is
sometimes afraid when there is no danger, but without fear he would be
destroyed. Sometimes the animal hates and kills and thus preserves
himself. The love of offspring is the cause of the care bestowed upon it
which preserves its life. The herd instinct in animal species develops
packs and clans and tribes and states. Man is the heir to all the past,
and the instincts and emotions of the primitive animal are strong in his
being. These may have been strengthened or diluted as the ages have come
and gone, but the same instincts furnish the motive power for all his
acts. Man fears and hates, and runs or kills and saves his life. He
loves, and preserves his offspring.

Man sees an object. Instinctively he may fear it or he may hate it. He
may run from it or destroy it. He gathers impressions through his
senses. The nerves carry them to the brain. He comes to fear certain
persons and things, to hate certain other persons or things, and to
love still others. If the hatred is strong enough or the danger great
enough or the desire sufficient, he may kill. Whether he plans the
method or deliberates upon the act can make no difference. He is
prompted by the instinct, and the reflection simply means the
consideration of reasons for and against, or the reaching of
inhibitions. If he acts, it is one of the primal emotions that causes
the act. He is the "machine" through which certain emotions find their
path and do their work. Infinite are the causes and circumstances that
give rise to an emotion strong enough to take human life.

Killings which result from a sudden passion are easily understood.
Everyone has been overwhelmed by rage, where reason and judgment and all
acquired restraints are entirely submerged. The primitive man with his
primitive emotion reasserts himself. It is mainly accident or the lack
of some particular circumstance that prevents a murder. Of course some
people are overwhelmed more easily than others. Some natures are less
stable, some nervous systems less perfect, and the built up barriers are
weaker. The whole result of stimuli is determined by the strength of the
feeling acting upon the machine. Such a person is not ordinarily
dangerous to the community. The act itself would generally assure that
it could never happen again. Some killings, however, are more
deliberate. They are preceded by a settled hatred which preys upon the
mind and fights against the preventive influences that training and
habit have formed. Under a certain combination of circumstances these
restrictions are swept aside and the emotions have their way.

There are, of course, certain broad classifications of homicides. A
considerable number, perhaps more than any other, come through the
commission of robbery, burglary and larceny. In the midst of the act the
offender is caught, and kills in an effort to escape. These murders fall
under the heading of property crimes; the cause is the same, and the
rules governing them are the same. The second group, with respect to
numbers, grows from the relations of men and women. Wives kill husbands
and husbands kill wives; sweethearts kill each other. Jealousy and
revenge are commonly mixed with sex life and sex association. Many
socialists have argued that under an equal distribution of property,
where women were freed from fear of want, these crimes would disappear.
But this argument does not take human nature into account. Jealousy is
inevitably associated with sex relations. The close contact of men and
women over long periods of time inevitably causes friction and
misunderstanding. These conditions often grow chronic, and in marriage
are aggravated by the necessity of close association regardless of the
real feelings that may exist. Certain claims are made by husbands and
by wives, which are probably inherent in the relationship; sometimes
they flow from habit and custom, but, from whatever cause, such claims
are so exacting that either the husband or wife finds them hard to meet.

Because of the fact that the feelings of men and women for each other
are deeper and more fundamental than those of any other relation, they
are more subject to misfortune and tragedy. The hatreds born from the
deepest affection are most beyond control. Then the desire of possession
is overwhelming. It would be strange if more killings did not result
from the relations of men and women than from any other cause. It is
easy to understand why this is true. It is likewise easy to understand
how laws, reason and judgment are powerless to prevent. Juries seem to
understand this when women kill husbands and lovers, but a
long-established code of chivalry and a cultivated attitude toward
women, which is partly right and partly wrong, make it impossible to see
that men are just as helpless under strong feelings as women. No doubt a
public opinion that would favor divorces on a greater number of grounds
and make them easily obtainable would prevent large numbers of such
killings, but the cause can not be altogether removed.

The law has long singled out killing as the greatest crime, doubtless
because man prizes life first of all. Of course every effort should be
made to protect life. Still, in measuring the character of the offender,
in determining his possibilities as a useful citizen, homicide is
probably one of the lesser crimes. Many times it implies no moral
turpitude, even with those who believe in moral turpitude. It may imply
very little lack of physical stability. Homicide practically never
becomes an occupation. Most killings are accidental in the sense that
they are casual and dependent on circumstances, and there is as a rule
much less danger of repetition than there is of the original commission
of a homicide by one of a defective nervous system who has never before
committed an unlawful act. A large number of men convicted of murder are
used as "trusties" in our penal institutions, even when their
imprisonment is for a long term, or for life. This shows from the
experience of prison officials that this class of offenders is, as a
rule, of a better fibre than almost any other class.

Doubtless no sort of treatment will ever entirely get rid of homicide.
Brains and nervous systems are so made, that inhibitions are unable to
protect in all cases. Nations and men readily engage in killing, either
from sport or because of a real or fancied wrong. Mob psychology shows
how whole communities are turned into ravenous beasts, hunting for
their prey. The world war, and all wars, show cases of mob psychology
that have led large masses of men to take an active part in killing. The
pursuit of those charged with crime shows that all people like the chase
when the emotions are thoroughly aroused. Under certain impulses,
communities gloat over hangings and commend judges and juries because
they have the courage to hang, when, in fact, they were too cowardly not
to hang and when their reason did not approve the verdict and judgment.
Men who do not kill often wish others might die and are pleased and
happy when they do die. We approve of death when it is the right one who
dies. Whether all persons are murderers or not may depend upon a
definition of murder. But, beyond doubt, all persons are potential
murderers, needing only time and circumstances, and a sufficiently
overwhelming emotion that will triumph over the weak restraints that
education and habit have built up, to control the powerful surging
instincts and feelings that Nature has laid at the foundation of life.




XI

SEX CRIMES


Most of the inmates of prisons convicted of sex crimes are the poor and
wretched and the plainly defective. Nature, in her determination to
preserve the species, has planted sex hunger very deep in the
constitution of man. The fact that it is necessary for the preservation
of life, and that Nature is always eliminating those whose sex hunger is
not strong enough to preserve the race, has overweighted man and perhaps
all animal life with this hunger. At least it has endowed many men with
instincts too powerful for the conventions and the laws that hedge him
about.

Rape is almost always the crime of the poor, the hardworking, the
uneducated and the abnormal. In the man of this type sex hunger is
strong; he has little money, generally no family; he is poorly fed and
clothed and possesses few if any attractions. He may be a sailor away
from women and their society for months, or in some other remote
occupation making his means of gratifying this hunger just as
impossible. There is no opportunity for him except the one he adopts. It
is a question of gratifying this deep and primal instinct as against
the weakness of his mentality and the few barriers that a meagre
education and picked-up habits can furnish; and when the instinct
overbalances he is lost.

Incest, which is peculiarly the crime of the weak, the wretched and the
poor, has a somewhat different origin. Westermarck in his "_History of
Human Marriage_" shows that in the early tribe there was no inhibition
against the marriage of blood relations; that the restriction then was
against the members of the tribe that used one tent; these might or
might not be blood relations. The traditions and folk-ways against the
marriage of close relations grew from the familiarity that came from the
living together of brother and sister, for instance, in one home. This
feeling gradually worked itself into custom and habit and from that into
folk-ways and laws. Sometimes we read accounts of the marriage of a man
and woman who found, after years had gone by, that they were brother and
sister who had been separated in infancy and grew up without knowledge
of their relation to each other. Whether Nature forbids the marriage of
relatives by preventing offspring or by producing imperfect offspring is
a doubtful question. Certain communities in Europe have lived together
so long that all are related and still they seem to thrive. Considering
the general custom and feeling on the subject, however, the man and
woman who know that they are closely related and who marry are different
and weaker than the others; and this may show in their offspring.
Although the subnormal may have no such feeling, they are judged by the
traditions and customs of the normal and on that judgment are sent to
prison.

Many sex crimes are charged to children in the adolescent age; children
who have no knowledge of sex and its development and are helpless in the
strength of their newly-discovered feelings. This class of offenders is
almost always the inferior and the poor who are moved by strong
instincts which they have not the natural feeling, the strength, the
education, nor the desire to withstand.

While most crimes against persons are not directly due to economic
causes, still the indirect effect of property is generally present in
these crimes as well as others. The fact that the poor and defective are
generally the subjects of prosecution and conviction in these offences
shows how closely economic conditions are related to all crimes.

Other criminal statutes are of more modern date, and as a rule involve
not much more than adultery, except in regard to the age of the girl
offender, which is generally placed below eighteen. Still the sex age of
neither boys nor girls can be fixed by a calendar. It depends really
upon development, which is not the same with all people or in all
environments. Many girls of sixteen are more mature and have more
experience of life than others of twenty. Most laws provide that below
sixteen one cannot give consent and that a sexual act is then rape. It
is doubtful if there should be any intermediate age between sixteen and
eighteen, where an act is not rape but still a minor offence.




XII

ROBBERY AND BURGLARY


Robbery and burglary are generally counted as crimes of violence, but
they should be properly classed under property crimes. Every motive that
leads to getting property in illegal ways applies to these crimes. There
is added to the regular causes of property crimes the element of danger
and adventure which makes a strong appeal to boys and men. I am inclined
to think that few mature men have committed one of these crimes, unless
they began criminal careers as boys. Such crimes especially appeal to
the activity and love of adventure which inhere in every boy. They are
committed for the most part by youths who have had almost no chance to
get the needed sport and physical experience incident to boyhood. The
foot-ball, base-ball, polo or golf player very seldom becomes a robber
or a burglar. Almost no rich man or rich man's son becomes a robber or a
burglar. Those who fall under this lure are mainly the denizens of the
streets, the railroad yards, the vacant lots, the casual workers who are
stimulated by a variety of conditions to get property unlawfully. Added
to this are almost invariably a defective heredity, vicious environment,
little education, and a total want of direction in the building up of
habits and inhibitions.

The robber or burglar who kills in the commission of crime is more
dangerous and harder to cure than the one who kills from passion or
malice. There is always the element of an occupation, for getting
property, and generally a love of adventure that is difficult to
overcome, except by a substantial change of social relations which makes
acquiring property easier for the class from which all these criminals
develop. The murder that comes from passion and feeling implies
situations and circumstances that are rarely strong enough to overcome
the restrictions against killing.




XIII

MAN AS A PREDATORY ANIMAL


Not less than eighty per cent of all crimes are property crimes, and it
seems probable that, of the rest, most arise from the same motives. If
we look at civilization as the result of that seesaw trend of the race
from "Naturalism to Artificialism," we may get a flexible view of life
that will be in accordance with the facts, and will help us to get rid
of the arbitrary division of man's history into the three periods termed
Savagery, Barbarism and Civilization. However desirable this division
may be for historic purposes in general, it is only confusing in an
effort to study the nature of man.

In the life and origin of the race, the fact is always evidenced that
the Ego through its growth and persistence is always drawing to itself
from the current of environment all things which it feels desirable to
its life and growth. This must be a necessary condition of survival. In
the long journey from amoeba to man, any circumstance causing a complete
halt for even a brief period meant extinction, while even a persistent
interference produced a weakened organism, if not an arrest of
development.

This then is the origin of the "Master Instinct," hunger. When we
consider the various emotions growing from the force of this vital urge,
as developed by adaptation to an ever-changing environment, we are able
to realize fully why it bulks so large in moulding and shaping the
destiny of the race.

All psychologists are agreed in classing under the nutritive instinct
such activities as acquisition, storing and hoarding. During a period
variously estimated as a quarter of a million to two million years, man
and his animal antecedents responded to the hunger instinct, in the
manner and by the same methods as did the various jungle animals. He
secured his prey by capture, or killed it wherever found, the one
condition being his power to get and to hold. Later tribal organization
arose, and food and shelter were held in common. But since the folk-ways
commended raiding and looting between alien tribes, here was presented
an alluring chance to secure both booty and glory to men trained in the
"get and hold" process of acquiring. For thousands of years life itself
depended upon this unerring exercise.

It was during the period outlined that man developed his big brain
(cerebrum) involving the central nervous system. Furthermore, it was
developed by, and trained to, these particular reactions. The
far-reaching control of the mind must be remembered, as upon this
through his racial heritage must be based his conflicting impulses.
These must be reckoned with in our conclusions with regard to
present-day behavior, economic or otherwise.

During the last thirty years, psychological laboratories, aided by
physiology, through oft-repeated experiments conducted with
newly-invented weighing and measuring instruments of marvelous accuracy,
have put us in possession of an array of facts unknown to students of
earlier periods, who sought the "why and the how" of man's erratic
actions as a social animal. It is constantly being demonstrated that
under given conditions, moved by appropriate stimuli, the human animal
inevitably and surely reacts the same as does inorganic matter. If we
understand "intelligence" to be the "capacity to respond to new
conditions," we can measurably see and at least partly understand the
constant inter-play of heredity and environment. Between these there is
no antagonism. The sum of life experiences consists solely in the
adjustments required to enable the sentient organism--man or beast--to
live.

How readily a "throw-back" to earlier and cruder life may be brought
about under favorable conditions, is shown by the methods and virulence
of combat during the vicious massacre in the war just ended. Can the
conclusion be evaded that individually and collectively we constantly
teeter on the brink of a precipice? If we fall it spells crime or
misfortune, or both.

Wherever civilization exists on the private property basis as its main
bulwark, we find crime as an inseparable result. Man, by virtue of his
organic nature, is a predatory animal. This does not mean that he is a
vicious animal. It simply means that man, in common with the eagle and
the wolf, acts in accordance with the all-impelling urge and fundamental
instincts of his organic structure. In any conflict between newer and
nobler sentiments and the emotions which function through the primeval
instincts, he is shackled to the bed-rock master instincts in such
manner that they usually win. This is conclusively shown by the history
of the race.

If this is true, we should expect to find the master hunger specially
active through the many chances presented for exploitation after the
fall of feudalism--beginning, let us assume, with the invention of power
machinery--the "Age of Steam". It is apparent that from that time to our
own day, man's acquisitive tendency has so expanded, that if we were
capable of an unbiased opinion it might be said to be a form of
megalomania gripping the entire white race, where highly-developed
commerce and industry are found in their most vigorous forms.

If our theory is correct, we should expect to find the most energetic
and enterprising nations showing a greater ratio of property crimes than
the invalid and feeble nations. This would more certainly be true where
political constitutions by letter and spirit encourage and promote
individual development, mental and industrial. When this condition
exists with abundant natural resources, such as often may be found in
what we term a new country, it furnishes the chance for the most
vigorous functioning of whatsoever may be the dominant qualities
inherent in the tendencies and aspirations of a people. The United
States of America, among the nations, meets these conditions, and we
find here the highest ratio of property crimes per capita. This holds as
to all such crimes, both minor and major, which are far in excess of
those of any other nation, as shown by statistics.

It seems clear that this explanation shows the main reason for the
seemingly abnormal number of property crimes in the United States.

Man's infinitely long past developed the hunger instinct, which made him
take directly and simply where he could and as he could. This is always
urging him to supply his wants in the simplest way, regardless of the
later restrictions that modern civilization has placed around the
getting of property. With the weaker intellectually and physically,
these instincts are all-controlling. The superficial and absurd theories
that his excesses are due to the lack of the certainty of punishment
take no account of the life experience, and the inherent structure of
man.

Especially in our large cities with their great opportunities for the
creation and accumulation of wealth, the "lust of power" is shown by the
nerve-racking efforts to obtain wealth by the most reckless methods. The
emotion drives us to spend extravagantly and conspicuously, that we may
inspire the envy of our neighbors by our money and power.

This is an old emotion securing a new outlet, and tenfold magnified in
force, through modern conditions in commercial and industrial life. Is
it not plain that in America it has assumed the form of an obsession,
biting us high and low, until we reek of it? It is likewise clear that
it is a menace to any abiding peace and welfare; that it is still
growing and leaving a bitter harvest of neurasthenics in its wake.

The criminologist must face the fact that, in spite of contrary
pretenses by most of our social doctors, we are still in our work-a-day
life guided almost exclusively by the mores--the folk-ways of
old--founded on expediency as revealed by experiences, and acquired by
the only known process, that of trial and error. If this be true, it
clearly follows that in order to conserve any vestige of a civilization,
we must realize the fact that property crimes are the normal results of
the complex activities making up the treadmill called civilization. We
must likewise realize that to modify these crimes we must modify the
trend of the race.

When the seamy side of man's behavior is scrutinized by science, it
cannot be other than grim and distressing to the reader. It is this to
the writer. But all the really significant facts of life are grim and
often repulsive in the material presented. To the "irony of facts" must
be ascribed the shadows as well as the high lights. No distortions or
speculations can influence the findings of science. They are accessible
and can be checked up by any one sufficiently interested. The student
knows that man is what he is, because of his origin and long and painful
past.




XIV

CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY


By far the largest class of crimes may be called crimes against
property. Strictly speaking, these are crimes in relation to the
ownership of property; criminal ways of depriving the lawful owner of
its possession.

Many writers claim that nearly all crime is caused by economic
conditions, or in other words that poverty is practically the whole
cause of crime. Endless statistics have been gathered on this subject
which seem to show conclusively that property crimes are largely the
result of the unequal distribution of wealth. But crime of any class
cannot safely be ascribed to a single cause. Life is too complex,
heredity is too variant and imperfect, too many separate things
contribute to human behavior, to make it possible to trace all actions
to a single cause. No one familiar with courts and prisons can fail to
observe the close relation between poverty and crime. All lawyers know
that the practice of criminal law is a poor business. Most lawyers of
ability refuse such practice because it offers no financial rewards.
Nearly all the inmates of penal institutions are without money. This is
true of almost all men who are placed on trial. Broad generalizations
have been made from statistics gathered for at least seventy-five years.
It has been noted in every civilized country that the number of property
crimes materially increases in the cold months and diminishes in the
spring, summer and early autumn. The obvious cause is that employment is
less regular in the winter time, expenses of living are higher, idle
workers are more numerous, wages are lower, and, in short, it is harder
for the poor to live. Most men and women spend their whole lives close
to the line of want; they have little or nothing laid by. Sickness, hard
luck, or lack of work makes them penniless and desperate. This drives
many over the uncertain line between lawful and unlawful conduct and
they land in jail. There are more crimes committed in hard times than in
good times. When wages are comparatively high and work is steady fewer
men enter the extra-hazardous occupation of crime. Strikes, lockouts,
panics and the like always leave their list of unfortunates in the
prisons. Every lawyer engaged in criminal practice has noticed the large
numbers of prosecutions and convictions for all sorts of offences that
follow in the wake of strikes and lockouts.

The cost of living has also had a direct effect on crime. Long ago,
Buckle, in his "_History of Civilization_," collected statistics
showing that crime rose and fell in direct ratio to the price of food.
The life, health and conduct of animals are directly dependent upon the
food supply. When the pasture is poor cattle jump the fences. When food
is scarce in the mountains and woods the deer come down to the farms and
villages. And the same general laws that affect all other animal life
affect men. When men are in want, or even when their standard of living
is falling, they will take means to get food or its equivalent that they
would not think of adopting except from need. This is doubly true when a
family is dependent for its daily bread upon its own efforts.

Always bearing in mind that most criminals are men whose equipment and
surroundings have made it difficult for them to make the adjustments to
environment necessary for success in life, we may easily see how any
increase of difficulties will lead to crime. Most men are not well
prepared for life. Even in the daily matter of the way to spend their
money, they lack the judgment necessary to get the most from what they
have. As families increase, debts increase, until many a man finds
himself in a net of difficulties with no way out but crime. Men whose
necessities have led them to embezzlement and larceny turn up so
regularly that they hardly attract attention. Neither does punishment
seem to deter others from following the same path although the danger
of detection, disgrace and prison is perfectly clear.

Sometimes, of course, men of education and apparent lack of physical
defect commit property crimes. Bankers often take money on deposit after
the bank is insolvent. Not infrequently they forge notes to cover losses
and in various ways manipulate funds to prevent the discovery of
insolvency. As a rule the condition of the bank is brought about by the
use of funds for speculation, with the intention of repaying from what
seems to be a safe venture. Sometimes it comes through bad loans and
unforeseen conditions. Business men and bankers frequently shock their
friends and the community by suicide, on disclosures showing they have
embezzled money to use on some financial venture that came to a
disastrous end.

These cases are not difficult to understand. The love of money is the
controlling emotion of the age. Just as religion, war, learning,
invention and discovery have been the moving passions of former ages, so
now the accumulation of large fortunes is the main object that moves
man. It does not follow that this phase will not pass away and give
place to something more worth while, but while it lasts it will claim
its victims, just as other strong emotions in turn have done. The fear
of poverty, especially by those who have known something of the value of
money, the desire for the power that money brings, the envy of others,
the opportunities that seem easy, all these feelings are too strong for
many fairly good "machines," and bring disaster when plans go wrong.

Only a small portion of those who have speculated with trust funds are
ever prosecuted. Generally the speculation is successful or at least
covered up. Many men prefer to take a chance of disgrace or punishment
or death rather than remain poor. These are not necessarily dishonest or
bad. They may be more venturesome, or more unfortunate; at any rate, it
is obvious that the passion for money, the chance to get it, the dread
of poverty, the love of wealth and power were too strong for their
equipment, otherwise the pressure would have been resisted. The same
pressure on some other man would not have brought disaster.

The restrictions placed around the accumulation of property are
multiplying faster than any other portions of the criminal code. It
takes a long time for new customs or habits or restraints to become a
part of the life and consciousness of man so that the mere suggestion of
the act causes the reaction that doing it is wrong. No matter how long
some statutes are on the books, and how severe the penalties, many men
never believe that doing the forbidden act is really a crime. For
instance, the violations of many revenue laws, game laws, prohibition
laws, and many laws against various means of getting property are often
considered as not really criminal. In fact, a large and probably growing
class of men disputes the justice of creating many legal rules in
reference to private property.

Primitive peoples, as a rule, held property in common. Their inhibitions
were few and simple. They took what they needed and wanted in the
easiest way. There is a strong call in all life to hark back to
primitive feelings, customs and habits. Many new laws are especially
painful and difficult to a large class of weak men who form the bulk of
our criminal class.

To understand the constant urge to throw off the shackles of
civilization, one need but think of the number of men who use liquor or
drugs. One need only look at the professional and business man, who at
every opportunity leaves civilization and goes to the woods to kill wild
animals or to the lakes and streams to fish.

The call to live a simple life, free from the conventions, customs and
rules, to kill for the sake of killing, to get to the woods and streams
and away from brick buildings and stone walls, is strong in the
constitution of almost every man. Probably the underlying cause of the
world war was the need of man to relax from the hard and growing strain
of the civilization that is continually weaving new fetters to bind
him. There must always come a breaking point, for, after all, man is an
animal and can live only from and by the primitive things.

Children have no idea of the rights of property. It takes long and
patient teaching, even to the most intelligent, to make them feel that
there is a point at which the taking of property is wrong. Nowhere in
Nature can we see an analogy to our property rights. Plants and animals
alike get their sustenance where and how they can. It is not meant here
to discuss the question of how many of the restrictions that control the
getting of property are wise and how many are foolish; it is only meant
to give the facts as they affect life and conduct.

It is certainly true that the child learns very slowly and very
imperfectly to distinguish the ways by which he may and may not get
property. His nature always protests against it as he goes along. Only a
few can ever learn it in anything like completeness. Many men cannot
learn it, and if they learned the forbidden things they would have no
feeling that to disobey was wrong. Even the most intelligent ones never
know or feel the whole code, and in fact, lawyers are forever debating
and judges doubting as to whether many ways of getting property are
inside or outside the law. No doubt many of the methods that intelligent
and respected men adopt for getting property have more inherent
criminality than others that are directly forbidden by the law. It must
always be remembered that all laws are naturally and inevitably evolved
by the strongest force in a community, and in the last analysis made for
the protection of the dominant class.




XV

ATTITUDE OF THE CRIMINAL


Probably the chief barrier to the commission of crime is the feeling of
right and wrong connected with the doing or not doing of particular
acts. All men have a more or less binding conscience. This is the result
of long teaching and habit in matters of conduct. Most people are taught
at home and in school that certain things are right and that others are
wrong. This constant instruction builds up habits and rules of conduct,
and it is mainly upon these that society depends for the behavior of its
citizens. To most men conscience is the monitor, rather than law. It
acts more automatically, and a shock to the conscience is far more
effective than the knowledge that a law is broken. For the most part the
promptings of conscience follow pretty closely the inhibitions of the
criminal code, although they may or may not follow the spirit of the
law. Each person has his own idea of the relative values attached to
human actions. That is, no two machines respond exactly alike as to the
relative importance of different things. No two ethical commands have
the same importance to all people or to any two people. Often men do
not hesitate to circumvent or violate one statute, when they could never
be even tempted to violate another.

Ordinarily unless the response of conscience is quick and plain, men are
not bothered by the infraction of the law except, perchance, by the fear
of discovery. This is quite apart from the teaching that it is the duty
of all men to obey all laws, a proposition so general that it has no
effect. Even those who make the statement do not follow the precept, and
the long list of penal laws that die from lack of enforcement instead of
by repeal is too well known to warrant the belief that anyone pays
serious attention to such a purely academic statement. No one believes
in the enforcement of all laws or the duty to obey all laws, and no one,
in fact, does obey them all. Those who proclaim the loudest the duty of
obedience to all laws never obey, for example, the revenue laws. These
are clear and explicit, and yet men take every means possible to have
their property exempted from taxation--in other words, to defraud the
State. This is done on the excuse that everyone else does it, and the
man who makes a strict return according to law would pay the taxes of
the shirkers. While this is true, it simply shows that all men violate
the law when the justification seems sufficient to them. The laws
against blasphemy, against Sunday work and Sunday play, against buying
and transporting intoxicating liquors and smuggling goods are freely
violated. Many laws are so recent that they have not grown to be
folk-ways or fixed new habits, and their violation brings no moral
shock. In spite of the professions often made, most men have a poor
opinion of congressmen and legislators, and feel that their own
conscience is a much higher guide for them than the law.

Religions have always taught obedience to God or to what takes His
place. Religious commands and feelings, are higher and more binding on
man than human law. The captains of industry are forever belittling and
criticising all those laws made by legislatures and courts which
interfere with the unrestricted use of property. None of this sort of
legislation has their approval and the courts are regarded as meddlesome
when they enforce it. The anti-trust laws, the anti-pooling laws,
factory legislation of all kinds, anything in short that interferes with
the unrestricted use of property by its owner are roundly condemned and
violated by evasion. On the other hand, so much has been written and
said in reference to the creation of the fundamental rights to own
property, and these rights depend so absolutely upon social arrangements
and work out such manifest injustice and inequality, that there is
always a deep-seated feeling of protest against many of our so-called
property laws. From those who advocate a new distribution of wealth and
condemn the injustice of present property rights, the step is quite
short to those who feel the injustice and put their ideas in force by
taking property when and where they are able to get it.

For instance, a miner may believe that the corporation for which he
works really has no right to the gold down in the mine. As he is digging
he strikes a particularly rich pocket of high-grade ore. He feels that
he does no wrong if he appropriates the ore. Elaborate means are taken
to prevent this, even compelling the absolute stripping of the workman,
and a complete change of clothes on going in and coming out of the mine.

Many laws are put on the books which are of a purely sumptuary nature;
these attempt to control what one shall do in his own personal affairs.
Such laws are brought about by organizations with a "purpose". The
members are anxious to make everyone else conform to their ideas and
habits. Such laws as Sunday laws, liquor laws and the like are examples.
Then, too, every state or nation carries a large list of laws that men
have so long violated and ignored, that they virtually are dead. To
violate these brings no feeling of wrong, but only serves to make men
doubt the evil of violating any law.

It is never easy to get a Legislature to repeal a law. Generally some
organization or committee of people is interested in keeping it alive,
and the members of the Legislature fear losing their votes. Social ideas
are always changing. No laws or customs are eternal. The ordinary man,
and especially the man under the normal, cannot keep up with all the
shifting of a changing world. There is always a fraction of a community
agitating for something new and gradually forcing the Legislature to put
it into law, even against the will of the majority and against the
sentiment of a large class of the community. The organization that wants
something done is always aggressive. The man who wants to prevent it
from being done is seldom unduly active or even alarmed. Many
organizations are eager to get statutes on the books. One seldom hears
of a society or club that is active in getting laws repealed. The
constant change of law, the constant fixing of new values in place of
old ones, is necessary to social life. This means putting new wine into
old bottles, and wine that is much too strong for the bottles. Everybody
can see why some particular law might be violated without a sense of
guilt, but they cannot see how a law they believe in can be violated
without serious obliquity.

Apart from this, there have always been crimes that were not of the
class that implied moral wrong. The acts of the revolutionist who saw,
or thought he saw, visions of something better; the man who is inspired
by the love of his fellow-man and who has no personal ends to gain; the
man who in his devotion to an idea or a person risks his life or liberty
or property or reputation, has never been classed with those who violate
the law for selfish ends. The line of revolutionists, from the beginning
of organized government down to the birth of the United States and even
to the present time, furnishes ample proof of this. And still the
unsuccessful revolutionist meets with the severest penalties. To him
failure generally means death. Men who are fired with zeal for all new
causes are forever running foul of the law. Social organization, like
biological organization, is conservative. All things that live are
imbued with the will to live and they take all means in their power to
go on living. The philosopher can neither quarrel with the idealist who
makes the sacrifice nor the organization that preserves itself while it
can; he only recognizes what is true.

Men have always been obliged to fight to preserve liberty. Constitutions
and laws do not safeguard liberty. It can be preserved only by a
tolerant people, and this means eternal conflict. Emerson said that the
good citizen must not be over-obedient to law. Freedom is always
trampled on in times of stress. The United States suffered serious
encroachments on liberty during the Civil War. During the last war,
these encroachments were greater than any American could have possibly
dreamed; and so far there seems little immediate chance for change.
Still the philosopher does not complain. He sees human passion for what
it is, a great emotion that holds men in its grasp, a feeling that
nothing can stand against. Opposition is destroyed by force, and often
blind, cruel, unreasoning force. Sometimes even worse, this force is
created for selfish ends. There are always those who will use the
strongest and highest emotions of men to serve their private, sordid
ends. Changing social systems, new political ideas, the labor cause, all
movements for religious, social or political change have their zealots;
they are met by the force of convention and conservatism ready to defend
itself, and the clash is inevitable. It is easy to distinguish this sort
of action from the things done by those who are known as criminals.
Their acts are done to serve personal ends. Society may always punish
both, but all men of right ideas will understand that the motive is
different, the equipment and capacity of the men are different, and they
are only in the same class because they each violate the law and are
each responsive to emotions and to feelings that are of sufficient
strength to compel action.




XVI

THE LAW AND THE CRIMINAL


If one were ill with a specific disease and he were sent to a hospital,
every person who touched him, from the time his disease was known until
he was discharged, would use all possible effort to bring him back to
health. Physiology and psychology alike would be used to effect a cure.
Not only would he be given surroundings for regaining health and ample
physical treatment, but he would be helped by appeals in the way of
praise and encouragement, even to the extent of downright falsehood
about his condition, to aid in his recovery.

If such is done of "disease," why not of "crime"? Not only is it clear
that crime is a disease whose root is in heredity and environment, but
it is clear that with most men, at least when young, by improving
environment or adding to knowledge and experience, it is curable. Still
with the unfortunate accused of crimes or misdemeanors, from the moment
the attention of the officers is drawn to him until his final
destruction, everything is done to prevent his recovery and to aggravate
and make fatal his disease.

The young boy of the congested districts, who tries to indulge his
normal impulses for play, is driven from every vacant lot; he is
forbidden normal activity by the police; he has no place of his own; he
grows to regard all officers as his enemies instead of his friends; he
is taken into court, where the most well-meaning judge lectures him
about his duties to his parents and threatens him with the dire evils
that the future holds in store for him, unless he reforms. If he is
released, nothing is done by society to give him a better environment
where he can succeed. He is turned out with his old comrades and into
his old life, and is then supposed by strength of will to overcome these
surroundings, a thing which can be done by no person, however strong he
may be.

For the graver things, the boy or man is taken to the police station.
There he is photographed and his name and family record taken down even
before he has had a hearing or a trial. He is handled by officers who
may do the best they can, but who by training and experience and for
lack of time and facilities are not fitted for their important
positions. I say this in spite of the fact that my experience has taught
me that policemen, as a rule, are kindly and human. From the police
station the offender is lodged in jail. Here is huddled together a great
mass of human wreckage, a large part of it being the product of
imperfect heredities acted upon by impossible environments. However
short the time he stays, and however wide his experience, the first
offender learns things he never knew before, and takes another degree in
the life that an evil destiny has prepared for him. In the jail he is
fed much like the animals in the zoo. In many prisons the jailer is
making what money he can by the amount he can save on each prisoner he
feeds above the rate the law allows of twenty-five or fifty cents a day.
In a short time the prisoner's misery and grief turn to bitterness and
hate; hatred of jailer, of officers, of society, of existing things, of
the fate that overshadows his life. There is only one thing that offers
him opportunity and that is a life of crime. He is indicted and
prosecuted. The prosecuting attorney is equipped with money and provided
with ample detectives and assistants to make it impossible for the
prisoner to escape. Everyone believes him guilty from the time of his
arrest. The black marks of his life have been recorded at schools, in
police stations and examining courts. The good marks are not there and
would not be competent evidence if they were. Theoretically the State's
Attorney is as much bound to protect him as to prosecute him, but the
State's Attorney has the psychology that leads to a belief of guilt, and
when he forms that belief his duty follows, which is to land the victim
in prison. It is not only his duty to land him in jail, but the office
of the State's Attorney is usually a stepping-stone to something else,
and he must make a record and be talked about. The public is interested
only in sending bad folks to jail.

No doubt there are very few State's Attorneys who would knowingly
prosecute unless they believed a man guilty of the offense, but it is
easy for a State's Attorney to believe in guilt. Every man's daily life
is largely made up of acts from which a presumption of either guilt or
innocence can be inferred, depending upon the attitude of the one who
draws the inference.

To a State's Attorney or his assistants the case is one that he should
win. All cases should be won. Even though he means to be fair, his
psychology is to win. No lawyer interested in a result can be fair. The
lawyer is an advocate trying to show that his side is right and trying
to win the case. The fact that he represents the State makes no
difference in his psychology. In fact, he always tells the jury that he
represents the State and is as much interested in protecting the
defendant as in protecting society. He does this so that the jury will
give his statements more weight than the statements of the lawyer for
the defense, and this very remark gives him an advantage that is neither
fair nor right.

The man on trial is almost always poor. It is only rarely that a poor
man can get a competent lawyer to take his case. He is often handed over
to the court for the appointment of a lawyer. The lawyer has no time or
money to prepare a defense. As a rule he is a beginner not fitted for
his job. If he wishes to take the case, he wants it only for the
experience and advertising that it will bring. He is handed a case to
experiment on, just as a medical student is handed a cadaver to dissect.
If the defendant is in jail, he has little chance to prepare his case.
If the defendant had any money he would not know what to do with it. He
is often a mentally defective person. His friends are of the same class
and can do little to help him. The jury are told that they must presume
him innocent, but the accusation alone carries with it the presumption
of guilt, which extends to everyone connected with the case, even to the
lawyer appointed to defend him. It is almost a miracle if the defendant
is not convicted.

Perhaps he is taken out to be hanged--the last act that society can do
for him, or the convicted man is sent to prison for a long or shorter
term. His head is shaved and he is placed in prison garb; he is
carefully measured and photographed in his prison clothes, so that if
he should ever get back to the world he will forever be under suspicion.
Even a change of name cannot help him. While in prison he works and
lives under lock and key, like a wild animal, eager to escape. On
certain days he is allowed to sit at a long table with other
unfortunates like himself, and visit for an hour with mother or father
or wife or son or daughter or friend on the other side. Other prisoners,
so far as he can associate with them, are as helpless and hopeless and
rebellious as he. How they will get out, and when, are their chief
concerns. Many of their guards are very humane. Probably no one seeks to
torture him, but the system and the psychology are fatal. He sees almost
no one who approaches him with friendship and trust and a desire to
help, except his family, his closest friends and his companions in
misery. He knows that the length of his term is entirely dependent upon
officials whom he cannot see or make understand his case. He snatches at
the slightest ray of hope. He is in despair from the beginning to the
end. No prison has the trained men who, with intelligence and sympathy,
should know and watch and help him in his plight. No state would spend
the money necessary to employ enough attendants and aids with the
learning and skill necessary to build him up. Money is freely spent on
the prosecution from the beginning to the end, but no effort is made to
help or save. The motto of the state is: "Millions for offense, but not
one cent for reclamation."

As all things end, prison sentences are generally finished. The prisoner
is given a new suit of clothes that betrays its origin and will be
useless after the first rain, ten dollars in cash, and he goes out. His
heredity and his hard environment have put him in. Now the state is done
with him; he is free. But there is only one place to go. Like any other
released animal, he takes the same heredity back to the old environment.
What else can he do? His old companions are the only ones who will give
him social intercourse, which he needs first of all, and the only ones
who understand him. They are the only ones who will be glad to see him
and help him get a job. There is only one profession for which he is
better fitted after he comes out than he was before he went in, and that
is a life of crime. Of course, he is a marked man and a watched man with
the police. When a crime is committed and the offender is not found, the
ex-convict is rounded up with others of his class to see, perchance, if
he is not the offender that is wanted. He is taken to the lock-up and
shown with others to the witnesses for identification. Before this, the
witness may have been shown his photograph in convict clothes. Perhaps
they identify him, perhaps they do not; if identified, he may be the
man or he may not be. Anyhow, he has been in prison and this is against
him. Whenever he comes out and wherever he goes, his record follows him
as closely as his shadow. Even his friends suspect him. They suspect him
even when they help him.

Such is the daily life of these unfortunates. What can be done? I can
see nothing that the officers of the law can do. Officers represent the
people. They reflect mob psychology. Even though an officer here and
there rises above the crowd, as he sometimes does, it is of no avail.
His place soon is filled by someone else. If only the public would
understand! If only the public were more intelligent, which in this case
at least would mean more human! If only the statement I repeat so often
could be understood! There are no accidents; everything is the result of
law. All phenomena are a succession of causes and effects. The criminal
is the result of all that went before him and all that surrounds him.
Like every other mortal, he is a subject for pity and not for hatred. If
society is not safe while he is at large, he must be confined and kept
under guard and observation. He must be kept until he is safe and a
favorable environment found for him. If he will never be safe for
society, he should never be released. He must not be humiliated, made to
suffer unduly, despised or harried. He must be helped if he can be
helped. This should be the second, if not the first object of his
confinement.

Assuming that the scientific attitude toward crime should be accepted by
those who make public opinion, and that this should become crystallized
into written law, the problem would be easy.

The officers of the state can, as a rule, be depended upon to deal
properly and considerately with the known insane. The insane are more
trying and difficult than the criminal. Courts and juries and the
public, however, recognize their mental condition and do not visit them
with vengeance. It is appreciated and understood that they cannot with
safety be left at large; but they are given the care and consideration
that their condition demands. If the criminal should be looked upon as
are the creatures insane from natural causes, the State's Attorney could
then be trusted to prepare the case and do the best he could for all
concerned. The defendant would no longer be a defendant. His case would
be under investigation; his past life would be shown, his credits as
well as his debits; he would need no lawyer, not even a public defender;
no jury would be required, and the uncertainties and doubts that hang
around judgments would be removed. There would be little chance for a
miscarriage of justice. Even should there be, it would result in the
speedy release of one against whom the public bore no ill-will. One who
was sick or insane would ordinarily not need a lawyer, as the state
would bear him no malice and make no effort to do more than investigate
the case and present the facts. The whole matter should be a purely
scientific attempt to find out the best thing to be done both for the
interest of the public and the interest of the man.

No doubt, in many cases, men are convicted who are perfectly innocent of
the crime of which they are accused. This is especially true with the
poor who can provide for no adequate defense and who perhaps have been
convicted before of some misdemeanor or crime. This is also often true
in cases where there is great prejudice against the defendant, either on
account of the nature of the case or of the defendant on trial. For
instance, during the recent war a wave of hysteria swept over the world,
and courts and juries trampled on individual rights and freely violated
the spirit of laws and constitutions. The close of the war left the same
intense feelings of bitterness which made justice impossible in cases
where the charge savored of treason, and involved criticism of the
government, or advocacy of a change of political systems.

Questions of race, religion, politics, labor and the like have always
awakened violent feelings on all sides, have made bitter partisans and
strict lines of cleavage, and have made verdicts of juries and
judgments of courts the result of fear and hatred. In spite of this,
most of the inmates of prisons have done the acts charged in the
indictments. Why they did them, their states of mind, the conditions and
circumstances surrounding them, what can be done to make them stronger
and better able to meet life are never ascertained, and few courts or
juries have ever deemed these things proper subjects for consideration
or in any way involved in the case.

In law every crime consists of two things: an act and an intent. Both
are necessary to constitute legal guilt, and on the prevalent theory of
moral guilt and punishment both are necessary to make up criminal
conduct. There can be no legal or moral guilt unless one intends
wickedness; unless he deliberately does the act because he wishes to do
wrong and knows he does wrong. The question then of moral guilt, which
is necessary to the commission of a criminal act, touches all the
questions suggested and many more. Even if freedom of action is to some
degree assumed, the question still remains as to the degree of guilt in
fixing punishment and responsibility. The question involves the make-up
of the man, his full heredity, so far as it can be known.

Most of every man's heredity is hidden in the mist and darkness of the
past. He inherits more or less directly through an infinite number of
ancestors, reaching back to primitive man and even to the animals from
which he came. The remote ancestry is, of course, usually not so
important as that immediately behind him. Still, plainly, his form and
structure and the details of his whole machine, including the
marvelously delicate mechanism of the brain and nervous system, are
heritages of the very ancient past. Neither are the processes of
inheritance well understood nor subject to much control. Often in the
making of the man Nature resorts to some "throw-back" which reproduces
the ancient heritage. This can be seen only in general resemblances and
behavior, for the genealogical tree of any family is very short and very
imperfectly known, and the poor have no past. In three or four
generations at the most the backward trail is lost and his family merged
with the species of which he forms but a humble part.

Enough, however, is known of ancestry and the infinite marks of
inheritance on every structure as well as enough of the reaction of the
human machine to the varied environment that surrounds it, to make it
clear that if one were all-seeing and all-wise he could account in
advance for every action of every man. More than this, he could see in
the original, fertilized cell, all its powers, defects and
potentialities and could, in the same manner, look down through the
short years during which the human organism, grown from the cell, shall
have life and movement, and could see its varied environment. If one
could see this with infinite wisdom, he could infallibly tell in advance
each step that the machine would take and infallibly predict the time
and method of its dissolution. To be all-knowing is to be
all-understanding, and this is infinitely better than to be
all-forgiving.

To get this knowledge of the past of each machine is the duty and work
of the tribunal that passes on the fate of a man. It can be done only
imperfectly at best. The law furnishes no means of making these
judgments. All it furnishes is a tribunal where the contending lawyers
can fight, not for justice, but to win. It is little better than the old
wager of battle where the parties hired fighters and the issue was
settled with swords. Oftentimes the only question settled in court is
the relative strength and cunning of the lawyers. The tribunal whose
duty it is to fix the future place and status of its fellowmen should be
wise, learned, scientific, patient and humane. It should take the time
and make its own investigation, and it can be well done in no other way.
When public opinion accepts the belief that punishment is only cruelty,
that conduct is a result of causes, and that there is no such thing as
moral guilt, investigations and sorting and placing of the unfortunate
can be done fairly well. The mistakes will be very few and easily
corrected when discovered. There will be no cruelty and suffering. The
community will be protected and the individual saved.

Neither will this task be so great as it might seem at first glance.
Trials would probably be much shorter than the endless, senseless
bickering in courts, the long time wasted in selecting juries and the
many irrelevant issues on which guilt or innocence are often determined,
make necessary now. Most of the criminal cases would likewise be
prevented if the state would undertake to improve the general social and
economic condition of those who get the least. Only a fraction of the
money spent in human destruction, in war and out, would give an
education adapted to the individual, even to the most defective. It
would make life easy by making the environment easy. Only a few of the
defective, physically and mentally, would be left for courts to place in
an environment where both they and society could live. Perhaps some time
this work will be seriously taken up. Until then, we shall muddle along,
fixing and changing and punishing and destroying; we will follow the old
course of the ages, which has no purpose, method or end, and leaves only
infinite suffering in its path.




XVII

REPEALING LAWS


It is comparatively easy to get a penal statute on the books. It is very
hard to get it repealed. Men are lazy and cowardly; politicians look for
votes; members of legislatures and Congress are not so much interested
in finding out what should be done, as they are in finding out what the
public thinks should be done. Often a law lingers on the books long
after the people, no longer believing the forbidden thing to be wrong,
have repealed it. The statute stays, to be used by mischievous people
and by those who believe in the particular law.

Often the unthinking lay hold of a catch-word or a pet phrase and repeat
and write it, as if it were the last word in social science and
philosophy. General Grant, when president, stumbled on such a silly
combination of words, and surface-thinkers have been repeating it ever
since, simply because it sounds wise and pat. Grant once said that, "The
way to repeal a bad law is to enforce it." Grant was not a statesman nor
a philosopher. He was a soldier. He probably heard some one use this
phrase, and it sounded good to him. Out of that has grown the further
statement which courts and prosecutors have used to excuse themselves
for the cruelty of enforcing a law that does violence to the feelings of
the people. This statement is to the effect that so long as the law is
on the books, it is the duty of officers to enforce it. The smallest
investigation of the philosophy of law shows how silly and reactionary
such statements are.

One thing should be remembered. Laws really come from the habits,
customs and feelings of the people, as interpreted or understood by
legislative bodies. When these habits and customs are old enough they
become the folk-ways of the people. Legislatures and courts only write
them down. When the folk-ways change the laws change, even though no
legislature or judge has recorded their repeal.

Since Professor Sumner of Yale University wrote his important book,
"_Folkways_," there is no excuse for any student not knowing that this
statement is true. As a matter of fact, no court ever enforced all the
written laws, or ever would, or ever could. Only a part of the discarded
criminal law is ever repealed by other laws. The rest dies from neglect
and lack of use. It is like the rudimentary parts of the human anatomy.
Man's body is filled with rudimentary muscles and nerves that, in the
past, served a purpose. These were never removed by operations, but died
from disuse. Every criminal code is filled with obsolete laws, some of
them entirely dead, others in the course of dissolution. They cannot be
repealed by statute so long as an active minority insists that they
remain on the books. When the great mass no longer wants them, it is
useless to take the trouble to repeal them. The fugitive slave law was
never believed in and never obeyed, and it was openly violated and
defied by the great mass of the people of the North. The Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Amendments to the Federal Constitution, and the statutes
passed to enforce them, providing political and civil equality for the
black man, and forbidding discrimination on railroads, in hotels,
restaurants, theatres and all public places, have never really been the
law in any state in the Union. Their provisions have always been openly
violated and no court would think of enforcing them, for the simple
reason that public sentiment is against it. Laws condemning witchcraft
and sorcery both in Europe and America did their deadly work and died,
for the most part, without repeal. Sabbath laws of all sorts forbidding
work and play and amusements are dead letters on the statute books of
most states, in spite of many attempts to galvanize them into life. All
kinds of revenue laws are openly violated. Most tax-payers of
intelligence who own property violate the revenue law openly and
notoriously, and all courts and officers as well as the public know it.
Many laws which interfere with the habits, customs and beliefs of a
large number of people, like the prohibition laws, never receive the
assent of so large a percentage as to make people conscious of any wrong
in violating them, and therefore people break them when they can. Often
this class of laws is enforced upon offenders who believe the law is an
unwarrantable interference with their rights, and thus causes
convictions where no moral turpitude is felt.

Every new crusade against crime not only sweeps away a large amount of
work that has been slowly and patiently done toward a right
understanding of crime, but likewise puts new statutes on the books
which would not be placed there if the public were sane. When it does
not do this, it increases penalties which work evil in other directions
and awe courts, juries, governors and pardon boards, not only preventing
them from listening to the voice of humanity and justice, but causing
them to deny substantial rights and wreak vengeance and cruelty upon the
weak and helpless.




XVIII

IS CRIME INCREASING?


The question is often asked, Is crime increasing? Statistics of all
kinds can be gathered on this subject. In the main they seem to show
that crime is on the increase in most civilized countries. It is very
unsafe to use statistics without at the same time considering all the
questions on which conduct rests. An increase of crime, as shown by
statistics, may mean that the records are kept more completely than in
former times. It may mean temporary causes like bad times are adding to
the number of arrests and convictions. It may mean new classifications.
It may mean that figures are based on arrests instead of convictions. It
may include misdemeanors with graver offenses. It may or may not include
repeaters. Statistics in any field are useful, but usually for broad
generalizations, and they must always be interpreted by men of
experience who are not interested in the results. Still, on the whole,
it is probable that statistics show that crime is on the increase. What
have reason and human experience to say on the subject?

We should always bear in mind that crime can never mean anything except
the violation of law, when the violator is convicted; that it has no
necessary reference to the general moral condition of man. Is the number
of criminal convictions growing, and if so why? In the first place, the
criminal code is lengthening every year. When civilized man began making
criminal codes, there were comparatively few things forbidden. The codes
were largely made up of those acts which, in some form, have for ages
been generally thought to be criminal. Religious beliefs, customs and
habits were included in the penal statutes. So were such things as
sorcery and witchcraft. Property was then not an important subject in
man's activities. When the instinct to create and accumulate property
began to rule life, the criminal code grew very rapidly. Complex
business interests, combined with the constantly increasing value placed
on property, were always calling for new statutes.

The same tendency, indirectly, demanded still other statutes until at
the present time this class of crimes makes up a large part of the
criminal code and is growing steadily each year. Then too, the necessity
of property has called for the violation of this part of the criminal
code more than any other, and it has naturally caused a considerable
increase of crime. Man in his social and political activities is ever
weaving and bending and twisting back and forth. For a number of years
the universal tendency, especially in America, has been toward what is
called "Social Control", the idea being that more and more people should
be controlled in an increasing number of ways. Of course, if people are
to be controlled they must be controlled by other people. This policy
has been extended until we are ever pushing further into the regulation
of the habits, customs and lives of all the individual members of the
community. The majority, when it has the power, has never hesitated to
force its ways of living, its ideas, customs and habits on the minority.
The majority, when strong enough, has always assumed that it was right,
and provided that others must live its way or not at all. The pendulum
is now swinging far this way as is evidenced by prohibition, the
persistent campaign for Sunday laws, and the growing belief in social
control as a means of changing and directing humanity.

This has added to the criminal code and has increased the number of men
in prisons. Two statutes of recent date in most of the states are
responsible for a very large increase in the number of convicts. The
conspiracy statute which is used today is a deliberate scheme on the
part of prosecutors to get men into the penitentiary by charging an
agreement or confederation of two or more persons to do something,
which, if really committed, would be a misdemeanor, or no crime
whatever. Under this charge, whether made specifically or in connection
with another crime, the rules of evidence have been opened and relaxed
until the wildest and most remote hearsay is freely admitted for the
plain purpose of convicting men who have really been guilty of no
specific act. It is in effect punishing one for his thoughts; the
business of the court or jury being to find out whether in some
particular he has an evil mind.

The statute forbidding the use of the "confidence game" in obtaining
property sends to prison a constant stream of persons who, until a few
years ago, would have been guilty of no crime. This law, as interpreted
by the courts, really means the procuring of money by dishonest means.
Under this statute the court and jury hear the evidence and say whether
the means charged are dishonest or not. This, of course, leaves the law
so that the temporarily prevailing power, perhaps only the prosecuting
attorney, may send men to prison who take means of getting money that
are not practiced or at least advocated by the ones who procure the
passage and enforcement of the law.

Numberless ways used by the strong to get money are considered dishonest
by a large class of men and women: exaggerated and lying advertisements,
forestalling the markets, the acts and wiles of the professional
salesman, misrepresenting goods and other methods that could never be
catalogued because new ways are constantly coming to light. The logical
end of all these indefinite and uncertain laws is to pass one statute
providing that whoever does wrong shall be imprisoned, _et cetera, et
cetera_. The law never can specify all the ways of doing wrong and many
of the meanest and most annoying things have never been, and from the
nature of things never can be, prohibited by the statutes. No man is a
good citizen, a good neighbor, a good friend, or a good man just because
he obeys the law. The intrinsic worth is determined mainly by the
intrinsic make-up.

Civilization is all the while making it harder for men to keep out of
prison. Especially do the weak and ignorant and poor find that
environment is constantly creating more inhibitions as time goes on.
While rules and customs are prohibiting more and more ways of getting
property, the needs growing out of civilization are always increasing.
The simple inexpensive life of the past has given place to a more
complex way of living, which calls for greater expense and harder work.
It has created rivalry and jealousy to get the things that others have,
and has placed men in a mad race with each other which often leads to
jail or death.

Students of biology are constantly noting the difficulty that hereditary
human traits, which have been evolved for simple reactions and plain
living, find in making the necessary adjustments to the extravagant
demands and complicated environment of the present day. This departure
from the old normal and simple environment, due largely to machinery and
commerce, is not only destroying individual lives by the thousands, but
is seriously threatening the whole social fabric.

The creation of new courts, like "Boys' Courts," "Juvenile Courts,"
"Courts of Domestic Relations," "Moral Courts," with their array of
"Social Workers," "Parole Agents," "Watchers," _et cetera,_ shows the
growth of crime and likewise the hopelessness of present methods to deal
effectively with a great social question. Numbers of people in our big
cities are making their living from the abnormal lives of children.
Whether they are doing good or not, or whether their service is
unselfish, as much of it doubtless is, are both quite aside from the
question. The important fact is that the present system brings no
results and that the disease is growing.

Instead of any considerable number of people taking hold of the question
of crime, as physicians have taken hold of disease, and seeking to find
its cause and to remove that cause, we content ourselves with
prosecuting and punishing and visiting with misery and shame, not only
the boys and girls, the men and women, who are the victims of life, but
the large number of fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, sons and
daughters, whose lives are ruined by a catastrophe with which at least
they had nothing to do. If a doctor were called in to treat a case of
typhoid fever, he would probably find out where the patient got his milk
supply and his drinking water and would have the well cleaned out to
stop the spread of typhoid fever through infection. A lawyer called to
treat the same kind of a case, legally speaking, would give the patient
thirty days in jail, thinking that this treatment would effect a cure.
If at the end of ten days the patient were cured, he would nevertheless
be kept in prison until his time was out. If at the end of thirty days
the disease was more infectious than ever, the patient would be
discharged and sent upon his way to spread contagion in his path.

The transgression of organized society in the treatment of crime would
not be so great if students and scientists had not long since found the
cause of crime. It would be hard to name a single man among all the men
of Europe and America who have given their time and thought to the
solution of this problem, who has not come to the conclusion that crime
has a natural origin, and that the criminal for the most part is the
victim of heredity and environment. These students have pointed the way
for the treatment of the disease, and yet organized government that
spends its millions on prosecutions, reformatories, jails,
penitentiaries and the like, has scarcely raised its hand or spent a
dollar to remove the cause of a disease that brings misery and despair
to millions and threatens the destruction of all social organization! To
the teaching of the student and the recommendations of the humane the
mob answers back: "Give us more victims, bigger jails, stronger prisons,
more scaffolds!"

Not only has the constant multiplication of penal laws helped without
avail to fill jails, but the failure to repeal laws that are outgrown
does its part. As already stated, there are many anti-social and
annoying things that can be done without violating the law. This, no
doubt, is responsible for some of the general statutes like that aimed
at the confidence game that catches a victim when the crime is not
clearly defined as in "robbery," "burglary," "larceny" and the like.
Still it has been the general opinion of those who have studied crime
and influenced the passage of penal laws, that criminal statutes should
be clear and explicit so that all would know what they must not do. It
is obvious that if one is to be punished simply for doing wrong, there
could be no judges or juries or jailers condemning and punishing and no
crowds shouting for vengeance. All do wrong and do it over and over
again, and day by day. It is not only those specific things that the
great majority think are wrong, but the graver offenses that are meant
to be the subject of criminal codes. Of course, codes do not work out
this way in practice. In effect, they forbid the things that the
strongest forces of the community wish forbidden, things which may or
may not be the gravest and most anti-social acts, but which at least
seem to the strong to be most hostile to their interests and ruling
emotions.




XIX

MEDICAL EXPERTS


So long as the ordinary ideal of punishment prevails, a crime must
consist of an act coupled with an intent to do the thing, which probably
means an intent to do evil. This is no doubt the right interpretation of
intent, although cases can be found, generally of a minor grade, which
hold that evil intent is not necessary to the crime. Under the law as
generally laid down, insanity is a defense to crime when the insanity is
so far advanced as to blot out and obliterate the sense of right and
wrong or render the accused unable to choose the right and avoid the
wrong. Of course, legal definitions of scientific terms, processes, or
things, do not ordinarily show the highest wisdom. It is safe to say
that few judges or lawyers have ever been students of insanity, of the
relation of "will" to "conduct," or of other questions of science or
philosophy. Each man confines himself to his field of operation, and the
love of living does not induce him to go far from the matter in hand,
which to him means the base of supplies.

The insane are exempted from punishment for crime on the ground that
they are not able to prepare and attend to their cases when placed on
trial and on the further ground that their "free will" is destroyed by
disease or "something else," and therefore they could form no intent. In
another place I have tried to point out the fact that the acts of the
sane and the insane are moved by like causes, but this is not the theory
of the law.

Insanity is often very insidious. Many cases are easily classified, but
there is always the border line, the twilight zone, which is sure to
exist in moral questions and in all questions of human conduct, and this
is hard to settle. It is generally determined by the feelings of a jury,
moved or not by the prejudice of the public, depending on whether the
community has been lashed or persuaded to take a hand in the conduct of
the case.

Lawyers and judges are not psychologists or psychiatrists, neither are
juries. Therefore the doctor must be called in. As a rule, the lawyer
has little respect for expert opinion. He has so often seen and heard
all sorts of experts testify for the side that employs them and give
very excellent reasons for their positive and contradictory opinions,
that he is bound to regard them with doubt. In fact, while lawyers
respect and admire many men who are expert witnesses, and while many
such men are men of worth, still they know that the expert is like the
lawyer: he takes the case of the side that employs him, and does the
best he can. The expert is an every-day frequenter of the courts; he
makes his living by testifying for contesting litigants. Of course
scientific men do not need to be told that the receipt of or expectation
of a fee is not conducive to arriving at scientific results. Every
psychologist knows that, as a rule, men believe what they wish to
believe and that the hope of reward is an excellent reason for wanting
to believe. It is not my intention to belittle scientific knowledge or
to criticise experts beyond such general statements as will apply to all
men. I have often received the services of medical experts when valuable
time was given without any financial reward, purely from a sense of
justice. But all men are bound to be interested in arriving at the
conclusion they wish to reach. Furthermore, the contending lawyers are
willing to assist them in arriving at the conclusions that the lawyer
wants.

It is almost inevitable that both sides will employ experts when they
have the means. The poor defendant is hopelessly handicapped. He is, as
a rule, unable to get a skillful lawyer or skillful experts. A doctor's
opinion on insanity is none too good, especially in a case where he is
called only for a casual examination and has not had the chance for long
study. The doctor for the prosecution may find that the subject can play
cards and talk connectedly on most things, and as he is casually
visiting him for a purpose, he can see no difference between him and
other men. This may well be the case and still have little to do with
insanity. Experts called for the defense cannot always be sure that the
patient truthfully answers the questions. A doctor must make up his mind
from examining the patient, except so far as hypothetical questions may
be used. In all larger cities, certain doctors are regularly employed by
the prosecution. While it would be too much to say that they always find
the patient sane, it is safe to say that they nearly always do.
Especially is this true in times of public clamor, which affects all
human conduct. A court trial with an insanity defense often comes down
largely to the relative impression of the testimony of the experts who
flatly contradict each other, leaving with intelligent men a doubt as to
whether either one really meant to tell the truth. The jury knows that
they are paid for their opinions and regards them more or less as it
regards the lawyers in the case. It listens to them but does not rely
upon their opinions. Expert testimony is always unsatisfactory in a
contested case. Under present methods, it can never be any different.

There is another danger: juries do not know the difference in the
standing, character and attainments of doctors, so the tendency is
always to find the man who will make the best appearance and testify
the most positively for his side. This is unfair to the expert, unfair
to science, and unfair to the case.

The method for overcoming this difficulty that has received most
sanction from students is that experts shall be chosen by the state and
appear for neither side. This, like most other things, has advantages
and disadvantages. State officials, or those chosen by the state,
usually come to regard themselves as a part of the machinery of justice
and to stand with the prosecuting attorney for conviction. It will most
likely be the same with state defenders. No one who really would defend
could be elected or could be appointed, and it would work out in really
having two prosecutors, one nominally representing the defense. A
defendant should be left to get any lawyer or any expert he wishes. No
one can be sure that the state expert will be better than the others.
All one can say is that state experts may not be partisans, but, in
effect, this would mean that they would not be partisans for the
defendant. The constant association with the prosecutor, the officers of
the jail, the public officials, and those charged with enforcing the
law, would almost surely place them on the side of the state. Such men
must be elected or appointed by some tribunal. This brings them to the
attention of the public and makes them dependent on the public. The
expert's interest will then be the same as the interest of the
prosecutor and the judge.

The prosecuting attorney is not a partisan. His office is judicial. He
is not interested in convicting or paid for convicting, and yet, no sane
person familiar with courts would think that the defendant could be
safely left in his hands. Assuming he is honest, it makes little
difference. Almost no prosecutor dares do anything the public does not
demand. Neither, as a rule, has he training nor interest to study any
subject but the law. The profounder and more important matters affecting
life and conduct are a sealed book which he could not open if he would.
Very soon under our political system the expert business would gravitate
into the hands of politicians, the last group that should handle any
scientific problem. I am free to confess the difficulties of the present
system, but some other way may be even worse. It must always be
remembered that this country is governed by public opinion, that public
opinion is always crude, uninformed and heartless. In criminal cases
there is no time to set it right. The position of the accused is hard
enough at best. He is really presumed guilty before he starts. Every
lawyer employed to any extent in criminal practice knows that in an
important case his greatest danger is public opinion. He would not take
the officers and attachés of the court as jurors, although they might
be good men, for their interest and psychology would be always for
conviction.

If defendants were not regarded as moral delinquents, if the examination
implied no moral condemnation, if it was only a scientific investigation
as to where to place him if he is anti-social, if public opinion
supported this view, then experts should be appointed by the court. On
this phase of the case there would be little need of experts. I would be
willing to go further and say that then, too, the partisan lawyer, the
hired advocate, should disappear. The machinery of justice would be
all-sufficient to take care of the liberties of every man, to give him
proper treatment in disease, to restore him to freedom when safe, and,
when that time does come, the unseemly contest in courts will disappear,
and justice, tempered with mercy, will have a chance.




XX

PUNISHMENT


Assuming that man is justified in fixing the moral worth of his fellow;
that he is justified in punishment for the purpose of making the
offender suffer; and that these punishments according to the degree of
severity will in some way pay for or make good the criminal act or
protect or help society or prevent crime or even help the offender or
someone else, what finally is the correct basis of fixing penalties?

No science, experience, or philosophy and very little humanity has ever
been considered in fixing punishments. The ordinary penalties are first:
fines, which generally penalize someone else more than the victim; these
with the poor mean depriving families and friends of sorely needed
money, and the direct and indirect consequences are sometimes small and
sometimes very great. These can be readily imagined. If instead of fines
a prison sentence is given, a sort of decimal system has been worked out
by chance or laziness or symmetry of figures; certainly it has been done
wholly regardless of science, for there is no chance to apply science
when it comes to degrading men and taking away a portion of their lives.
Generally ten days is the shortest. From this the court goes to twenty,
then thirty, then sixty, then three months, then six months, then one
year.

Why not eleven days? Why not twenty-four days? Why not forty days? Why
not seventy days? Why not four months or five, or eight or nine or ten
months? Is there no place between six months in jail and a year in jail?
The bids at an auction or the flipping of pennies are exact sciences
compared with the relation between crime and punishment and the process
of arriving at the right penalty. If in the wisdom of the members of the
legislature the crime calls for imprisonment in the penitentiary, then
the ordinary sentences run one, two, five, ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty
years, and life, according to the hazard of the legislature, the whim of
the court, the gamble of the jury, or the feeling and means of
expression of the unthinking and pitiless crowd who awe courts and
juries with their cries for vengeance.

Neither does punishment affect any two alike; the sensitive and proud
may suffer more from a day in jail or even from conviction than another
would suffer from a year. The various courts and juries of the different
states fix different penalties. Even in the same state there is no sort
of resemblance to the punishments generally given for similar crimes.
Some jurisdictions, some juries and some courts will make these three or
four times as severe as others for the same things. Some days the same
judge will give a longer sentence than on other days. In this judges are
like all of us. We have our days when we feel kindly and sympathetic
toward all mankind. We have our days when we mistrust and dislike the
world in general and many people in particular. Largely the weather
influences those feelings. Therefore, the amount of time a person spends
in prison may depend to a great extent on the condition of the weather
at the time of conviction or when sentence is passed. The physical
condition of judge or jury, and above all, their types of mind, are
all-controlling. No two men have the same imagination: some are harsh
and cruel; others kind and sympathetic; one can weigh wheat and corn and
butter and sugar; one can measure water and molasses and gasoline. When
one measures or weighs, one can speak with exactness regarding the thing
involved. Justice and mercy and punishment cannot be measured or
weighed; in fact there is even no starting point. The impossibility of
it all makes many of the humane and wise doubt their right to pass
judgment upon their fellow man. Society no doubt is bound by
self-protection to resist certain acts and to restrain certain men, but
it is in no way bound to pass moral judgments.

Under any system based on a scientific treatment of crime, men would be
taken care of as long as it was necessary to restrain them. It would be
done in the best possible way for their own welfare. If they ever were
adjudged competent to enter society again, they would be released when
that time came. Neither under a right understanding, and a humane,
scientific and honest administration, would it be necessary that places
of confinement should be places of either degradation or misery. In fact
the inmate might well be put where he could enjoy life more than he did
before he was confined. It might and should be the case also that he
could produce enough to amply take care of himself and provide for those
who would naturally look to him for support, and perhaps make
compensation for the injury he had caused to someone else.

It is obvious that this cannot be done until men have a different point
of view toward crime. In the last hundred years much has been done to
make prisons better and to make more tolerable the life of the inmates.
This has been accomplished by men who looked on criminals as being at
least to a certain extent like other men.

Above all, as things are now, the prison inmate has no chance to learn
to conform unless hope is constantly kept before him. He should be like
the convalescing invalid, able from time to time to note his gradual
progress in the ability to make the adjustments that are necessary to
social beings. No patient in a hospital could be cured if he were
constantly told that he could not get well and should not get well. His
imagination should be enlarged by every means that science can bring to
the teaching of man.

First of all there must be individual treatment. No one would think of
putting hundreds or thousands of the ill or insane into a pen, giving
them numbers, leaving them so that no capable person knows their names,
their histories, their families, their possibilities, their strength or
their weaknesses. Every intelligent person must know that this would
inevitably lead to misery and death. The treatment of men in prison is a
much more difficult problem than the care of the physically diseased. It
requires a knowledge of biology, of psychology, of hygiene, of teaching
and of life; it needs infinite patience and sympathy; it needs thorough
acquaintance and constant attention. It is a harder task than the one
that confronts the physician in the hospital, because the material is
poorer, the make is more defective, and the process of cure or
development much slower and not so easily seen.

No person is entirely without the sympathetic, idealistic and altruistic
impulses, which after all are the mainsprings of social adaptation.
Probably these innate feelings can be found in prisoners as generally as
in other men. It is the lack of these qualities that often keeps men
outside the jail. They "get by" where kindly and impulsive men fail. A
large part of the crime, especially of the young, comes from the desire
to do something for someone else and from the ease with which persons
are led or yield to solicitation.

The criminal has always been met by coldness and hatred that have made
him lose his finer feelings, have blunted his sensibilities, and have
taught him to regard all others as his enemies and not his friends. The
ideal society is one where the individuals move harmoniously in their
various orbits without outside control. The governing power of a perfect
order in its last analysis must be within the individual. A perfect
system probably will never come. Men are too imperfect, too weak, too
ignorant and too selfish to accomplish it. Still, if we wish to go
toward perfection, there is no other road.

One of the favorite occupations of legislatures is changing punishments
in obedience to the clamor of the public. In times of ordinary
tranquility a penalty may even be modified or reduced, but let the
newspapers awaken public opinion to crime by the judicious use of
headlines and a hot campaign, let the members feel that there is a
popular clamor and that votes may be won or lost, and the legislature
responds. This is generally done without reference to the experience of
the world, without regard to the nature of man, with no thought of the
victim, and with no clear conception of how the legislation will really
affect the public.

The demand is constantly made that such crimes as kidnapping, train
robbing, rape and robbery should be punished with death, or at least
with imprisonment for life. Irrespective of its effect on the criminal,
what is the effect on the victim of the criminal? A man is held up on a
lonely highway; the robber does not intend to kill. His face is exposed.
If the penalty for robbery is life imprisonment, he kills to avoid
detection. If it is death, he kills even before he robs. The same thing
operates in rape, in burglary, and in other crimes. In all property
crimes not only is no killing intended or wanted, but precautions are
taken to guard against killing. All laws to make drastic penalties
should really be entitled: "An Act to Promote Murder."

Making penalties too drastic destroys the effect meant to be produced.
Public clamor does not last forever. Men grow tired of keeping their
tongues wagging on the same subject all the time. A state of frenzy is
abnormal and when it subsides the temperature not only goes back to
normal, but as far below as it has been above. When the fury has spent
itself jurors regain some of their human feeling and refuse to convict.
History has proved this over and over again, and still politicians
always seek to ride into power on the crest of the wave; when the wave
moves back, they can easily go back with it. Even if the severe
punishments should be continued without abatement, these soon lose their
power to terrify. Communities grow accustomed to hangings; they get used
to life sentences and long imprisonments and the severity no longer
serves to awe. The cruelty serves only as a mark of the civilization of
the day. Some day, perhaps, a wiser and more humane world will marvel at
our cruelty and ignorance, as we now marvel at the barbarity of the
past.




XXI

THE EFFECT OF PUNISHMENT ON OTHERS


The ordinary man who hears of a crime hates the criminal and wants him
to suffer. He does not picture the malefactor as a man who, for some
all-sufficient reason, has committed a dreadful act. Still less does he
ask: "Has he a father or mother, a wife or children, brothers or
sisters, and how are these affected by his deed?" No one can
intelligently deal with the criminal without considering these.
Practically no inmate of a prison stands alone. He is a member of a
family or small social group, and inevitably the interests of these
others are more or less closely bound up with his. If punishment is
justified for its influence on society, these must be taken into account
with the other members of the social organization.

The criminal, it must be remembered, is almost always poor. He has a
mother, brothers and sisters, wife or children, dependent for support to
a large extent, upon his casual earnings. He is placed in jail or the
penitentiary and the family must make new adjustments to life. The
mother or wife may go to work at hard labor for a small return; the
children may be taken out of school and sent to stores or factories, be
condemned to lives of drudgery that will often lead to crime. The family
may be broken up and scattered through institutions and the poorest
shelters. A complete transformation for the worse almost always comes
over the home. It is safe to say that at least three or four are closely
touched by the misfortune of every one. These lives must be readjusted,
and the chances are that the new adjustments will not be equal to the
old, if for nothing else than because the conviction is a serious
handicap in their struggles. Let anyone go to a city jail on a visiting
day and see the old mothers, the stunned and weeping wives, the little
children, down to babes in arms, who crowd around the corridors to get a
look at the man behind the bars. To them at least he is a human being
with feelings and affections, with wants and needs. All of these can
recount his many good qualities which the world cannot see or know.
Their first step is to borrow or to sell what they can to provide means
for his defense. Everything else is cast aside. Day after day they visit
the jail and the lawyer, contriving means to save liberty or life. When
the trial comes, they watch through its maze in a dazed, bewildered way.
They know that the man they love is not the one who is painted in the
court room, and at least to them he is not. If he is convicted and goes
to prison for a term of years, then month by month the faithful family
goes to see him for an hour in the prison, visiting across the table in
open view of guards and others as unfortunate as they. The family
follows all sorts of advice and directions and seeks out many hopeless
clews for men of influence and position who can unlock prison doors. The
weeks run into months and the months into years, and still many of them
keep up their hopeless vigil; some are driven to drudgery, some to
crime, some to destruction for the man whom the state has punished that
society may be improved. It is safe to say that the state ruins at least
one other life for every victim of the prison.

No provision is made for the dependent families of the wretched man.
Ruthlessly society sends the man to prison and sees the daughter leave
school, a mere child, and go to work. What becomes of her it does not
know or care. It seems not to know that she exists. The state sees the
convict's boy working at casual tasks and growing up on the streets,
while his father is paying the penalty of his act. He may on this
account follow his father to jail; it is not society's concern.

Assuming that an offender must be confined for the protection of
society, as some no doubt must be, still the effect on the family and
how to prevent its destruction should be among the first concerns in the
disposition of the case.




XXII

EVOLUTION OF PUNISHMENT


Among primitive peoples the penal code was always short. Desire for
property had not taken possession of their emotions. Their lives were
simple, their adjustments few, and there was no call for an elaborate
code of prohibited acts. Their punishments were generally simple, direct
and severe: usually death or banishment which often meant death,
sometimes maiming and branding, so that the offender might serve as a
constant warning to others.

Primitive peoples early asked questions about their origin and destiny.
The unknown filled most of the experiences of their lives. The realm of
the known was very small. They had no idea of law and system, of cause
and effect. They early began evolving religious ideas. The
manifestations of nature, the mystery of birth, the fear of death, the
phenomena of dreams, the growth and harvesting of crops--all of these
were beyond their understanding. They peopled the earth with gods to be
propitiated and appeased. Everything was the act of a special
providence. From early times religion and witchcraft furnished the
chief subjects for the criminal code.

The penalties for the violation of the code were always severe,
generally death, and by the most terrorizing ways. No other crime could
be so great as to arouse the anger of the gods, and naturally no other
conduct should demand so severe a penalty as calling down the wrath of
the gods. This would fall not only upon the offending man, but upon the
community of which he was a part. Even as man developed in knowledge and
civilization, this sort of crime continued to furnish the greater
proportion of victims and the most cruel punishments. Torture of the
most fiendish sort was evoked to catch offenders and extort confessions.
Difference of religious opinions was the worst crime. The inquisition
became an established thing. Sometimes a nation was almost wiped out
that heretics should be killed and heresies destroyed. The heretic was
the one who did not accept the prevailing faith. The list of victims of
punishment on account of religion, witchcraft, sorcery and kindred laws
has in the past no doubt been larger than for any other charges.

This kind of laws always called out the greatest zeal in their
enforcement. To the religious enthusiast nothing else was of equal
importance. It involved not only the life of man on earth but his life
through all eternity. Our statutes today are replete with such crimes,
but the punishments have been lessened and, as a rule, communities will
not enforce them. But laws against blasphemy, working on Sunday, and
Sunday amusements of all sorts, are still on the books and enforced in
some places. A large organization and an influential and aggressive part
of the Christian Church are insisting that these laws shall be enforced
to the limit and that still others shall be placed among the statutes of
the several states.

The methods of inflicting the death penalty have been various, the
favorite ways being burning, boiling in oil, boiling in water, breaking
on the rack, smothering, beheading, crucifying, stoning, strangling and
electrocuting. Until the middle of the last century they were carried
out in the presence of the multitude so that all might be warned by the
example.

The number of crimes for which death and bodily torture have been the
punishment can scarcely be recorded, and if they could it would be of no
value. They would run into the hundreds and probably the thousands. A
large part of these crimes are now obsolete. Doubtless more men have
been executed for crimes they did not commit and could not commit than
for any real wrong of which they were guilty.

Prisons came into fashion later than the death penalty, and as a form of
punishment have gradually come to take the place of most death
penalties. Prisons in the past have been loathsome places and not much
better than death. Prisoners have been packed together so closely that
life was almost impossible. To incarcerate victims in prisons has
brought terrible punishment not only on the prisoners and their
families, but indirectly on the state. No doubt through the years
prisons have been gradually improved. Many of their terrors have been
banished. People have come to believe that even a prisoner should have
some consideration from the state. Penalties have likewise grown less
severe and terms have been shortened, but this course has not been
regular or constant; the public readily relaxes into hatred and
vengeance, and it is easy to arouse these feelings in men, since they
lie very close to the surface. A constant struggle has always been waged
by the humane to make man more kindly, and yet probably his nature does
not really change. A few months of frenzy may easily undo the work of
years.

So long as men punish for the sake of punishment, there will be a
disagreement between the advocates of long punishment and short
punishment, hard punishment and light punishment. From the nature of
things, there is no basis on which this can be determined. The only
thing that throws any light on the question is experience, and men can
always differ as to the lessons of experience. Neither do they remember
experience when feelings are concerned.

Punishment can deter only on the ground of the fear that flows from it.
Fear comes from things that are more or less unusual. Man has little
abstract fear of a natural death; it is so unavoidable that it does not
even figure in the ordinary affairs of life. Extreme punishments may
grow so common that few give them any concern. They probably are so
common now that the impression they make is not very great. Lighter and
easier punishments would have the same psychological effect. In many
cases a lenient punishment would also eliminate much of the hatred and
bitterness against the world that are common to all inmates of prisons.




XXIII

CAPITAL PUNISHMENT


The question of capital punishment has been the subject of endless
discussion and will probably never be settled so long as men believe in
punishment. Some states have abolished and then reinstated it; some have
enjoyed capital punishment for long periods of time and finally
prohibited the use of it. The reasons why it cannot be settled are
plain. There is first of all no agreement as to the objects of
punishment. Next there is no way to determine the results of punishment.
If the object is assumed it is a matter of conjecture as to what will be
most likely to bring the result. If it could be shown that any form of
punishment would bring the immediate result, it would be impossible to
show its indirect result although indirect results are as certain as
direct ones. Even if all of this could be clearly proven, the world
would be no nearer the solution. Questions of this sort, or perhaps of
any sort, are not settled by reason; they are settled by prejudices and
sentiments or by emotion. When they are settled they do not stay
settled, for the emotions change as new stimuli are applied to the
machine.

A state may provide for life imprisonment in place of death. Some
especially atrocious murder may occur and be fully exploited in the
press. Public feeling will be fanned to a flame. Bitter hatred will be
aroused against the murderer. It is perfectly obvious to the multitude
that if other men had been hanged for murder, this victim would not have
been killed. A legislature meets before the hatred has had time to cool
and the law is changed. Again, a community may have capital punishment
and nothing notable happens. Now and then hangings occur. Juries acquit
because of the severity of the penalty. A feeling of shame or some
bungling execution may arouse a community against it. A deep-seated
doubt may arise as to the guilt of a man who has been put to death. The
sentimental people triumph. The law is changed. Nothing has been found
out; no question has been settled; science has made no contribution; the
public has changed its mind, or, speaking more correctly, has had
another emotion and passed another law.

In the main, the controversy over capital punishment has been one
between emotional and unemotional people. Now and then the emotionalist
is reinforced by some who have a religious conviction against capital
punishment, based perhaps on the rather trite expression that "God gave
life and only God should take it away." Such a statement is plausible
but not capable of proof. In the main religious people believe in
capital punishment. The advocates of capital punishment dispose of the
question by saying that it is the "sentimentalist" or, rather, the
"maudlin sentimentalist" who is against it. Sentimentalist really
implies "maudlin."

But emotion too has its biological origin and is a subject of scientific
definition. A really "sentimental" person, in the sense used, is one who
has sympathy. This, in turn, comes from imagination which is probably
the result of a sensitive nervous system, one that quickly and easily
responds to stimuli. Those who have weak emotions do not respond so
readily to impressions. Their assumption of superior wisdom has its
basis only in a nervous system which is sluggish and phlegmatic to
stimuli. Such impressions as each system makes are registered on the
brain and become the material for recollection and comparison, which go
to form opinion. The correctness of the mental processes depends upon
the correctness of the senses that receive the impression, the nerves
that transmit the correctness of the registration, and the character of
the brain. It does not follow that the stoic has a better brain than the
despised "sentimentalist." Either one of them may have a good one, and
either one of them a poor one. Still, charity and kindliness probably
come from the sensitive system which imagines itself in the place of
the object that it pities. All pity is really pain engendered by the
feelings that translate one into the place of another. Both hate and
love are biologically necessary to life and its processes.

Many people urge that the penalty of imprisonment for life would be all
right if the culprit could be kept in prison during life, but in the
course of time he is pardoned. This to me is an excellent reason why his
life should be saved. It is proof that the feeling of hatred that
inspired judge and jury has spent itself and that they can look at the
murderer as a man. Which decision is the more righteous, the one where
hatred and fear affect the judgment and sentence, or the one where these
emotions have spent their force?

Everyone who advocates capital punishment is really ashamed of the
practice for which he is responsible. Instead of urging public
executions, the most advanced and sensitive who believe in killing by
the state are now advocating that even the newspapers should not publish
the details and that the killing should be done in darkness and silence.
In that event no one would be deterred by the cruelty of the state. That
capital punishment is horrible and cruel is the reason for its
existence. That men should be taught not to take life is the purpose of
judicial killings. But the spectacle of the state taking life must tend
to cheapen it. This must be evident to all who believe in suggestion.
Constant association and familiarity tend to lessen the shock of any
act however revolting. If men regarded the murderer as one who acted
from some all-sufficient cause and who was simply an instrument in an
endless sequence of cause and effect, would anyone say he should be put
to death?

It is not easy to estimate values correctly. It may be that life is not
important. Nature seems extravagantly profligate in her giving and
pitiless in her taking away. Yet death has something of the same shock
today that was felt when men first gazed upon the dead with awe and
wonder and terror. Constantly meeting it and seeing it and procuring it
will doubtless make it more commonplace. To the seasoned soldier in the
army it means less than it did before he became a soldier. Probably the
undertaker thinks less of death than almost any other man. He is so
accustomed to it that his mind must involuntarily turn from its horror
to a contemplation of how much he makes out of the burial. If the
civilized savages have their way and make hangings common, we shall
probably recover from some of our instinctive fear of death and the
extravagant value that we place on life. The social organism is like the
individual organism: it can be so often shocked that it grows accustomed
and weary and no longer manifests resistance or surprise.

So far as we can reason on questions of life and death and the effect
of stimuli upon human organisms, the circle is like this: Frequent
executions dull the sensibilities toward the taking of life. This makes
it easier for men to kill and increases murders, which in turn increase
hangings, which in turn increase murders, and so on, around the vicious
circle.

In the absence of any solid starting point on which an argument can be
based; in the absence of any reliable figures; in the absence of any way
to interpret the figures; in the absence of any way to ascertain the
indirect results of judicial killings, even if the direct ones could be
shown; in the impossibility through life, experience or philosophy of
fixing relative values, the question must remain where it has always
been, a conflict between the emotional and unemotional; the
"sentimental" and the stolid; the imaginative and the unimaginative; the
sympathetic and the unsympathetic. Personally, being inclined to a
purely mechanistic view of life and to the belief that all conduct is
the result of certain stimuli upon a human machine, I can only say that
the stimuli of seeing and reading of capital punishment, applied to my
machine, is revolting and horrible. Perhaps as the world improves, the
sympathetic and imaginative nature will survive the stolid and selfish.
At least one can well believe that this is the line of progress if there
shall be progress, a matter still open to question and doubt.




XXIV

STIGMATA OF THE CRIMINAL


Lombroso and others have emphasized the theory that the criminal is a
distinct physical type. This doctrine has been so positively asserted
and with such a show of statistics and authority, that it has many
advocates. More recent investigations seem to show conclusively that
there is little or no foundation for the idea that the criminal is a
separate type. Men accustomed to criminal courts and prisons cannot
avoid being impressed with the marks of inferiority that are apparent in
prisoners. Most prisoners are wretched and poorly nourished, wear poor
clothes and are uncared-for and unkempt. Their stunted appearance is
doubtless due largely to poor food, the irregularity of nourishment, and
the sordidness of their lives in general. One also imagines that a
prisoner looks the part, and in his clothes and surroundings he
generally does. It is hard for a prisoner to look well-groomed; he has
neither the opportunity nor the ambition to give much attention to his
personal appearance. The looks of the prisoners are of little value.
Nothing but actual measurements could give real information, and these
do not sustain the theory of their being different from other men.

It is not possible to see how the criminal can be of a distinct physical
type. Criminality exists only in reference to an environment. One cannot
be born a criminal. One may be, and often is, born with such an
imperfect equipment that he cannot make his adjustments to life, and
soon falls a victim to crime and disease. All that a physical
examination could do would be to show the strength or weakness of the
body and its various organs. What may befall him will depend partly on
the kind and quality of his mind and nervous system, and partly on the
physical structure and the kind of experiences that life holds in store
for him.

No doubt thorough psychological examinations would reveal something of
the brain, just as physical examinations certainly would determine the
strength and capacity of the body. This would be of material aid in
determining the kind of environment that should be found for the
individual, and if such environment could be easily found it would avert
most of the calamities which beset the path of the youth.

Something can be told of a person's character from his eyes, the
expression of the face and the contour of the head, but this information
is very misleading as our everyday experience shows. It is not
necessary to find stigmata in the prisoner to know that he was born the
way he is. One's character must be fixed before birth whether Nature
marks it on one's head or not. Likewise every particle of matter moves
from stimuli and obedience to law, regardless of whether it shows in the
face or not. The strong are no more exempt from the law than the weak.
All the difference is that they can longer and more easily avoid
disaster.

Everyone is in the habit of forming a hasty opinion of another by
reading his face and noting his expression. But the indication given by
facial expression is mainly the product of the life that has been lived,
and tells something of the part that the hidden emotions have played on
the body.

It has been generally believed that mind has its seat in the brain and
the nervous system. Later investigations, however, seem to show that it
is the product of the whole physical organism. There is no chance to
measure or weigh or still less assay the qualities of the machine. It is
certain that the quality of the mind depends very little upon either the
contour or size of the skull.

About all that can be learned of the mind and the character of the man
must be gathered from the manifestation of the machine. It is shown by
his behavior in action and reaction. This behavior is caused by the
capture, storage and release of energy through the ductless glands.

A defective mechanism either inherited or acquired through imperfectly
balanced glands will inevitably produce an imperfect mind and defective
conduct. This it will be bound to do because the body is the mind.

As a matter of fact, no man is branded physically with the "mark of
Cain." If criminology were so simple it would not be difficult to
handle. The manifestations of the human machine are infinite and only
patience and careful study can find the points of weakness and of
strength. That all brains and bodies have both is beyond dispute. No
physical human structure was ever put together where the organs were
equally strong to do the work assigned to them. Some part of the body
always needs watchfulness and repair and can never be depended upon in
emergencies. In times of overstress and strain, the defective organ or
organs will manifest their weakness. The intricate nervous system and
the brain, the unseen instincts and emotions likewise do not work
perfectly; but as a rule the ones that underwork or overwork cannot be
seen by a physical examination. It generally requires great subtlety to
find them, and careful treatment and environment to make the machine
work fairly well in spite of these imperfections. This could be
provided; in most cases the machine could be placed in an environment
where it would work fairly well; but instead of this all the effort
that is made to keep the machine in shape is a threat of the jail if it
goes wrong; it is then left to run itself without help or assistance of
any kind.

While examinations of the head do not show marked differences between
prisoners and others, a great distinction is seen between the general
proportion and the degrees of nourishment of prisoners and those not
accused of crime. Nothing is more common than the weak and underfed
condition of the delinquent and the criminal. This needs no expert
examination. It is obvious to all. The poor, scanty clothes and personal
belongings corroborate the fact that the accused is poor and has not
enough to eat or wear, nor anything but the most scanty shelter. In
addition to these facts, he is almost always ill. A report recently
published, based on investigations by a special committee of the New
York State Commission of Prisons, shows that in the New York Reformatory
only eight per cent passed the required physical examination. In the
penitentiary, where the average age was higher, only five per cent
passed the test. In the work house--the home of the "down and
outs"--only one per cent passed. The health tests employed were those
for admission to the army. It was likewise found by the same commission
that of those in good health or fair physical condition, eighty-five per
cent were self-supporting, while only eighteen per cent of those in
poor physical condition took care of themselves.

Disease and ill health, when found so generally, are in themselves
indications of a defective system, and such machines are constantly
exposed to temptation. Their needs are ever present and their poverty
great. Sickness and disease weaken or destroy such inhibitions as the
unfortunate are able to build up, and they readily yield to crime.




XXV

THE GOOD IN CRIMINALS


The criminal is confronted in court with an indictment charging him with
a violation of the law. He is a human being, like all others, neither
perfect nor entirely worthless. He has some tendencies and inclinations
which the world calls good for lack of a better term, and some that it
calls bad for the same reason. In this he is like the jury and the
judge. The strength of the different tendencies is not the same in any
two machines. The judge and jury are interested in determining whether
he is good or bad; that is, better or worse than they themselves. In
theory he is tried on the charges contained in the indictment.

In most cases by a constant stretching of the rules of evidence his
whole life may be involved. That is, proof may be offered of any act of
delinquency that constituted a violation of the law, if in any way
similar, or in any way connected with the one charged in the indictment.
He cannot meet these charges by proving the acts of kindness and charity
and real worth that are rarely absent in any life. The proceedings show
how bad he is, not how good. He may be able to call witnesses to show
that up to the time of the bringing of the indictment his reputation for
honesty was good; but he cannot show that he supported his grandmother,
or helped his aunt, or educated his younger brother, or gave his money
to the poor. All the good is irrelevant to the issue. This does not
prove that he did not commit the act. It might clearly prove whether on
the whole he should go to jail. Through this process he feels that the
law and proceedings are unfair and that he is condemned, when, in fact,
he is as good as those who judge him. Neither can he show the
circumstances that hedged in his way nor the equipment with which he
entered life. Under the legal theory that he is "the captain of his
soul," these are not material to the issue. Neither can he show the
direct motive that caused the conduct. It may have been a motive that
was ideal, but the question involved is, did he violate the law?

He is convicted and sent to prison. As a rule, he will some time be
turned back into the world. He needs careful treatment, involving
instruction and an appeal to that part of his nature which may awaken
sympathies and produce emotions that will make him more of a social
being on his return to the world. In the loose language of the world, it
is necessary for him not only to learn how to curb the evil but how to
increase the good. His imagination should be cultivated and enlarged.
The responses to better sentiment should be strengthened. This can be
furthered only by skilled teachers who are moved by the desire to help
him. The process should be similar to a hospital treatment. Instead of
this, he is usually surrounded by men of little intelligence or
education, men who have no fitness for the task; he is governed by
strict rules, all of them subjecting him to severe penalties when
violated. Every action in the prison reminds him of his status. With the
exception of a few strong men who need suffering for their development
it can have but one result. He must come out from prison poorer material
than when he went in. There are only two reflections that can keep him
out of trouble in the future: the remembrance of the past and the fear
that a similar experience might come to him again.

When it is remembered that the greatest enemy to happiness and life is
fear; when we realize that the constant battle of the primitive man was
with the fear that peoples the unknown with enemies and dangers; when we
remember that in some way, fear of poverty, of disease, of disaster, of
loss of friends and life is the ever-present enemy of us all, it is
evident that nothing but harm can come from the lessons of fear that are
drilled into the victim in prison. Life furnishes countless ways to be
kind and helpful and social. It furnishes infinite ways to be cruel,
hard and anti-social. Most of these anti-social ways are not condemned
by the law. Whether the life is helpful and kindly or hard and selfish
can never depend upon the response of an organism to fear, but upon the
response of an organism to the kindlier and more humane and sympathetic
sentiments that to some extent at least inhere in the constitution of
man.

It is a common thing for prisoners, even during the longest term, to be
more solicitous about mother, child, wife, brother or friend than about
themselves. It is common for them to deny themselves privileges,
presents or favors to help other inmates. The consideration and kindness
shown by unfortunates to each other are surprising to those who have no
experience with this class of men. Often to find real sympathy you must
go to those who know what misery means. Pride and coldness are usually
due to lack of understanding, and life alone can bring understanding.
Every intelligent man engaged in efforts to improve and help either
criminals or children or any others, knows the need of an appeal to what
passes as the better nature. Help does not come so much from directly
inhibiting the bad as by extending the area of the higher emotions. To
pull up weeds in a garden without planting something in their place is a
foolish task. The human being is like the garden. Something must grow in
the soil. If weeds are pulled up and nothing planted Nature will grow
more weeds. Some feelings and emotions always possess every person. The
best that is incident to the machine should be found and this be
cultivated and extended until it dominates the man. Courts and prisons
have no machinery to cultivate the best in their victims; they are
always looking for the worst, aiding and promoting it until the prisoner
is driven to hopelessness and despair.




XXVI

THE DEFECTIVE AND INSANE


It is almost hopeless to bring any system or order out of the chaos that
prevails in the discussion of the insane, the defective, the moron, and
the feeble-minded. The world has so long believed that man is a
specially created animal and that he does wrong from free choice, that
much more time and investigation are necessary before sane and
scientific theories can be formulated on this subject.

It has been a great many years since any semi-intelligent man believed
that all sorts of physical abnormalities were due to one cause and could
be cured by one method, and yet the prevailing opinion now, even among
the fairly educated, is that all sorts of abnormal conduct are due to
one cause, perversity and wickedness, and should be treated with only
one prescription, punishment. Scientific men indeed have long known that
there were causes for the abnormality of conduct and that there were
various more or less satisfactory remedies for many cases. Still the
time that scientists have worked on the problem is short and the data
imperfect, and many years of patient study will be needed before there
can be worked out the broad theories of responsibility for and treatment
of crime which will replace the long accepted doctrines of original sin,
and the expulsion of devils from the wicked by cruelty and punishment.

By far the largest part of the population of prisons is made up of the
insane, feeble-minded, morons, defectives or victims of diseases that
seriously influence conduct. This is especially shown by the increased
percentage of the clearly defective that are repeaters, over those in
prison for their first offense. There is no lack of statistics as to the
various groups of defectives, but these figures cannot be reconciled. No
two authorities agree as to percentages; the classifications are more or
less uncertain; the dividing lines between the different groups are
vague, one class easily fading into another. The investigations have
largely been made by those not trained for the work, and above all the
conclusions as to treatment are at variance, doubtful and necessarily
not yet satisfactory. That the clearly insane and the plainly
feeble-minded should not be punished would doubtless be admitted by all
who speak in public or write for others to read. Many persons speaking
in private, acting on juries and connected with the machinery of
"justice" say that these should be punished like the rest. Still for a
starting point, it may be assumed that most men would agree that these
classes should be restrained rather than punished.

The chief difficulty is that between the most violently insane and the
least emotional man are infinite numbers of gradations blending so
closely that no one can mathematically or scientifically classify all
the various individual units. While there are cases of insanity that can
be clearly traced to injury or disease, the degree of sanity in most
cases is still impossible to determine. Most insane people are sane on
some things, generally on most things and are sane a part or most of the
time. The periods of sanity and insanity can be distinguished only by
conduct. How far any specific insanity may impair the brain and affect
the inhibitions, is impossible to foretell.

When it comes to the defective, the problem is still more difficult. No
two persons have the same degree of intelligence. Some are clearly
lacking in mentality. Others are manifestly intelligent. The great mass
range all along between these extremes. Various arbitrary rules have
been laid down to aid in classifying different grades of defectives.
Generally the feeble-minded can be sorted out. The defectives are
supposed, if young, to be two years or more below the normal scholar in
development; if older, three or more below. Their standing is fixed by
asking certain test questions. Furthermore, a list of questions has
been commonly used for an "intelligence test." These queries have
nothing to do with the school work of the child, but are supposed to
reveal only his native intelligence.

No doubt in a broad way such tests throw considerable light on the
mentality of those who submit to the examination. Ordinary experience,
however, shows that they cannot be fully relied on. Some children
develop very slowly, others very rapidly. Some are much quicker, others
slower in their perceptions and responses. No two children or grown-ups
have the same turn of mind. One may be very bright in business affairs
and very dull in books. One may be clever in arithmetic and hopeless in
grammar. One may have marked mechanical ability and no taste for school.
These tests are only valuable if given by well qualified examiners, and
the method is so new that few have had the chance to thoroughly prepare
for the work. For the most part the tests are given by people who are
wholly unfit for so important a task.

Quite aside from all this it is not certain that intelligent people are
necessarily safer to the community than stupid ones. There is always a
tendency for the stupid to stick to the beaten path. Intelligence
generally means individuality and divergence. On the other hand, the
stupid and subnormal are moved much more directly by instincts and
emotions. Their lack of imagination, poor perceptions and want of
reasoning or comparing power, make their self-control weak. In sudden
stress or an unusual situation, they are easily swept away and respond
directly to instinct and feeling. In short the urge of the primitive
through the long history of the race cannot be modified sufficiently by
the new structure that civilization has built around more intelligent
people.

The various distinctions between the feeble-minded and the normal must
not be taken with too much confidence. As the motives that govern man
are understood, it is easy to see that intelligence is a strong factor
in regulating behavior. When it is seen also that at least the larger
part of the inmates of prisons are subnormal and at the same time
without property or education, it is evident that all these handicaps
are dominating causes of conduct. This position is made still more
certain by the further evidence that nearly all of the repeaters in
prison are of this type.

Most states already make some allowances in their criminal codes for the
defective and the insane. This is really an acknowledgment that the
activity of the human machine is governed by its make and environment.
The history of the treatment of the insane serves to show the
uncertainty of all man's theories as to punishment and responsibility.
Doubtless at a very early age in the history of man it was discovered
that there were people who acted so abnormally that they could not be
classified with the great mass. Such persons were supposed to be
possessed of devils or demons, and various incantations and practices
were used to drive the devils out. Failing in this they were put in
prison, loaded with chains or put to death because of their danger to
the community.

In other communities, however, insane persons were thought to be
possessed of special gifts. God had come nearer to them than to common
mortals, and they were seers or prophets endowed with a portion of the
divine power.

Either view of the problem is explainable by the lack of scientific or
exact knowledge that marks early societies. Still these societies relied
on punishments just as much as our present law-makers and enforcers,
possibly more, because presumably less enlightened. Further
investigation and experiences with the insane have convinced even the
most casual observer that they function somewhat differently from other
people; there is not the same certainty between stimulus and response.
What they will do and how they will act under given conditions cannot be
foretold with anything approaching the exactness that is possible with
the normal.

The origin of the insanity in many cases is clearly traceable: sometimes
to lesions; sometimes to illness; sometimes to the mode of life;
perhaps more is due to heredity than to any other cause. At any rate in
theory the civilized world has long since ceased to hold the insane
criminally responsible for their acts. This applies only to the clearly
insane. The border-line is impossible to find, and many cases are so
difficult to classify that there is often a doubt as to where the given
patient belongs. In times when the crowd is mad with the mob psychology
of hatred, people are impatient of insanity and do not care whether the
accused was sane or not at the time of the commission of the act. Many
insane are put to death or sentenced to long terms of punishments. Jails
and other penal institutions are constantly sorting their inmates and
finding many who were clearly insane at the time their sentences began.

Society is beginning to find out that even where there is no marked
insanity, many are so near idiocy that they cannot fairly be held
responsible for their acts. The line here is just as vague and uncertain
as with the insane. Thus far, society has not provided adequate
protection for the public against this class; neither has it properly
cared for these unfortunates. It has simply excused their conduct,
except in cases where some act is so shocking that it arouses special
hatred, and then it freely declares that it makes no difference whether
the accused is a defective or not; he is of no value to the world and
should die. Many of this class are put to death. I am inclined to think
that most of those executed are either insane or serious defectives; and
those who say that such people are of no value are probably right. It is
perhaps equally true that few if any are of value, for when value is
considered we are met with the question: "Value to whom, or for what?"
All you can say of any one is that he wishes to live, and has the same
inherent instincts and emotions toward life as are common to all other
men.

Even the legal tests as to insanity and feeble-mindedness are neither
logical nor humane. Often the definition is given by courts that if one
is able to distinguish between right and wrong, he is sane within the
meaning of the law. This definition of insanity is utterly unscientific.
If the insane or the defective above an idiot is questioned specifically
whether certain distinct things are right or wrong, he can generally
give the conventional classification. Often he can tell much better than
the intelligent man, for he has been arbitrarily taught the things that
are right and wrong and has not the originality or ability to inquire
whether the classification is right or how far circumstances and
conditions determine right and wrong.

Conduct is ruled by emotion, and actions depend not upon whether one has
learned to classify certain conduct as right or wrong, but whether from
education, life or otherwise, the thought of a certain act produces a
quick and involuntary reaction against doing it. No one believes or
feels that it is always really wrong to violate some statutes, and most
men indulge in many practices that are wrong and repulsive but not
forbidden by the criminal code.

Furthermore, the insane and subnormal are influenced by punishment and
fear. Even the animal responds to both. It is possible that in many
instances those who are insane and subnormal are influenced by fear more
than the intelligent and normal. The most that can be said is that they
have not the same power of resistance that is given stronger men. This
means only that they have not stored up the experiences of life so well;
that their nervous system has not so well conveyed impressions, or that
their power of comparison is less; this, in turn, means that it will
take greater stress or harder environment to overcome the inhibitions of
the sane than the insane. The treatment of the insane and the defective
is an acknowledgment that all conduct comes from a direct response of
the machine to certain stimuli and the machine can act only in a way
consistent with its mechanism.

In other cases, the courts often recognize the strength of hereditary
defects in nullifying environment with its strict ideas of right and
wrong. The kleptomaniac is generally recognized as being a well-defined
class of the insane. Most of the shop-lifters are women. This is
especially a female crime. It is useless to explain why. It is not a
daring crime; it is secretive in its nature; it requires more stealth
than courage; it especially appeals to women on account of their taste
for the finery exhibited at stores. The kleptomaniac, however, is
generally a rich or influential woman. She steals something she does not
need, and she is therefore held to be a kleptomaniac and not
responsible.

The poor woman who steals something she actually needs is not a
kleptomaniac. I have no doubt that the rich woman who could not resist
shop-lifting is a kleptomaniac. I have just as little doubt that the
poor woman, with an imperfect make, found her environment such that she
was forced to act as she did. If a rich woman is irresponsible and
cannot resist when she steals something she does not need, I can see no
reason why a poor woman is not likewise irresponsible when she takes
something that she needs or must have. The kleptomaniac finds herself in
a position where her emotions and her feelings are too strong for her
judgment and inhibitions. Everyone who acts must act from similar causes
or inducements. There is no special providence in the realm of mind.
There is no room for chance in any natural phenomenon. Possibly the
public will understand sometime, and law-makers and law-enforcers will
place crime and punishment on a scientific basis.




XXVII

SOCIAL CONTROL


Organizations and cults are forever coining new expressions that sound
"pat" and for this reason seem true. As a rule, these terms and phrases
are put in the shape of general statements that may or may not mean
something; but their "pat" sound is used to justify all sorts of
excesses and violations of individual rights. The term "social control"
is met everywhere now. It may imply much or little, according to the
construction of the users. It is meant at least to imply that somewhere
is lodged a power to bring under control or supervision the refractory
or evil elements of society for the well being of the whole. As a rule,
under this phrase anything is justified which seems in some way fit for
the community as a whole. The fact that the restraint interferes with
personal liberty seems to have no bearing on the matter. Social control
necessarily means that the majority of the members of a social unit
shall limit the freedom of action of the individual to conform to its
view. Of course, the majority has the right because it has the power. In
the discussion of political or philosophical questions, "right" means
little more or less than "power." A right must be based upon some custom
or habit with some power to enforce it, or it cannot be claimed. It can
never be enjoyed without the power to obtain it.

The relation of society to the individual has been one long conflict.
This is necessarily true because every human organism has instincts,
feelings and desires and is naturally impatient at any limitations
placed upon it unless self-imposed. On the other hand, organized society
functions to preserve itself, and if the activities of the individual
are hostile to this preservation the individual must give way. Theorists
of various schools are forever propounding social ideas, with the
positive assurance that, if followed, they would work automatically and
heal all social ills. But it must be evident that neither from history
nor philosophy can any such theory be proved. Between the extreme
anarchistic view that each person should be free of control by law, and
the extreme socialistic view of an extension of state organization until
all property and all industrial activity shall be administered by the
state and collectively owned, social life in its relation to the
individual is always shifting. No one can find the proper line, and if
there were a line it would forever change. On the one hand, the power of
the strongest element in social organization is always seeking to
enlarge the province of the state. On the other hand, the individual
unit following the natural instincts for its development is reaching out
for more freedom and life. When the theorists in each camp manage to
push so hard that both can no longer be maintained, the old organization
of society breaks up into new units, immediately to re-form in some new
way.

This struggle of contending forces is a prolific and unavoidable source
of crime. When organized society goes too far, the individual units
rebel and clash with law; when the units swing too far away from the
social organization and defy the power of the state, almost
automatically some sort of a new organization becomes the state. Whether
this new one discards all old forms and laws and acts without the
written law, is of no concern. It at least acts and sets limits to the
individual life. If it were possible for all legislative bodies to meet
and repeal all laws, the state would still remain; the people would live
and automatically form themselves into a certain order and protect that
order either by written law or vigilance committees. At least the people
would act together.

The majority generally has some religious creed, and to it this is all
important. This creed is made up of observances, such as holy days, the
support of the prevailing religion, the condemnation of witchcraft and
magic, and the like. These and other doctrines often have been enforced
upon those who have no faith in the regulations. The enforcement of
such laws in the past has been by the most drastic penalties and has
brought extreme suffering upon the world. No religious organization has
ever seemed willing to confine its activities to propaganda, teaching
and moral suasion; those methods are too slow, and the evils and
consequences of disbelief are too great. Laws of this drastic character
are still part of the penal codes of various states and nations, and
well-organized bodies are always strenuously seeking to extend the
application of such laws and re-enact at least a portion of the
religious code that has been outgrown.

Individuals have likewise found, or at least believed, that certain
personal habits were best for them, for instance, abstaining from
alcohol and tobacco in all forms. Not content with propaganda, they have
sought to force their views upon others, many of whom deeply resent
their interference.

It is not enough that certain things shall be best for the health and
physical welfare of a community. This does not justify the wise
law-giver in making them a part of the penal code. If so, the code would
be very long. No doubt coffee and tea, and perhaps meat, are injurious
to health. Most likely the strength of the community would be conserved
if regular sleeping hours were kept and if great modifications or
changes were made in dress. But this does not justify criminal statutes.
The code must take notice of something more than the general welfare.
Unless the end sought to be attained is very direct and plain and the
evil great so that a large majority believes in the law, it should be
left to education and to other voluntary social forces.

A large part of the community has always attributed many criminal acts
to intoxicating drinks. I am convinced that with such crimes as murder,
burglary, robbery, forgery and the like, alcohol has had little to do.
Petty things, like disorderly conduct, are often caused by intoxicating
liquor, and these land a great many temporarily in jail, but these acts
are really not criminal. Men have been temporarily locked up for
over-drinking. If over-eating had been treated the same as over-drinking,
the jails would often be filled with gluttons. As to health, probably
the glutton takes the greater chance. A very large percentage of deaths
would have been materially delayed except for excessive eating. The
statements ascribing crime to intoxicating drinks have generally been
made by those who are obsessed with a hatred of alcohol. As a rule if
one lands in prison and has not been a total abstainer, his downfall is
charged to rum. Statistics have been gathered in prison often by
chaplains who, in the main, are prohibitionists and interested in
sustaining an opinion. The facts are mainly furnished by inmates of
prisons, a poor source from which to gather facts and draw deductions,
especially as to the cause of crime. Prisoners are interested in only
one thing, and that is getting out. They understand perfectly well what
kind of statistics the chaplain wants and these are given. It is the
nature and part of the protective instinct of everyone to find some
excuse for his acts. Alcohol has always furnished this excuse. It is a
good alibi; it is readily believed, always awakens sympathy and at once
turns the wrath of a provincial community from the inmate of the prison
to the saloon-keeper.

Even if prisoners were unlike others and wished to tell the truth about
themselves, they have not the art and understanding to give the causes
of their plight. No man, however intelligent, can do this, least of all
one of inferior brain power, little education and not trained in dealing
with facts. The prison inmate, like everyone else, knows only that he
followed what seemed to him the line of least resistance, and that every
step in his course was preceded by another and that there was a reason
for what he did. Most likely he does not know the reason. In the hours
of his despair he goes over his life in every detail, at every
crossroad, and at all the forks where paths branch, always wishing he
had gone the other way.

While this is true, he could know neither the dangers that lurked along
other roads, nor the fact that he had no choice about the way he went.
All he knows is that he stumbled along a certain path which led to
disaster. All the paths of life lead to tragedy; it is only a question
as to how and when. With some, the evil day is longer delayed and the
disaster seems not so hard to bear.

In a sense, all the classifications as to the cause of crime are
misleading and worthless. Your existence is the result of infinite
chances and causes appalling in their number. Out of a thousand eggs,
one is fertilized by perhaps one of a billion sperms, and from this you
have been given life. Each of your parents and grandparents and so on,
back for two hundred thousand years of human ancestors, and back to
infinity before man was born, was the result of the same seemingly blind
and almost impossible hazard. The infinitely microscopic chance that
each of us had for life cannot be approximated. All the drops of water
in the ocean, or all the grains of sand upon the shore, or all the
leaves on all the trees, if converted into numbers and used as a
denominator, with one for a numerator, could hardly tell the fraction of
a chance that gave us life.

The causes of human action are infinite, and no cause stands isolated
from the rest. In the first place we cannot tell the meaning of the word
"cause" when applied to a problem of this sort. In law the ordinary
rule for a "proximate cause" is "an event or happening in the direct
line of causation, not too remote, that has led to the result, and
without which the result could not have happened." But this means
nothing. Infinite are the causes which have led to every act, and
without each one of the infinite causes the act could not have resulted.
If it be something that affected a life, and had it not happened then
the life would have drifted somewhere else. In the end it would have
reached the same harbor of Nirvana. But the life would not have been the
same. A drop of water falls on the Rocky Mountains, it trickles along,
going around through pebbles and grains of sand; it joins with others,
meets trees and roots, winds and twists perhaps for hundreds, even
thousands of miles before one can tell by what channel it will reach the
sea. Infinite accidents determine even which sea it shall finally reach.
The most radical advocates of social control are never at a loss to lay
their fingers on causes or to know what would have happened if something
else had not happened; they never hesitate to forbid seemingly innocent
acts because they are certain that evil will follow. They are
contemptuous of one who wants to preserve the semblance and spirit of
freedom.

Life has none too much to offer where men are left to control
themselves, and to be forbidden to follow your inclinations and desires
because sometimes they may result disastrously, is to give up what seems
to be a substance for what is most likely a shadow.

All we can tell about the man whom we are pleased to call a criminal, is
that he had a poor equipment and met certain influences, motives and
conditions, called environment, on his journey. We know that at a given
time the journey has reached a certain point; it has met disaster or
success, or most likely indifference. At a certain point he has reached
a prison or is waiting for the hangman to tie a noose around his neck.
Is heredity responsible? We know of many who apparently started out with
an equipment no better. These may be business men and congressmen and
deacons in the church. While we do not know and cannot know the trend
and relative strength of the instincts in the various machines or the
emotions that these and the whole equipment produced, apparently an
equipment as poor as that of the criminal has met success, or at least
kept its possessor out of jail. Was it then his environment? We have
known men placed in the same environment, perhaps a brother, conquering
difficulties and bringing success from what seemed to promise certain
defeat. Why did one fail where the other conquered? Was it the "will"
that caused one to be the "captain of his soul"? What then is the
"will" and who gave the weak will to one and the strong will to another?
And, if each was born with a certain "will" or the capacity to make a
certain "will", who then is responsible for the result? Or, does the
word "will" mean anything, as usually applied?

All we can tell is that a certain equipment met a certain environment,
and the result was early disaster. A change of even the slightest factor
of environment might have saved the victim from hanging, so that he
could die a respectable and peaceful death from tuberculosis or cancer.

After all, the inevitable tragedy that in some form marks the end is not
so important as the sensations and experiences that one meets on the
road. Life is hopeless and colorless indeed if these experiences are
chosen for the wayfarer and the sensations are enforced or denied, as
the case may be. Nothing recompenses the individual for the denial of
his chance to follow his own path.




XXVIII

INDUSTRIALISM AND CRIME


It was not until about the middle of the eighteenth century that the
desire for the creation and accumulation of property began to rule the
world. Up to that time such small amounts of property as man needed or
coveted had either been produced in a simple manner by himself or taken
in the easiest way.

This new passion has made a large part of the modern criminal code. A
world of warriors, religious zealots and pastoral people could not
readily adapt themselves to the change. Criminal codes were lengthened;
methods of getting property and keeping it were provided for, and other
ways condemned. It must be obvious that it was not easy for man with his
age-old machine, his inherited institutions and his ancient folk-ways,
to adjust himself rapidly to the change. New conditions and laws created
new criminals.

With the growth of the factory system and accelerated industrial
development, an overweening desire for material things was awakened. As
neither individuals nor societies can be possessed of more than one
overpowering emotion at a time, the devotion to property naturally
weakened religious fervor. Religion became more an abstract belief and a
social organization than a vital thing affecting life and conduct. Even
before this time there was growing up in the world a protest against the
religious superstition that had led to the cruelties of the past. The
scientist and the modern philosopher were making their contributions to
the world of thought, and these contributions were slowly affecting life
and conduct.

A doubt of old creeds and doctrines and faiths was coming over the minds
of men. Social conventions were loosening, new customs and habits were
becoming folk-ways. In short, society and life were growing more fluid
and adaptable. The growth of property holdings created new desires and
new temptations. The accumulation of large fortunes brought envy and
hatred and ambition. The rise of industries built the large cities, with
palaces on one hand and hovels on the other. The vast inequality of
wealth and the growth of workers' organizations, together with the
spirit of skepticism which activity always brings, caused large numbers
to doubt the justice of property rights, the utility of many
institutions and the possibility of radical change by social
organization. It is perfectly evident that all of this movement brought
more conflict between social units, a constant lengthening of the
criminal code to protect the interests of the controlling powers, an
increase of prisons, and an apparent if not a real increase of crime.

Nothing but a strong government can long endure great inequality of
wealth or social condition. The slaves of the past civilization were
kept in subjection by main strength and fear. This enslavement was aided
by the deep ignorance of the masses who had no means of information and
nothing but vague feelings of the injustice of their lot. Even then the
poor sometimes revolted, but such outbreaks were generally easily put
down by the sword. The growth of political power and industrial
independence has been accompanied by the constant conflict of social
forces. This means conflict with the law, and the law has always taken
its toll of victims.

New inventions and methods that bring power of any sort carry with them
social clashes, protests, bitterness, conflicts and violations of law.
The invention of gun-powder was the source of great conflict and still
continues to add to the inmates of prisons. From the first, the
far-reaching effects of high explosives were seen by the wise, and
firearms were permitted only in the hands of those who could be depended
upon to support the state. Gradually through the needs of the rulers in
war they were given to the poor. When the American Revolution separated
us from Great Britain, the spirit of democracy and revolt was strong in
the world. A body of peasants had gained independence over the strongest
nation on earth. This body, through its delegates, provided in the
Constitution of the United States that the people should never be
forbidden to bear arms. The cheap production of firearms placed them in
the hands of all who wished to buy. This aided feuds and brawls. It also
gave strength to the burglar and robber.

America was fast becoming a manufacturing and commercial nation. The
accumulation of property was greater, and the inequalities perhaps more
marked than in any other land; likewise the poor were more independent.
Gradually we came to rely more and more upon the power of law and the
force that goes with it to preserve the old order. Legislatures and city
councils all over the United States began to limit and forbid carrying
firearms. The Constitution of the United States was held no impediment
to this legislation. Gradually laws have forbidden the carrying of guns
by the common man, and these laws are growing stronger every year. In
many states robbery with a gun may mean life imprisonment, while the
mere carrying of a revolver is a serious offense. The passage of these
drastic laws and the number of prison inmates confined for these
offenses show that the invention and use of firearms has affected crime,
and likewise that the government is constantly growing more doubtful of
the common man.

Civilization largely has to do with the creation and protection of
property. Although it is related to literature, architecture, politics,
art and the like; even these things if not actually rooted in property
are stimulated or affected by property. Civilization has created new
crimes and new ways to commit crime. It has likewise created many wants
and desires that furnish the motive power of property crimes. Each new
invention of civilization adds to these needs and these desires,
increases the power of committing crime, and necessitates stricter
measures to prevent it. Civilization has likewise created many new
outlets for the emotions, strengthened old ones, weakened others and
added to the complexity of life. It has imposed added strain and stress
upon man's nervous system and through this has caused the abnormalities
and excesses that are either crimes or lead to crimes.

Civilization has created the big cities; in other words, the powers and
forces that made civilization have made the big cities. The invention
and development of the railroad has taken men from the air and sunlight
and comparative freedom of motion of the country and the small village,
and placed them in an atmosphere not really fitted for normal animal
life, especially the life of the young. It has likewise stimulated crime
by offering the opportunities and making the suggestions that are
potent factors in crime. In country and village life everyone was known,
the smallest detail of every life was an open book. This fact furnished
a moral restraint to the individual and likewise made it hard for him to
violate the rules of the game. The opportunities for collecting large
numbers of people who might encourage each other with their conversation
and association were very few in rural life. The man who would violate
the law must do it alone. Not only this, but he must take his first
steps almost without suggestion or aid. This confined criminal conduct
largely to the feeble-minded and the seriously defective, and even these
could generally live in a country atmosphere where life is simple and
easy, without serious danger to themselves or others.

The great city with its swarms of people, its wealth and poverty, its
unhealthy atmosphere, its opportunities for everyone to have many
associates and still be lost to the community at large, makes irregular
lives not only easy, but almost necessary to large numbers of men.
Civilization has no doubt created crime as it has created luxury,
wealth, refinement and ease. Much luxury has always led to deterioration
and decay and is doubtless leading that way now.

One of the latest products of civilization that has had a marked effect
on crime is the automobile. Stringent laws are on the statute books of
all states against stealing automobiles, yet stealing and selling
automobiles is a flourishing and growing business. A large percentage of
the boys in the juvenile courts of our cities are there for stealing
automobiles. Yet this is the work of a very short period. I do not mean
to say that many of the boys brought into court for stealing automobiles
would not have committed some other crime, if automobiles had not been
invented and come into general use, but I feel quite sure that many of
them are victims of the automobile madness alone.

The automobile is one of the latest manias and fashions that
civilization has provided. Almost no one is free from the disease.
Conservative business men must have motor cars; clerks and salaried
people who cannot afford them must get them; mechanics and professional
men who have no need for them, except that others use them, must
contrive to buy them. Automobiles are much more important today than
houses. Men go into debt and struggle for money to buy gasoline so that
they may drive somewhere for the sake of coming back. It has created a
psychology all its own, a psychology of movement, of impatience, of
waste, of futility. Men in Chicago start to drive to Milwaukee without
the slightest reason for going there; they travel the road so fast that
they could get no idea of the scenery even if there were something to
see. They hurry as if going for a doctor. They reach their destination
and then start back home. The specific desire that is satisfied by this
expense and waste is a new one, an emotion of no value in the life
processes and probably of great injury in life development. It is a
craze for movement, for haste, for what seems like change.

The automobile has made its list of criminals, and it is making them
every day. Probably it will continue to make them until the flying
machine is perfected, and then to some extent at least the airplane will
take its place.

The truth is that man is not adapted to the automobile. His reactions
are too simple; his inherent needs are not adjusted to the new life; he
has not been built up with barriers to protect him from this insidious
temptation which is claiming its victims by the hundreds every day.

The boy is perfectly helpless in the presence of this lure. He wants to
do what others do. He is by nature active and venturesome and needs to
keep on the move. The mechanism itself appeals to him. He wants to work
in a garage. He is anxious to be a chauffeur. He cannot resist an
automobile. No such temptation should be placed before a boy. It has
added a great deal to the responsibility of parents and teachers, and so
far they seem not to have been able to meet that responsibility in any
way. Aside from the boys' thefts it has played a great part in crime.
The doctor, the real estate agent, the business man cannot afford to be
without automobiles. No more can the burglar, the hold-up man, the bank
robber, if he would keep up to date. The automobile has raised the
robbery of country banks from a vagrant crime, infrequent and dangerous,
to a steady occupation coupled with a great deal of excitement and some
chance for profit. So far no one has ever suggested anything to
counteract or lessen the evil effects except to increase penalties. The
crimes committed with and for automobiles are a result of the conditions
of life. Out of a thousand men and boys, a certain percentage must
commit these crimes just as a certain percentage must die of
tuberculosis. The temptation is very great. The human equipment is not
strong enough in many people to withstand the temptation. They either
buy them when they cannot afford to own them, or they steal them, and
either way leads to disaster. No doubt men will some time become
adjusted to the automobile as they have become adjusted to the horse,
but until that time comes, it will demand its heavy toll of
unfortunates.

Not only, it seems to me, does the growth of civilization mean the
growth of crime, but that civilization likewise leads to decay. The
world has seen the result over and over again, but it cannot learn. Man
is an animal; the law of his being demands that he shall live close to
nature; he needs the outdoors, the country, the air; he needs to walk
and run; otherwise his digestive apparatus will fail, his brain power
will decay, and the strength of his legs will be impaired. Civilization
runs too much to stomach and nerves, and Nature will have revenge. To be
sure, the professional American rhapsodist points out that we are immune
from natural law because we have a chance to vote for presidents once in
every four years. But there are ample signs that Nature knows little
about political institutions or other man-made devices and that she will
have her way.

How much the natural limitations of man will permit him to learn and
understand; how far his instincts and emotional nature would allow him
to be controlled by knowledge, if he had it; what would be the results
to life if reason could control him, are pertinent questions that affect
all discussion and which may never be satisfactorily answered. It is
entirely possible that the student who tries to point out better ways
and teach better methods does it only to satisfy his own emotions and is
often conscious that it does nothing else. But, whatever the inducing
cause or result, given a brain and nervous system and the material that
civilization furnishes for reflection, these and other important
subjects will be interesting topics of study and furnish material for
the reflective powers of man.




XXIX

WAR AND CRIME


All natural phenomena affect the activities of man. It has been
repeatedly observed that the number of crimes of assault and murder
increases in the summer months and fluctuates with extreme heat or a
cooler temperature. The nervous system of man is responsive to all sorts
of physical and psychological influences, and criminologists take these
into account in considering crime, as doctors take them into account in
treating disease. Man is influenced by substantially all the things that
affect other structures and by many things that do not. His nervous
system is more delicate, his emotional nature more complex, and his
brain permits the handling of impressions in a way not possible to lower
organisms.

The effect of war has always been manifest in human conduct. Man acts
largely from habit and custom; he does as others do, without reflection
as to why he should do it or why others do it. War is a sudden, violent
and spectacular destroyer of all established habits. In its conduct and
preparation it has rules of its own which have no analogy in civil
life. The battlefield is a reversion to the primitive; a reversion which
man finds it easy to make, for it appeals to fundamental instincts which
civilization holds in leash with great difficulty and never with entire
success. War especially appeals to the young. Their desire for activity,
their impatience with restraint, their love of the spectacular, their
untrained emotions, all find a ready outlet in war. Even those who are
too young to fight still read of it, talk of it, play at it to the
exclusion of other games. War is a profound and rapid maker of mental
attitudes and of complexes that are quick to develop and slow to pass
away. Both the quick development and slow decay are probably due to the
fact that war meets a decided response in the primitive nature of man.

Nearly all the newspapers of America are now calling attention to the
increase of crime since the close of the Great War. It is a topic of
pulpit and platform discussion. Wild appeals are made for convictions
and extreme penalties. Governors and boards of pardon and parole are
urged to refuse clemency to prisoners and are roundly condemned when
they do their plain duty, even though they do it very reluctantly and
tardily.

It is probably true that the close of the war has shown a large increase
in criminality, especially in crimes of violence. This is true not only
of America but of all European countries. In some of the most afflicted
ones civil government for a time has virtually broken down. Both the
great need for food and clothing and the overthrowing of conventions,
customs and habits are responsible for the change. Here we perceive a
notable example of the almost instantaneous disruption of established
folk-ways.

For more than four years most of the western world did nothing but kill.
The whole world talked of slaughter and devoted its energy to killing.
Every sentiment of humanity was forgotten. Even religious ties and
religious commands were ignored. The prayers to the Almighty contained
requests that He help the various fighting nations to kill their
enemies. Everyone was taught to hate. The leaders in the war knew that
boys could not do efficient killing unless they learned to fear and
hate. The most outrageous falsehoods were freely circulated by every
nation about its enemies and their conduct of the war. The highest
rewards were offered for new and more efficient ways to kill. Every
school was turned over to hate and preparation for war, and, of course,
all the churches joined in the universal craze. God would not only
forgive killing but reward those who were the most expert at the game.

The newspapers carried stories of battles every day, the dead and
wounded often running into the tens of thousands. None of the reports
was exact. Nothing was true. Everything was wild and exaggerated. Facts
were not strong enough to make an impression. Lies were deliberately
circulated to help the cause.

Every tradition and habit of life was broken and broken all the time.
The commandment, "Thou shalt not kill," was repealed. Property was not
only ruthlessly destroyed but openly confiscated. Lying was a fine art.
When this bears a harvest after the war, the public loudly clamors for
hanging boys whose psychology is a direct result of long and intensive
training by the leaders of the world.

One life is not worth considering in the face of the holocaust that has
taken its hundreds of thousands and has been defended in the schools and
churches. It is not strange that the after-war harvest of crimes should
come largely from boys, often those boys who did their part on the field
of battle. Whether they got the psychology from killing or reading or
hearing or playing soldier or training makes no difference. Everyone who
has any reasoning power knows that they got it, that it was deliberately
given to them if not forced upon them, and that just as deliberately the
state is killing them because they took it.

It is not alone the young who show this psychology of killing that has
grown out of the war. Organized society, the public, juries, judges,
pardon boards and governors, show that war has made them cruel and
wanton of human life. The great number of hangings since the war is
patent to all observers. In normal times juries were very loath to
pronounce the death penalty. With any possible excuse they always saved
life. Now they pride themselves on taking life. Even insanity does not
always prevent an execution.

Numerous are the evidences of the derangements the war has created and
left behind. A few years ago a prize fight would not have been permitted
in more than one or two states in the Union. Now state after state is
passing laws to permit prize fights to take place, and even the best
society has given its sanction to this sort of sport. Whether the state
should permit prize fights is not the question. The fact is, as everyone
knows, that it is permitted on account of a psychology growing out of
the war. We content ourselves with saying it will never do to raise our
boys as molly-coddles; they must learn to fight.

It is not alone murder that can be traced directly to the war
psychology. Robbery and burglary have rapidly increased, and much of
this is due to the emotions of boys. The robbing of country banks has
grown to be almost a pastime, and often one or more participants in
these raids is a returned soldier.

What should be done to meet these new conditions? Common honesty,
common sense and common humanity alike plainly show that a large part of
the crimes of violence are due to the war. Will hangings and life
sentences stop them? And, if so, is it right for organized society to
ignore its responsibility and place it on the young men that they
innoculated with the universal madness? It is expecting too much to
think that there is any process by which society can be made to think
and feel. Some day, however, when the war fever passes away crime will
again take its normal place.

This phenomenon is not new in the world. Everyone interested has noted
it before. It has followed all great wars. War means the breaking up of
old habits, the destruction of many inhibitions, which in the strongest
civilization are only skin deep at the best. It means the return to the
primitive feelings that once ruled man.

The Napoleonic Wars left a long heritage of crime. Every nation in
Europe was affected by them. Many years passed before the world grew
tranquil. Our Civil War brought its harvest of crime. It was felt both
North and South. It was not confined to homicide but was shown in all
sorts of criminal statistics, especially crimes of violence.

I do not write as a pacifist. There is nothing in the constitution of
man that makes pacifism anything but a dream. Man is largely ruled by
fear and hate, and it is not possible to imagine an individual or a
race that under sufficient provocation will not fight. Neither is it
possible that nations will not always, from time to time, find the
provocation sufficiently great. Individuals and nations can philosophize
and reason and make compromises when they are calm; but let them be
moved by fear and hatred, and these emotions will sweep away every other
feeling. The conditions for war were ripe in 1914, and it was inevitable
that America should be in it too. This should not make one wish for war
nor believe in war nor close one's eyes to its horrors and results. Much
less should it prevent him from trying to do his part to restore sanity
to the world.

Another consequence of war which America is passing through is the
spirit of super-patriotism. This is always aroused and must be aroused
to carry on the war. It is potent in creating the psychology that makes
men fight. Every people teaches that its own country is the best; that
its laws and institutions excel those of all other lands. This spirit is
taken advantage of and used by designing men. It is used to send to jail
those who criticise existing things. It is used to hamper and destroy
any effort to change laws and institutions. The one who criticises
conditions is a disturber and a traitor. Those who profit by existing
things are always intense patriots and by means of cheap appeals and
trite expressions seek to stifle discussion and criticism. This war has
borne a deadly harvest of restrictive legislation in America. We are no
longer an asylum for political offenders. We no longer stand for freedom
of speech. Old traditions and constitutional and legal guarantees have
been swept aside under the hysteria which has prevailed during and since
the war. These results were inevitable and will follow war as long as
man is man.

All the after-effects of the World War show how completely man is ruled
by forces over which he has no control. If considerable numbers of the
people have been moved by war hysteria, and if a large part of crime is
directly traceable to war, it seems plain that all human action could be
traced to some controlling cause, if only man could be wise enough and
industrious and humane enough to find the cause. It is plain that the
law of cause and effect influences mental phenomena as it does physical
acts, and sometime, perhaps, men will seek to avoid the effect by
removing the cause.




XXX

CIVILIZATION AND CRIME


As children we have all amused ourselves by looking into a kaleidoscope,
turning it around and around and watching the changing patterns formed
from the mixing bits of different colored glass in the other end. Each
turn makes a different pattern and each bit of glass seems to seek a
spot in the general medley where it can be settled until another turn
drives it to find a resting place somewhere else. The organization of
individual units into a group is more or less such a formation, each
seeking to adjust itself to a pattern and finding that the pattern is
ever-changing and the individual units obliged to seek new positions and
make new adjustments.

It is vain for social theorists to talk of a perfect order, a system of
social organization that will find the proper place for each unit and
bring social symmetry out of the whole. Such a society is not consistent
with the varied capacities and wants of men. Neither is a perfect order
possible with ever-changing and moving physical forces, with new mental
conceptions, with new needs and wants, with constant births and deaths,
and with the innate instincts of man.

Some system may be the best for a time but must in turn give place to
new formations. In this process the old is ever mixed with the new. The
past hangs on to plague the present, and the vision of the future
disturbs the quiet and stability that the present inherited from the
past. Organizations of society are necessary and automatic. The frost on
the window pane takes its pattern, the crystals in the glass and stone
have their formations, the grain of sand, the plant--all forms of animal
life--the solar system and, doubtless, an infinite number of other
systems which the eye cannot see or the mind comprehend take on form and
order. The symmetry and shape of any of these organizations may be
shattered by growth or catastrophe, and new forms may take their place.
All life is constant friction and constant adjustment, each particle in
a blind way trying to find a more harmonious relation, but never
reaching complete rest.

The social and political patterns that men have taken have been of many
forms. All through the past these have changed, and the laws and habits
that were meant to hold men together, have been made and discarded as
fast as new emotions or ideas have gained the power to make the change.
Men are of all degrees of adaptability. Some can readily conform to the
new. Some adjust themselves very slowly. Man's structure is fixed; his
inherent instincts are of ancient origin, always urging him to primitive
reactions; his habits are slowly formed and slowly changed. Slowly he
settles himself to the conditions that surround him. He learns their
demands; he manages to conform, but the folk-ways that he knew and the
way of life he learned must be changed to something else. Every new
adjustment, every change of organization, every modification made by
civilization, bears its toll of victims who have not been able to adjust
themselves to the new order.

The first criminal regulations, doubtless, had to do with the personal
relations of men. The number of offenses was small for life was simple,
wants were few, and ambition rare. The growth of religion created a
ferocious criminal code, regulating every thought and action that God's
agents thought might offend the Deity or threaten their power on earth.
Anyone interested in the story of punishment for heresy, sorcery or
other crimes growing out of religious fanaticism, can read the story in
Lecky's _History of Rationalism in Europe_, in White's _A History of the
Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom_, in Draper's
_Intellectual Development of Europe_, and in many other books. The
Spanish Inquisition alone furnished about 350,000 victims in the two
centuries of its power. Many of them were burned alive, many others were
killed by the most cruel torture that could be devised by man. Up to
recent times more victims have been put to death for heresy and kindred
crimes against religion than for any other cause. Next to this no doubt
stand political crimes. Even America hanged old women for witchcraft, a
crime they could not commit. Practically all the victims of religious
and political persecution have been guiltless of any real crimes, and
among them were always many of the noblest of their age.

Every general change of religious or political ideas bears its quota of
crimes. For whatever the religious or political organization, it always
uses every means in its power to perpetuate itself. This is as true of
republics as of monarchies, although the severity of punishment and the
amount of heresy permitted change from time to time. Each age is sure
that it has the true religion and the God-given political organization.
In every age the accepted religion is true, and the king and the state
can do no wrong.

One thing only seems to be sure. Human nature does not change. Whether
it was the theological systems of the ancient world fighting to keep
Christianity out, or Christianity fighting to preserve itself, the same
cruel, bigoted, fanatical majority has been found to do its will, and
the same reasons and excuses have served the law from the earliest
times down to today.

A letter of the younger Pliny, who was then governor of Bythinia-Pontus,
a province of Rome, asking the Emperor Trajan for instructions in
dealing with the early Christians shows how persistent are intolerance
and bigotry. This might have been written yesterday to seek advice in
the suppression of opinion and punishment for sedition in any of the
most advanced governments of the modern world, as it was in the most
advanced of the ancient world. The letter is here reproduced as an
interesting exhibit of human nature and it fixity.

Pliny, the younger, was born in 61 A.D. and became governor of the
province of Bythinia-Pontus about the year 112 A.D. under the Emperor
Trajan. In the discharge of his duties as governor, Pliny discovered
that the conversion of many of his subjects to Christianity had resulted
in a falling off of trade in the victims usually purchased for
sacrifices at the temples and in other commodities used in connection
with pagan worship. As a good governor, Pliny sought to remedy this
economic situation, and his plan was to restore his subjects to their
old forms of worship. Thus he was brought into contact with
Christianity. The following letters, one from Pliny to Trajan, and the
other, Trajan's reply, show the situation. These documents are from the
Tenth Book of Pliny's Correspondence, Letters 97 and 98.


    PLINY ASKING INSTRUCTIONS OF TRAJAN ON TRIALS OF CHRISTIANS

    It is my invariable rule, Sir, to refer to you in all matters where
    I feel doubtful; for who is more capable of removing my scruples, or
    informing my ignorance? Having never been present at any trials
    concerning those who profess Christianity, I am unacquainted not
    only with the nature of their crimes, or the measure of their
    punishment, but how far it is proper to enter into an examination
    concerning them. Whether, therefore, any difference is usually made
    with respect to ages, or no distinction is to be observed between
    the young and the adult; whether repentance entitles them to a
    pardon; or if a man has been once a Christian, it avails nothing to
    desist from his error; whether the very profession of Christianity,
    unattended with any criminal act, or only the crimes themselves
    inherent in the profession are punishable; on all these points I am
    in great doubt. In the meanwhile, the method I have observed towards
    those who have been brought before me as Christians is this: I asked
    them whether they were Christians; if they admitted it, I repeated
    the question twice, and threatened them with punishment; if they
    persisted, I ordered them to be at once punished: for I was
    persuaded, whatever the nature of their opinions might be, a
    contumacious and inflexible obstinacy certainly deserved correction.

    There were others also brought before me possessed with the same
    infatuation, but being Roman citizens, I directed them to be sent to
    Rome. But this crime spreading (as is usually the case) while it was
    actually under prosecution, several instances of the same nature
    occurred. An anonymous information was laid before me, containing a
    charge against several persons, who upon examination denied they
    were Christians, or had ever been so. They repeated after me an
    invocation to the gods, and offered religious rites with wine and
    incense before your statue (which for that purpose I had ordered to
    be brought, together with those of the gods), and even reviled the
    name of Christ: whereas there is no forcing, it is said, those who
    are really Christians into any of these compliances: I thought it
    proper, therefore, to discharge them. Some among those who were
    accused by a witness in person at first confessed themselves
    Christians, but immediately after denied it: the rest owned indeed
    that they had been of that number formerly, but had now (some above
    three, others more, and a few above twenty years ago) renounced that
    error. They all worshipped your statue and the images of the gods,
    uttering imprecations at the same time against the name of Christ.
    They affirmed the whole of their guilt, or their error, was, that
    they met on a stated day before it was light, and addressed a form
    of prayer to Christ, as to a divinity, binding themselves by a
    solemn oath, not for the purposes of any wicked design, but never to
    commit any fraud, theft, or adultery, never to falsify their word,
    nor deny a trust when they should be called upon to deliver it up;
    after which it was their custom to separate, and then re-assemble,
    to eat in common a harmless meal. From this custom, however, they
    desisted after the publication of my edict, by which, according to
    your commands, I forbade the meeting of any assemblies.

    After receiving this account, I judged it so much the more necessary
    to endeavor to extort the real truth, by putting two female slaves
    to the torture, who were said to officiate in their religious rites:
    but all I could discover was evidence of an absurd and extravagant
    superstition. I deemed it expedient, therefore, to adjourn all
    further proceedings, in order to consult you. For it appears to be a
    matter highly deserving your consideration, more especially as great
    numbers must be involved in the danger of these prosecutions, which
    have already extended, and are still likely to extend, to persons of
    all ranks and ages, and even of both sexes. In fact, this contagious
    superstition is not confined to the cities only, but has spread its
    infection among the neighboring villages and country. Nevertheless,
    it still seems possible to restrain its progress. The temples, at
    least, which were once almost deserted, begin now to be frequented;
    and the sacred rites, after a long intermission, are again revived;
    while there is a general demand for the victims, which till lately
    found very few purchasers. From all this it is easy to conjecture
    what numbers might be reclaimed if a general pardon were granted to
    those who shall repent of their error.


    TRAJAN TO PLINY

    You have adopted a right course, my dearest Secundus, in
    investigating the charges against the Christians who were brought
    before you. It is not possible to lay down any general rule for all
    such cases. Do not go out of your way to look for them. If indeed
    they should be brought before you, and the crime is proved, they
    must be punished; with the restriction, however, that where the
    party denies he is a Christian, and shall make it evident that he is
    not, by invoking our gods, let him (notwithstanding any former
    suspicion) be pardoned upon his repentance. Anonymous information
    ought not to be received in any sort of prosecution. It is
    introducing a very dangerous precedent, and is quite foreign to the
    spirit of our age.


Civilization is largely a question of new machinery and methods. It is
not the humanizing of men. It is plain that no matter what the time or
age, the characteristics of man remain the same. His structure does not
change; his emotional life cannot change. New objects and desires may
control his feeling, but whatever the aim of the age and place, the same
inherent emotions control.

Intolerance has been one of the great sources of evil all down the ages.
It is practically certain that neither time nor education has made man
more kindly in his judgment of his fellows or more tolerant in his
opinions and life. All that education can do is to remove some of the
inducing causes that have always brought the sharp conflicts and
awakened the cruelty of man.

Every civilization brings new evils and new complexities which man meets
with the same machine and the same emotions. It is fairly certain that
no nobler idealism or no finer feelings have been planted or cultivated
in man since the dawn of history, and when it is thoroughly realized
that man's structure is fixed and cannot be changed it seems as if none
could be developed.




XXXI

THE CONVICT


Human nature is so weak and imperfect that, at its best, it needs all
the encouragement it can get. The comradeship of friends, and the
attitude of the public and acquaintances are of the greatest importance
in effecting the development of most lives. Sooner or later the
convicted man is turned out either on probation or parole, or at the
expiration of his sentence. He was probably none too strong a man before
his conviction. His heredity was poor in most cases, and his environment
completed his downfall. He faces the world again with a serious handicap
that he did not have at first. If he had just recovered from a severe
illness, everyone he met would do all he could to help him; his
environment would be made easier than before his confinement in the
hospital; and especially from the conditions that placed him there, both
society and his neighbors would try to see that he should, as far as
possible, be saved. If he had been one of those who could live only by
means of his own work, and if on account of himself or his family he had
been obliged to over-strain, an easier place would probably be found
for him. The chances of going to the hospital the second time would be
very much less than they were the first time. Even his experience in
confinement would be of use, and through that experience he would be
taught to live and preserve his health.

The discharged prisoner is met in an entirely different way. The
ex-convict is under doubt and suspicion from the start. On the slightest
provocation he is reminded of his past. He is always under suspicion
unless, perhaps, he professes a change of heart. Such a change implies a
physical process which is impossible. Some sudden exaltation may furnish
him a new emotion for a time, but this can last only while the stimulus
has power to act. It will soon pass away and the man will be himself
again. It may be possible that here and there is a nature of such an
emotional temperament, that religion or socialism or single tax or some
other strong conviction may possess him until such time as his feelings
begin to cool and change, when he will be safe. But most men are
inherently the same when they come out of prison as when they go in.
Under right treatment they may gain a little more wisdom as to life that
will help them make adjustments; or they may be relieved from some
burdens, or placed in an environment of less stress and strain where it
will be easier to live. In those cases, the attitude and help of the
community are all-important.

Society is not entirely to blame for looking on him with suspicion. It
knows he once failed. It has been taught that this failure was due to a
moral delinquency outside the law of cause and effect, and society is
naturally suspicious that he will offend again or molest the community
in some other way. Had he been confined because he had not the strength
to meet his environment; had the law put him in custody under expert
control until he gained the strength for his battle with life; or had a
new environment been provided under scientific direction as in the case
of a hospital patient, society would then take another view and do all
it could to help him. New comrades and associates would surround him to
show him the way, and they would make his burden lighter. Instead of
this, he comes out with his ability to adjust himself to life lessened.
If a crime is committed in his community he is blamed or at least
suspected. He is known to the police and often "rounded-up." This
directly interferes with his employment, places him at a disadvantage
with his associates, and drives him into the company of others who feel
that the world is against them and that a life of crime is all there is
left to follow. It is not hard to see how men come to be "repeaters." It
is hard to understand when they do not.




XXXII

ISOLATION AND STERILIZATION


The growing belief that crime comes largely from the subnormal has
created a more or less definite demand for the isolation of the moron
before the commission of crime and for the sterilization of certain
misfits, especially after conviction. Both of these methods are very
drastic, and while society must and will adopt any way that seems to be
necessary to protect itself, still before accepting such drastic
remedies it should be very clear that the danger is sufficiently great
to justify the means, that the desired result will follow and that no
other means will bring about the end.

In this discussion it should be remembered that the mental
classification of children and grown-ups is only in its infancy, that
much that is freely stated is still in the realm of theory, and that
time and patience in making investigations and classifying facts are
most important in arriving at correct results.

The really intelligent are as abnormal as the defective. The great
masses of men are rather mediocre, and those above and below are
exceptions. This depends on how broad is the class included in the
normal. There are no sharp divisions anywhere; above, the normal shades
imperceptibly into those of unusual intelligence, and below it fades
just as gradually into the sub-normal. While defectives are more apt to
commit crimes, in the main this is because their environment is too hard
for their machine.

The sub-normal are probably more tractable and less disposed to the
emotions that lead to criminal acts than are the more intelligent. Their
crimes are especially noticed because they seem to be without any
serious motive and often shockingly brutal. City life most readily
uncovers the sub-normal. This is true because the strain is far greater
in the city than the country. There are exceptions to this rule,
particularly those portions of the country that are barren and
unproductive territory into which the venturesome and obvious unfits are
drawn.

The prisons are not the only places which are inhabited by the
sub-normal and the misfit. The hardest and most disagreeable and most
poorly paid labor is largely done by this class of people. Very few
people of superior intelligence and education do manual labor and the
more disagreeable the manual labor, the more certain it is that the job
is done by the sub-normal and the misfit. A large part of the farm
labor, the odd jobs and common labor in small towns, the cheaper labor
on railroads, in factories and all industrial plants is given to this
sort of men. In the country and small village, where life is easy, this
class seldom makes trouble and is hardly known. These men and women
easily and naturally fall into a place in the industry and society of
the village and are often among the most useful members.

A general examination of all men to discover the defective and the
sub-normal, coupled with a demand that all such be sent to some place of
confinement, would meet with such a protest from all classes seriously
affected as to end not only the demand but the further agitation of the
subject. Any such law, if carried out, would not only seriously increase
the cost of all industry, but in many instances would make it impossible
to carry it on. It is hardly conceivable that above the idiot, society
shall make examinations and tests and confine or sterilize large classes
of people who have not yet developed anti-social tendencies, but who on
account of feeble intellects might sometime commit crime.

The world has ample data at hand to show more humane and at the same
time much cheaper ways, even methods that will yield a profit. These
ways have been abundantly illustrated by history and can be witnessed in
operation every day.

England was repeatedly conquered and settled by brigands and misfits.
When her people grew more homogeneous and orderly she sent her
anti-social to New Zealand and to Virginia. In New Zealand with its
opportunities these outcasts and their descendants prospered and were as
orderly and conventional as the English society that banished them for
England's good. The colonies in Virginia with access to land and a
chance to make homes for themselves established a social order and
formed communities more prosperous than the ones that sent them out.
Many of their descendants are now successful and important members of
every western state.

In fact, most of the European immigrants who have settled in the United
States were the poor and the outcast, the misfits of European countries.
With better opportunities and a chance to build up homes in a new land,
their descendants are at least the equals of those who stayed behind.
The growth and development of the United States westward from the
Atlantic seaboard has been effected by the poorer and less intelligent,
but often the more venturesome, who constantly turned West to get
cheaper land and a better chance. The residents of these western states
compare very favorably with those who still reside in the sections of
the country which these pioneers left behind. It cannot be shown that
the less intelligent have criminal natures. All that can be shown is
that they have a poorer equipment to meet the stress and strain of
life. To make most of this class safe, all that is needed is fairer
conditions and an easier environment. If society could only recover from
the obsession that what is necessary to regulate man is plenty of
prisons and harder punishments, it would be fairly easy and infinitely
cheaper to improve the environment from which crime springs than to
visit vengeance on the victim.

The effect of education is very great. Many a subnormal and backward
person has been educated so he could take a place in life that those
with a much greater natural ability could not fill.

Beyond the segregation of the imbecile, the insane and those who have
committed crime, it is dangerous to go. The course of preventing crime
lies in the other direction, better opportunity and an easier life.

It has grown to be a commonplace in the discussion of crime to speak of
isolation and sterilization as the proper treatment of the criminal and
defective. This is generally done without any clear understanding of the
laws of heredity.

The laws of the transmission from parent to child of traits and
tendencies are not yet well enough known to justify any attempt to
interfere with the function of life, except in the case of the idiotic.
It is plain that crime cannot be inherited. Certain defects in the brain
and nervous system can be and are inherited. No brain or nervous system
is perfect, so the problem is one of the incapacity which causes the
maladjustment. Crime results from defective heredity when applied to the
environment. It comes from the inability of the machine to make the
necessary adjustments of life. The making of the criminal is largely a
question of his fortune or misfortune in the environment where he is
placed. It is absurd to say that one inherits the tendency to rob or
rape or burglarize or kill. He may inherit an unstable organization that
in certain hostile environments will lead him to any of these crimes.
For that matter all men inherit the organization that will bring these
results if the environment is sufficiently hard. Society may in many
ways place too high a value on human life. Still we punish men who place
too low a value on the lives of others, and the state should be very
slow to destroy life or the capacity for life.

There is much to learn, much to explain about the mysterious workings of
heredity, before man can undertake to say that he has the wisdom or
justice to choose the ones who should be the bearers of life to the
future.

It is most common to find in the same family various degrees of
intelligence. Now and then a man of such high powers and faculties is
born that he is regarded by scientists as a "sport" who defies all
known laws in his origin. Often one person in a family is of commanding
strength, while the rest are commonplace.

The insanity and disease that afflict many men of genius is well known.
Grasset in his book _The Semi-Insane and the Semi-Responsible_ has given
a long list of eminent names. Many great authors have depicted insanity
in their most gifted characters. Genius is frequently an indication of
insanity. It is a wide departure from the normal.

The obscure and lowly origin of many of the world's greatest men seems
to point to the fact that Nature has methods that man cannot comprehend
and with which it is not wise for him to interfere. The fact is that
genius, or even great strength or ability in the parent, is by no means
sure to be handed down. In fact, it is very rare indeed that such
unusual traits persist. That sterilization should follow as a punishment
for sex crimes is without any sort of logic except that sterilization
relates to sex. The whole idea is born of the hatred or loathing of
certain crimes.

Generalizations have been made from a few poorly authenticated cases,
and these generalizations have gone far beyond anything that the
evidence can justify. It does not follow that because the father and son
have black hair, or the mother and daughter have blue eyes, or that
their mannerisms are similar, that inheritance is responsible for
character, much less for crime. Certain things are clearly traceable to
heredity. Other things may be the result of association or what to us
must still be accident.

Often the fact is pointed out that great progress has been made in the
culture of plants and the breeding of animals. This is true. No
intelligent farmer to-day would think of raising any but the best stock.
He takes pains with the breeding of his cattle. If he wants rich milk
and butter, he breeds Jerseys or Guernseys. If he wants a larger
quantity of milk and a fair beef animal, he breeds Holsteins. If he
wants beef only, perhaps he raises Durhams. At any rate he knows what he
wants and breeds that kind. Similarly the horse-raiser will breed for
race horses or dray horses as the case may be, and the system works with
almost mechanical certainty. He gets what he wants and would never think
of raising scrubs and taking a chance on results. The effect of
selective breeding and culture is beyond dispute, and to many it seems
obvious that all that is needed to perfect the human race and wipe out
misery and crime is to supervise human breeding in the same way, so that
the species may be controlled.

At first glance this seems to be the logical thing to do, especially as
the effects of heredity can no more be doubted in man than in animals.
Still there are important questions to be asked and grave dangers to be
encountered. When we say that the well-bred Berkshire hog is better than
the "razor-back," we mean that it will produce more meat for food. In
other words the hog is better for man. If we were to ask which would be
the better, if the hog were to be considered, the answer would probably
be the "razor-back." The fact that the food consumed by the Berkshire
produces a large quantity of fat, makes him unfitted to live if he were
living for his own sake. Turn both hogs out to run wild, and the
"razor-back" will live and the Berkshire die. Nature will make her
selection and adapt the hog to his environment. The Berkshire will
produce more lard, but it will not run so fast; it has no more brains
and cannot adapt what it has so well to the preservation of life. The
same thing is doubtless true of other animals and likewise of plant
life. The Jersey cow would not survive in a natural state. She gives too
much milk and for too long a time. Man has made of her a milk-machine.
Turn all thoroughbred horses out on the plains to shift for themselves,
and they would either die or gradually be modified until they were
adapted to the free and wild life of the plains. This would not be so
good for man, but would be better for the horses. In plants and animals,
man can by selection breed or cultivate any characteristics that he may
choose, but he cannot produce a horse which is both a draft horse and a
running horse; he cannot produce cattle that are the best both for milk
and beef. He is urged to try scientific breeding on the human race. How
would he have man changed? Would he experiment for more intellect, or a
bigger and stronger physique? Would he breed for art and civilization or
would he breed for strength and physical endurance? What qualities are
desirable for the human race? This would be a very hard question even to
entrust to a popular vote. While the capacity of cattle to produce milk
can be increased, cattle cannot increase their own capacity or improve
their own quality. This can be done only by the slow and patient
processes of Nature in the line of adapting the animal to its
environment. The rapid change that is to come about by breeding must be
directed and controlled by man. The cattle have nothing to say about the
process. No doubt a higher order of beings who could control man might,
and perhaps would change him by selective mating. How they would change
him would depend on the use they wished to make of him, not on what the
man himself would like to do. The contemplation of a higher order of
beings experimenting with the human race is not a pleasant one for
intelligent men.

Can we imagine men, through government, forcibly experimenting with each
other? Who would settle the kind of man that was to be evolved or the
specific changes that would be required? Or, what was to be done and
how? Who could prophesy what man would be like when he should be made
over in the likeness of something else? Who are the people with the
breadth and tolerance and infinite wisdom, in whose hands it would be
safe to place the remodeling of man? It is hard to conceive that it can
be seriously considered.

Nature in her own way is a eugenist. By her slow processes she is
continually wiping out the unfit and adapting man to the environment
where he must live. Perhaps by saving too many of the unfit man is more
or less interfering with the processes of Nature, and it may be that the
interference with her method of work is bad. But Nature is mindful of
this tendency and if it is not in accordance with the profoundest laws
of being, Nature will have her way in spite of man's meddling. Any
change that can be brought about by selective mating must come by
natural processes aided by the education of each individual through a
closer study of the origin and evolution of life. This must leave
everyone free to do his own selecting, rather than to trust it to the
state. Society can do much toward giving man an environment which will
more or less be adjusted to his heredity. To give him a heredity that
will conform to his environment is quite another thing and probably must
be kept practically free from the theories, vagaries and experiments of
man. It would seem so absurd and dangerous as not to be worth discussing
except for the fact that the movement, both for sterilizing and some
degree of control of mating has already gone far in some of the states.
There is no limit that fanaticism or hatred will respect.

No doubt the popular opinion that in some way crime and pauperism are
inherited has been strengthened by the literature concerning the family
that has been given the name of "The Jukes." The first extensive study
of this family was made by Richard L. Dugdale, who was connected with
the New York Prison Association. It was first published in 1877 and may
almost be regarded as the "Uncle Tom's Cabin" of the scientific study of
crime in America.

Mr. Dugdale was evidently a careful student, an honest investigator and
a humane man. Strange to say, deductions have been freely and carelessly
made from his book, which the investigations do not warrant, and against
which he carefully cautioned the reader. No one can examine Mr.
Dugdale's book without being impressed with the quiet unassuming modesty
and worth of the author, and yet in the hands of those who have so often
carelessly and unscientifically generalized from his studies, it has
possibly brought more harm than good.

The book covers investigations made by Dugdale between 1850 and 1870, a
period in which little was known about the laws that govern inheritance,
and necessarily, much evidence was pure hearsay without the data of
careful investigation at hand. The case, however, does show a surprising
number of criminals, paupers, harlots and misfits, descending from their
original ancestor. From time to time further investigation has brought
the history of the family down to 1918.

The ancestor with whom the investigation begins was born some time
between 1720 and 1740. In the report the original is called "Max." He
has been described as a "hunter and fisher," "a hard drinker," "not fond
of work," fairly intelligent and leaving no record of crime. He probably
left behind a large family, some of whom were legitimate and some
illegitimate. The family came from a barren, rocky, lake region in New
York and several generations grew up in the vicinity. The only industry
was rough work like quarrying stone, logging and the like. Later a
manufacturing plant was located in the region. The Jukes early got a bad
name in the small community. Even when they wanted to find employment it
was hard to get a job. They were socially ostracized and individually
boycotted. The region was poor, and for the most part the family grew up
in poverty. Often several members of a family lived in one room and
slept on the floor indiscriminately, regardless of sex. For several
generations few of them wandered far from the ancestral home. The
locality was one that naturally came to be the resort of the poor and
the outcast; these are always driven to the cheapest and most barren
land. Whether the community was related by blood or not, the residents
would almost inevitably be of the same class. Rich people cluster
closely together for association and fellowship. The poor and wretched
do the same. Common observation in city and country shows that this is
inevitable. It comes from deeper and more fundamental laws than human
statutes. It is born of the gregarious instinct and fostered and
developed by economic law.

In the main, lax habits grow from surroundings and association. The
tendency of all human beings is to revert to the primal. It is only
association that keeps the individual units up to the tension that
civilization expects and demands. Every community shows many examples of
this inevitable tendency. Nature is constant; civilization spasmodic.
Especially with sex relations, conditions are the chief factor. Nature
knows little or nothing of the regulations fixed by society and custom.
Poverty and wretchedness reach outward through a community and by
association between the old and the young pass down the generations.
Nothing but a complete change of environment can counteract the
inevitable tendency. When social classes arise and the cleavage is clear
and established, no great effort is made by the superior members to aid
the inferior. In fact they are almost invariably left to themselves.
Poverty and wretchedness are not transmitted in the blood, but in the
environment.

It is not many years since physicians and communities believed that
tuberculosis was inherited. In all communities there were instances of
this dread disease spreading out through families and down the
generations. It required the sacrifice of many lives and the careful
investigation of scientists to discover that tuberculosis was the result
of germs, generally accompanied by an impoverished system. These germs
were transferred by close association and lack of sanitary conditions.
It is as easy to transmit shiftlessness, idleness and lax habits as
disease.

Dugdale's figures of delinquency in the Jukes family are doubtless much
too high. A large percentage of facts was gained from gossip and hearsay
about those long since dead. The details show that many crimes charged
were not even proved, others were evidently not crimes, and in any small
community suspicion would rest upon a member of this family who was
accused. Then too, the poor in court and out have a hard time defending
themselves. They are frequently convicted when accused. The evidence in
regard to the subnormal and defective is still less satisfactory.
Without close examination and thorough tests, illiteracy generally
passes as subnormality. Very few of the subjects were submitted to a
careful test. It is at least probable that this family was not much
different from the other families who lived in like circumstances in the
community.

Dugdale's original examination covered 709 cases out of about 1200 that
were supposed to be living at the time. Of this number, 180 are put down
as having received institutional and outdoor relief. The criminals and
offenders are put down at 140. Habitual thieves convicted and
unconvicted are listed at 60. Common prostitutes are put down at 50.

After Dugdale's investigation the family, from industrial and other
conditions, became scattered and spread out over many states. A record
has lately been made of the descendants of this family, the later record
showing much improvement in the stock. This must be due to environment.
It seems fairly certain that with time and opportunity, it will not much
longer be a marked family.

Quite aside from the history, it seems certain that no results such as
shown by Dugdale could have followed from inheritance. Defectiveness is
a recessive factor; normality a dominant one. If such were not true,
this would be a world of feeble-minded. If the Mendelian law held good
in this regard, from a union of a defective and a normal person, three
out of four would be normal, but as a matter of fact, the percentage of
normal is no doubt much greater. It is only when both father and mother
are feeble-minded that feeble-mindedness is sure to show in the
offspring. With the modern care of this sort of defectives, the chance
of breeding is growing rapidly less.

The Kallikak family is cited as another illustration showing the
possible inheritance of criminality and poverty through a defective
strain. This family, so far as shown, makes it still clearer that what
some authors have charged to heredity is simply due to environment.
These investigations do not show the need of controlling birth but do
prove the necessity of improving environment. It is not possible to
speak with certainty as to heredity and environment. The thorough
investigation of these two factors which make up life is still in its
infancy, but scientists are working out the problem, and we may be
confident that with the right attitude toward crime, a remedy will be
found for such cases as result from environment.




XXXIII

CRIME, DISEASE AND ACCIDENT


The criminologist has always looked for the cause of crime in some other
direction than in the inherent wickedness of the criminal. Only those
who make and enforce the law believe that men commit crimes because they
choose the wrong.

Different writers have made their catalogues of causes that are
responsible for crime, and most of these lists are more or less correct.
There can be no doubt that more crimes against property are committed in
cold weather than in warm weather; more in hard times than in good
times; more by the unemployed than the employed; more during strikes and
lockouts than in times of industrial peace; more when food is expensive
and scarce than when it is cheap and plenty; more, in short, when it is
harder to live. There is no doubt that there are more crimes of violence
in extreme hot weather than in cold weather. That is, heat affects
crimes as it affects disease and insanity and death; in short, as it
affects all life. More crimes of violence are committed after wars or
during heated political campaigns than at other times; more of such
crimes when, either by climatic or other conditions, feelings are
intensified or aroused and less subject to control. Likewise there are
more crimes committed by young men between seventeen and twenty four or
five years of age than at any other age. Neither the very young nor the
old commit crimes, except in rare cases. All the old people could be
safely dismissed from prisons. Some few of the senile would need
attention, and many need support and care, but none is dangerous to the
community. There can be no question that practically all criminals are
poor. Even when bankers get into prison they almost never have much
money when they start that way, and none when they arrive. They are sent
for something that would not have happened except for financial
disaster. There is no longer any question that a large number, say
probably from ten to twenty per cent of the convicted are, in fact,
insane at the time the act was committed, and that the demented, the
imbecile, and the clearly subnormal constitute many more than half of
the inmates of prisons. Most of the rest can be accounted for by
defective nervous systems, excessively strong instincts in some
directions, weak ones in another, or a very hard environment. Add to
this the facts that only a few have ever had any education worthy of the
name, that most of them have never been trained to make a fair living by
any trade or occupation, that almost all have had a poor early
environment with no chance from the first, and most of them have had a
very imperfect heredity. In short, sufficient statistics have been
gathered and enough is known to warrant the belief that every case of
crime could be accounted for on purely scientific grounds if all the
facts bearing on the case were known.

Is there anything unreasonable in all of this? Is it outside of the
other manifestations of life? Let us take disease. Clearly this is
affected by heat and cold; beyond question it is largely the result of
inherited susceptibilities. Poverty or wealth has much to do with
disease. Many poor people die of tuberculosis, for instance, where the
well-to-do would live. The span of life of the rich is greater than that
of the poor. The long list of diseases from under-nourishment is mainly
from the poor. Age affects disease, increasing the hazard of death. The
food supply seriously affects health. Ignorance is a prolific cause of
disease. Or, to speak more correctly, the lack of education and
knowledge prevents men from living so that sickness will not overtake
them, or so that they can recover when they are attacked by disease. The
strength or weakness of the nervous system is a material factor.

The times of life, too, when the ravages of disease are greatest are as
distinct as those of crime. And barring the fact that the few who are
left at seventy rapidly drop away, the time of the greatest disasters
would rather closely correspond with that of crime. Tuberculosis and
insanity, for instance, take their greatest toll in the period of
adolescence between fifteen and twenty-five years, just as crime does,
and the percentage of both begins falling off rapidly after thirty.

Accidents can be as surely classified, and many of them in the same way.
The poor naturally have more accidents than the rich; the ignorant more
than the educated; the poorly-fed more than the well-nourished.
Accidents are directly affected by climatic conditions; they are
affected by human temperaments, by the strength and weakness of the
nervous system, by the environment, by heredity, and by all the manifold
stimuli that act on the human machine.

Legislatures have long since recognized that crime does not really stand
as a separate and isolated phenomenon in human life. They have long
since passed laws to safeguard the community against loss by accident
and disease. A lengthening list of statutes can be found in our code
regulating dangerous machinery, the operation of railroads, the running
of automobiles, the construction of buildings, the isolation of the
tubercular and those suffering from other contagious diseases, the
amount of air-space for each person in tenement and work-shop, the use
of fire-escapes and all of man's conduct and activity for the
prevention of accidents and disease.

Quite apart from the question of the wisdom or the foolishness of all
this line of legislative activity, over which there will always be
serious discussion, it is evident that criminal conduct even now
occupies no unique or isolated place in law or human conduct. All
unconsciously the world is coming to look on all sorts of conduct either
as social or anti-social, and this regardless of what has already been
classified as criminal. A few years since science was absorbed in the
study of man's racial origin and development. Today, biology and allied
sciences are devoted to unraveling the complex causes responsible for
individual development. It is fair to presume that this new effort of
science may be able in time to solve the problem of crime, and that it
may do for the conduct and mental aberrations of man what it has already
done for his physical diseases.




XXXIV

LUCK AND CHANCE


Accident and luck may seem to have no place in a world of law, and yet
the fate of lives rests almost entirely on what can be better classified
under this head than any other.

This is a pluralistic universe. The world is made up of an infinite
number of independent machines, each having its own existence and
controlled by the laws of its own being. In going its several ways and
living its own life, inevitably it often clashes with others and is
seriously affected by them. The fox and the rabbit both roam the woods,
apparently at will, at least independently of each other. By an infinite
number of circumstances, at a particular time and place, their paths
cross and the fox devours the rabbit. Had they not met at the time and
place, the fate of the rabbit would not have been the same. The fox
would have traveled farther and eaten another rabbit or some other
animal in its stead.

An engine is running on a railroad track. It makes the trip day after
day without accident or disaster. An automobile is one of a million
built in a far off city. Its mechanism is marvelous, and each part is
dependent on the rest for its normal functioning. Some vital piece of
the machine contains a flaw. How it chanced to be imperfect is another
story involving endless speculation. An inherent natural defect in the
ore, or a tired workman anywhere from the original smelting place to the
last hand that touched it, may have been the cause; or, the reason may
be still more impossible to discover. The machine is purchased and does
its work perfectly for months. It is driven thousands of miles without
any mishap. It is propelled along the highway and reaches the railroad
track over which the engine runs. It is filled with happy people
enjoying a vacation. The automobile and the engine reach the crossing at
almost the same time. The automobile driver sees the engine and applies
the brakes. For the first time since it left the shop, the machinery
does not work. The car forges ahead and reaches the tracks just in time
to be struck by the engine. The merry party meets disaster. No power
could foresee the catastrophe, nor provide against the death that must
result. Inevitably comes the clash of independent machines. Each human
being is a separate machine. Along the road of life he meets countless
others like himself. Some chance meetings are fortunate and help the
journey. Some other chance meeting with a human machine, a mechanical
device, an infinitesimal microbe that happened to be at the same place
at the same time brings disaster or death. This is luck or chance or
fate, and this really hovers over every life, controlling its course and
destiny and deciding when the puppet shall be laid away!

Luck and chance are the chief of all factors that really affect man.
From birth to death the human machine is called on to make endless
adjustments. A child is born and starts down the road of life. He starts
blindly and, for the most part, travels the whole way in the mists and
clouds. On his pathway he meets an infinite number of other pilgrims
going blindly like himself. From the beginning to the end, all about him
and in front of him are snares and pitfalls. His brain and nervous
system are filled with emotions and desires which lure him here and
there. Temptations are beckoning and passions urging him. He has no
guide to show the way and no compass to direct his course. He knows that
the journey will bring him to disaster in the end. He does not know the
time or the nature of the last catastrophe he shall meet. Every step is
taken in doubt and pain and fear. His friends and companions, through
accident or disease, drop around him day by day. He cannot go back or
halt or wait. He must go forward to the bitter end.

The whole journey of life is largely a question of luck. Let anyone ask
himself the question how often he has escaped disaster or how often
death has just passed him by. How often has he done some act that would
have led to degradation had it been known? How many hair-breadth escapes
has he met? How many accidents has he had which luckily were slight but
which easily might have caused his destruction?

Chance is the great element in life. Two men invest money; one gains a
fortune, the other loses all. Two men are riding in a machine and it
goes over a cliff; one is killed, the other escapes. The deadly germ is
taken by one, it passes the other by; or, it is taken by one when his
health will make him immune, by another at the time that it will destroy
his life. How many temptations to violate the law has one just missed by
a lucky accident? How many times has a previous experience, education,
or a friend at the right time saved him from destruction?

The imperfect man travels this road; he is poor and friendless; his life
is a long series of accidents great and small. The first accident that
weakens his structure makes the second more certain and so on in
increasing ratio until the end. Good luck crowds around one life, while
ill luck and disaster follow another's footsteps wherever he goes with
the persistency of his shadow.

In all the infinite number of chances one false step may be enough to
bring final disaster. All depends on the nature of the step. Every
pilgrim makes innumerable false steps; often luck alone saves the
situation; often luck alone compasses the destruction.

Insurance companies know just when accidents will befall the insured. If
a man lives long enough he will die from a mischance. In a thousand men,
a certain number will meet accident in a given time. It is just the same
whether the insurance is written to be payable when a leg is cut off by
a train or when money is embezzled from an employer. In either event the
time can be figured out, and inevitably it will come if the time is long
enough.

Neither is it necessary that the bad luck shall be great at the first
misfortune. It may be but the loss of a few dollars which another could
easily stand. It may be only a few days of sickness which would be of no
consequence to someone else. It may be the death of a father or an
uncle, while the same sort of tragedy might be the source of another's
wealth. It may be some other person's hard luck which takes him from
school and leaves him to follow a life of hard and constant toil. It may
be that he had the bad luck not to marry the person of his choice, or it
may be that he had the bad luck to marry her. It may be because he had
no children; it may be because he had too many. It may well be that he
has been saved from prison by dying early of tuberculosis. He may have
been saved from a railroad wreck by going to jail. Infinite are the
tricks of chance. Infinite are the combinations and consequences that
may come from turning the cards in a single deck.

Who is the perfect one that should be willing to punish vengefully his
fellow-man? Let one look honestly into his own life and pick out the
important things that lead to fortune or disaster from birth onward, and
say how many are the results of circumstances over which he had no
control.

Where is the human being, in the presence of a dead child or a dead
parent or a dead friend or in the presence of a terrible trouble, that
has not sat down in sorrow and despair and again and again lived over
every circumstance that led to the disaster, asking why he did not turn
this way instead of that way? Why did he not stop here, or go there; why
did he do this or why did he not do that? Why did he not take this short
step? Why did he not think of this or think of that? If only any one of
almost an infinite number of things had been done or left undone, the
dead would be alive or the disaster would not have befallen. Every man
who is honest with himself knows that he has been a creature of
conditions and chance, or at least what is chance as far as a man can
see, and what was clearly chance to him. He knows that if he has met
success, he has only been more in luck than the rest. If he has
intelligence and human sympathy, he feels only pity for the suffering.
He would never punish in vengeance or hatred. He knows that all do the
best they can, with what they have.

Enumerating some of the many causes of crime ought to be an unnecessary
task. To give the number of ways men die or are killed by accident,
means only that sooner or later they die, and if they had not died one
way, they would have died another. It means only that a machine will
inevitably give way in some part, and man may go on finding the weak
spots and strengthening them forever and still the end will come. Fate
does not look for a weak spot; it looks for the weakest and finds it.

Manifold causes produce crime; some men commit it from one cause: some
from another. Statistics only show the number of men who commit crime
from the various separate causes. In logic and philosophy it really
shows that, a certain heredity placed in a certain environment, will
meet obstructions and obstacles. Some heredities will carry men further,
and some environments will overcome them more quickly; but as surely as
effects follow from causes, every heredity will meet disaster in some
way under any environment, and the time and kind of disaster it meets
depend not upon perverseness or freedom of will, but upon the fortune of
the meeting of heredity with the manifold environment that surrounds
every life. It must be plain that life lasts only as long as it makes
adjustments. That it consists only of adjustments. That, ordinarily,
strong heredity and a good environment will serve the longest. That,
generally, a weak heredity and a poor environment will meet disaster
soonest. Life may be lengthened either by improving the heredity or the
environment or both. Whatever catastrophe overtakes it and the time it
falls depend not upon the will of the machine, but upon the character of
the machine that starts on the journey and the road it travels. The
disasters cannot in reason or justice be divided into criminal or
non-criminal. They are all natural; they are each and all inevitable.
Each is the inevitable destruction of a machine which could stand so
much, but which could stand no more. And in each, in spite of both
heredity and the general environment, the constant meeting with other
machines due to pure luck and chance is a great factor, if not the chief
factor, that determines the individual life.




XXXV

PARDONS AND PAROLES


It has always been the province of the Chief Executive of a state or
nation to grant pardons or clemency to those who are confined in prison.
This is largely to correct the mistakes of courts and juries and is
often indulged in by presidents and governors at Christmas time.
Experience shows that during the trial of a case, especially one that
causes public notice and general discussion, injustice is frequently
done. Often the defendant is convicted when he should have been
acquitted, and still more frequently punishments are excessive and
cruel. Almost never is any serious inquiry made as to the heredity and
environment of the accused. Probably trial by jury has served to save
many defendants where the judge would have convicted, and has still more
often tempered and modified penalties. Still, juries are by no means
free from the mob psychology that surrounds and affects most important
and well-known cases. Jurors are generally none too intelligent and not
very ready to stand against public opinion. Most men agree with the
crowd. The prevailing religious opinion and the dominant political and
social ideas are accepted and believed by the ordinary citizen. Social
and business considerations cause most men to go with the crowd, and in
any case of importance it is easy for a jury to tell the feeling of the
populace. If the case has attracted much attention, the juror knows the
prevailing ideas as to the guilt or innocence of the defendant. When he
takes his seat in the box he almost always shares that feeling. If the
case is not one he has heard of or discussed, he can easily tell by the
actions and surroundings of the court room how public feeling lies. All
lawyers know how readily men feel the sentiment of a court room and how
much easier is the task when the sentiment is their way. Juries are also
apt to have an undue regard for the opinion of the judge. In spite of
the fact that it is their province to pass upon the facts, they are very
watchful of all the judge says and does and are prone to decide a case
as they believe the judge wishes it to be decided. Even when the judge
is not permitted to express any opinions on the facts involved, it is
difficult for him to hide his real feelings, and when his desire is
strong for either side it is easy to make his opinions known.

A jury is more apt to be unbiased and independent than a court, but they
very seldom stand up against strong public clamor. Judges naturally
believe the defendant is guilty. They feel that the fact that an
indictment has been found is a strong presumption against the accused.
The judge regards himself as a part of the administration of justice and
feels that it is a part of his duty to see that no guilty man escapes.
Generally, in the administration of the court he is very closely
connected with the state's attorney and naturally believes that the
attorney would not have procured an indictment, much less pushed a
trial, unless the defendant was guilty.

The whole atmosphere of the court at the time of the trial calls for a
harsher and more drastic dealing with a defendant than would naturally
prevail after the feeling has passed away. For this reason, the
pardoning power is given to the chief executive to correct errors or
undue harshness after the legal proceedings have been finished. Often
after months or years, the persons or family who have suffered at the
hands of the defendant feel like reversing their judgment or extending
charity, and it is not unusual that the prosecutor and judge who
conducted the case ask for leniency and a mitigation of the sentence is
imposed. So often is an appeal made and so frequently is it felt just to
grant clemency, that this part of the duty of the chief executive has
grown to be very burdensome and really impossible for him thoroughly to
perform. The policy of the law is further to give a prisoner some
consideration and in cases of good behavior and mitigating circumstances
to release him before the expiration of his time. In most states this
has called for the creating of a board of pardons and parole. The
statutes fixing penalties for certain offenses provide for a reduction
of a certain number of weeks or months each year, but as a rule courts
take this provision into consideration and figure out the net time they
wish to give the defendant so that there is no clemency except through
pardon or parole.

In most states the duties of the board are very grave and its business
large. With this has generally gone a law providing for the release of
prisoners on parole before their sentences are finished. In these cases
the prisoner is paroled to someone who promises the board to employ him,
and a monthly report is to be made of his conduct for a stated length of
time. He is then given conditional freedom, subject to the revocation of
the parole by the board on the violation of its terms.

The administration of this power has made the parole board one of the
most important, if not the most important, of any branch of the state
government. The lives and well-being of thousands of prisoners are
absolutely dependent on this board. Even more important are the
happiness and well-being of the families of the inmates of the prison.
The power and responsibilities of this board are so great that only men
of the best judgment and of humane and just tendencies should be trusted
with the task. It also calls for great courage such as few men on
boards possess. The public generally clamors for vengeance and unfairly
and unjustly criticises the board, especially when a released man
violates his parole or commits another crime. This frequently happens.
Perhaps on an average ten per cent of those paroled are sent back to
prison before their term expires. All this makes it hard for the board
to perform its duties, and makes the members of the board timid and
doubtful of the result, often causing them to deny paroles in many cases
where they should be given.

A great deal of criticism has been made of the parole system. Public
officials and that part of the crowd that is clamorous for vengeance are
always ready to assail its activities unfairly and unduly. Most
professional criminals are against the parole board. Speaking of the
State of Illinois, I am sure that the parole law, instead of shortening
the time of imprisonment, has lengthened the terms. All lawyers in any
way competent to handle the defense of a criminal case would, in the
event of conviction, almost always get a shorter term for their clients
from a jury or from the court, or even from the prosecutor, than from
the parole board. I feel strongly that the board is too timid and
unwilling to grant paroles. Still in spite of this there can be no doubt
that the parole law is a step in the right direction, and it should be
upheld by all who believe offenders should have a better chance. If
human nature in the administration of law could be relied on; if there
were some method of getting men of courage and capacity with plenty of
competent aid and assistance to take charge of paroles and prisons, then
the ideal sentence should be one that fixed no time whatever. It should
simply leave a prisoner for study and observation until it was thought
wise and safe to release him from restraint. This like all the rest
could not be done with the present public attitude toward criminals. So
long as men subscribe to the prevailing idea of crime and punishment, no
officials could stand up against public opinion in the carrying out of a
new and radical theory, and even if such a board should be established,
the law under which it acted would soon be repealed or the members of
the board forced to resign and a new one would take its place.

In spite of the fact that the effect of parole boards has been to
lengthen sentences, and in spite of my personal belief that they should
be materially shortened, I am confident that the parole system should be
maintained with the hope of improvement and the chance of gradually
educating the public until sentences can be naturally shortened, and the
care and control of prisoners be placed on a scientific and humane
basis.

A board of pardons and paroles should be made up of men who are really
interested in their work. They should carefully keep up with the
literature on crime and punishment; they should be scientists in all
matters touching their work, and they should be men of humane feelings.
It is too much to expect that all of this can be found in a board for a
long time to come, but with good sense and the right attitude of mind
the board could employ the skill that it does not now have. Every
prisoner should be the subject of attention, not of spying, but of
friendly interest that would inspire confidence and trust,--such an
interest as a wise doctor has in a patient. This attention would in most
cases gain the confidence of the prisoner and make it possible to find
out how far he could be trusted, at the same time showing the treatment
and environment he needed for future development. Where this confidence
could not be had, safety would probably require a longer term. Most men
respond to kind treatment. The criminal has so long looked on the world
as his enemy, especially the official world, that he hesitates to trust
anyone. Still the really sympathetic and kindly man who is honestly
trying to help him will sooner or later get his confidence and
coöperation. Every prisoner should understand that all of those around
him are anxious to educate him so as to fit him for society and to put
him in an environment where he can live. Even then there would be
mistakes, and a portion of the prisoners would be so defective or
imperfect that they never could be released; but under proper treatment
many would be restored to association with their fellow-men.

It will be a long time before it will be safe to make sentences entirely
indeterminate. Boards cannot be trusted to give such time and work and
judgment to their task as will prevent cases of great injustice. Until
such time shall come either the statutes must fix an unbending and
arbitrary time which takes no account of individual cases, or it must be
left with the court or jury. Clearly the jury should fix the maximum,
leaving the members of the board to reduce the penalty if they deem it
wise.

Most men are forgotten when they go to prison, especially if they have
no active friends on the outside. No board can fully keep in mind all
the inmates of a large prison. It may be that by some system their
attention is automatically called to the man at certain times, but this
matters very little. Someone should know he is there and why, and who he
is. He should not be an abstract, but a concrete man. For these reasons,
a limit should always be set on a punishment and the limit should not be
too long. The idea of a tribunal, perhaps including the judge who passed
sentence, having the power and the duty imposed upon him to review
sentences and reduce them if it seemed best from time to time, might
have a good effect. The feelings of most men in reference to the degree
of punishment change as time goes by. Always with the punishment is a
strong feeling of both hate and fear. It is not possible really to
punish, that is, to inflict suffering without hate or fear. The most
necessary thing in preparing soldiers to fight, is to teach them to hate
and fear the enemy. In the trial of a case, these feelings are fresh in
the minds of the prosecutor and the judge when the case is finished, and
they necessarily act more or less under the dominance of their passions.
In time these feelings fade, and a saner and kindlier judgment takes the
place of the first feelings that possessed the mind.

With the parole system is going on a movement for probation. This
provides that the convicted man need not be sent to prison but may be
released on certain terms, sometimes requiring that money taken shall be
refunded. After that he shall be placed under the supervision of some
friend or agent who will report from time to time to probation officers
or to the court. Probation is generally granted to young prisoners and
first offenders but usually not permitted in cases that the law
classifies as the most serious.

Parole and probation are much the same in theory. In both these cases
the clemency should depend much more upon the man than on the crime. It
does not follow that a very serious crime shows a poorer moral fibre
than a lesser one. It may well be that the seemingly slight
transgressions, like stealing small amounts, picking pockets and the
like, show a really weaker nature than goes with a more heroic crime.
There is no such liability to repeat in homicide as there is in forgery,
pocket-picking or swindling. The seriousness of a homicide is likely to
make it impossible that the same man shall ever kill again. Many such
men would be perfectly safe on probation or parole. But the smaller
things that are easily concealed and come from an effort of the
condemned to live, either without work or in a better way than his
ability or training permits him to do in the hard and unfair conditions
that society imposes, are often much harder to overcome. At any rate,
the main question should be in regard to the man and not the crime. In
cases of parole or probation, society should do what it can to help the
man make good. Generally employment is necessary and a different and
easier environment often indispensable. If organized society would only
take the pains to make an easier environment for all the less favored,
the problem would be fairly simple and most of the misery that comes
from crime and prison would gradually disappear.




XXXVI

REMEDIES


Students of crime and punishment have never differed seriously in their
conclusions. All investigations have arrived at the result that crime is
due to causes; that man is either not morally responsible, or
responsible only to a slight degree. All have doubted the efficacy of
punishment and practically no one has accepted the common ideas that
prevail as to crime, its nature, its treatment and the proper and
efficient way of protecting society from the criminal.

The real question of importance is: What shall be done? Can crime be
cured? If not, can it be wiped out and how? What rights have the public?
What rights has the criminal? What obligations does the public owe the
criminal? What duties does each citizen owe society?

It must be confessed that all these questions are more easily asked than
answered. Perhaps none of them can be satisfactorily answered. It is a
common obsession that every evil must have a remedy; that if it cannot
be cured today, it can be tomorrow; that man is a creature of infinite
possibilities and all that is needed is time and patience. Given these
a perfect world will eventuate.

I am convinced that man is not a creature of infinite possibilities. I
am by no means sure that he has not run his race and reached, if not
passed, the zenith of his power. I have no idea that every evil can be
cured; that all trouble can be banished; that every maladjustment can be
corrected or that the millennium can be reached now and here or any time
or anywhere. I am not even convinced that the race can substantially
improve. Perhaps here and there society can be made to run a little more
smoothly; perhaps some of the chief frictions incident to life may be
avoided; perhaps we can develop a little higher social order; perhaps we
may get rid of some of the cruelty incident to social organization. But
how?

To start with: it seems to me to be clear that there is really no such
thing as crime, as the word is generally understood. Every activity of
man should come under the head of "behavior." In studying crime we are
merely investigating a certain kind of human behavior. Man acts in
response to outside stimuli. How he acts depends on the nature,
strength, and inherent character of the machine and the habits, customs,
inhibitions and experiences that environment gives him. Man is in no
sense the maker of himself and has no more power than any other machine
to escape the law of cause and effect. He does as he must. Therefore,
there is no such thing as moral responsibility in the sense in which
this expression is ordinarily used. Punishment as something inflicted
for the purpose of giving pain is cruelty and vengeance and nothing
else. Whatever should be done to the criminal, if we have humanity and
imagination, we must feel sympathy for him and consider his best good
along with that of all the rest of the members of the society whose
welfare is our concern.

While punishment cannot be defended, still self-defense is inherent in
both individuals and society and, without arguing its justification, no
one can imagine a society that will not assert it and act for its
defense. This will be true regardless of whether the given society is
worth preserving or not. Inherent in all life and organization is the
impulse of self-preservation. Those members of society who are
sufficiently "anti-social" from the standpoint of the time and place
will not be tolerated unduly to disturb the rest. These, in certain
instances, will be destroyed or deprived of their power to harm. If
society has a right attitude toward the subject, if it has imagination
and sympathy and understanding, it will isolate these victims, not in
anger but in pity, solely for the protection of the whole. Some there
are who ask what difference it makes whether it is called punishment or
not. I think that the attitude of society toward the criminal makes the
whole difference, and any improvement is out of the question until this
attitude influences and controls the whole treatment of the question of
crime and punishment.

If doctors and scientists had been no wiser than lawyers, judges,
legislatures and the public, the world would still be punishing
imbeciles, the insane, the inferior and the sick; and treating human
ailments with incantations, witchcraft, force and magic. We should still
be driving devils out of the sick and into the swine.

Assuming then that man is governed by external conditions; that he
inevitably reacts to certain stimuli; that he is affected by all the
things that surround him; that his every act and manifestation is a
result of law; what then must we and can we do with and for the
criminal?

First of all we must abandon the idea of working his moral reformation,
as the term "moral reformation" is popularly understood. As well might
we cure the physically ill in that way! Man works according to his
structure. He never does reform and cannot reform. As he grows older his
structure changes and from increase of vitality or from decrease of
vitality his habits, too, may change. He may likewise learn by
experience, and through the comparing and recalling of experiences and
their consequences may build up rules of conduct which will restrain him
from doing certain things that he otherwise would do. Anything that
increases his knowledge and adds to his experience will naturally affect
his habits and will either build up or tear down inhibitions or do both,
as the case may be. If he has intelligence he knows he is always the
same man; that he has not reformed nor repented. He may regret that he
did certain things but he knows why and how he did them and why he will
not repeat them if he can avoid it. The intrinsic character of the man
cannot change, for the machine is the same and will always be the same,
except that it may run faster or slower with the passing years, or it
may be influenced by the habits gained from experience and life.

We must learn to appraise rightly the equipment of every child and, as
far as possible, of every adult to the end that they may find an
environment where they can live. It must never be forgotten that man is
nothing but heredity and environment and that the heredity cannot be
changed but the environment may be. In the past and present, the world
has sought to adjust heredity to environment. The problem of the future
in dealing with crime will be to adjust environment to heredity. To a
large extent this can be done in a wholesale way. Any improved social
arrangement that will make it easier for the common man to live will
necessarily save a large number from crime. Perhaps if the social
improvement should be great enough it would prevent the vast majority
of criminal acts. Life should be made easier for the great mass from
which the criminal is ever coming. As far as experience and logic can
prove anything, it is certain that every improvement in environment will
lessen crime.

Codes of law should be shortened and rendered simpler. It should not be
expected that criminal codes will cover all human and social life. The
old method of appealing to brute force and fear should gradually give
place to teaching and persuading and fitting men for life. All prisons
should be in the hands of experts, physicians, criminologists,
biologists, and, above all, the humane. Every prisoner should be made to
feel that the state is interested in his good as well as the good of the
society from which he came. Sentences should be indeterminate, but the
indeterminate sentence of today is often a menace to freedom and a means
of great cruelty and wrong. The indeterminate sentence can only be of
value in a well-equipped prison where each man is under competent
observation as if he were ill in a hospital. And this should be
supplemented with an honest, intelligent parole commission, fully
equipped for thorough work. Until that time comes, the maximum penalty
should be fixed by the jury, the parole board retaining the power to
reduce the punishment or parole. No two crimes are alike. No two
offenders are alike. Those who have no friends on the outside are
forgotten and neglected after the prison doors have been closed upon
them. Some men now are confined much too long; others not long enough.
No doubt, owing to the imperfections of man, this will always be the
case.

At present no penal institutions have the equipment or management to
provide against such shortcomings. They never can have it while men
believe punishment is vengeance. When the public is ready to provide for
the protection of society and still to recognize and heed the impulses
of humanity and mercy, it will abolish all fixed terms. As well might it
send a patient to a hospital for a fixed time and then discharge him,
regardless of whether he is cured or not, as to confine a convict for a
definite predetermined time. If the offense is one of a serious nature
that endangers the public, the prisoner should not be released until by
understanding or education, or age, or the proper form of treatment, it
is fairly evident that he will not offend again. When the time comes, if
it is the day of his incarceration, he should be released. The smallest
reflection ought to teach that for many crimes, especially for many
property crimes, it is hopeless to release a prisoner in an environment
where he cannot survive. An environment adjusted to his heredity must be
found by the state.

All indignities should be taken away from prison life. Instead the
prisoner should be taught that his act was the necessary result of cause
and effect and that, given his heredity and environment, he could have
done no other way. He should by teaching and experience be shown where
he made his mistakes, and he should be given an environment where he can
live consistently with the good of those around him.

Various reforms have been urged in the treatment of criminals and in
criminal procedure in the courts. Most of these impress me as possessing
no fundamental value. It is often said that the accused should be given
an immediate trial; that this and subsequent proceedings should not be
hindered by delay; that the uncertainties of punishment furnish the
criminal with the hope of escape and therefore do not give the community
the benefit of the terror that comes with the certainty of punishment
that could prevent crime. I can see no basis in logic or experience for
this suggestion. It is based on the theory that punishment is not only a
deterrent to crime, but the main deterrent. It comes from the idea that
the criminal is distinct from the rest of mankind, that vengeance should
be sure and speedy and that then crime would be prevented. If this were
true and the only consideration to prevent crime, then the old torture
chamber and the ancient prison with all its hopelessness and horror
should be restored. Logic, humanity and experience would protest against
this. If there is to be any permanent improvement in man and any better
social order, it must come mainly from the education and humanizing of
man. I am quite certain that the more the question of crime and its
treatment is studied the less faith men have in punishment.

England and Continental Europe are often pointed to as examples of sure
and speedy justice. The fact that there are more convictions and fewer
acquittals in England in proportion to the number of trials does not
prove that the English system is better than ours. It may and probably
does mean that ours is better. Here the accused has more chance. There
the expense, the formality, the power of the court all conspire to
destroy every opportunity of escape, regardless of innocence or guilt.
Even the fact that there are fewer crimes committed in England does not
prove that the system is best or that it prevents crime. An old country
with its life of caste lacks the freedom and equality that naturally
produce defiance of rules and customs and lead to breaches of the law.
Other things being equal, a greater degree of freedom leads to more
violations of rules and greater resisting power among the poor than a
lesser degree of freedom. It does not necessarily follow that the
country is best where the people are the most obedient. Complete
obedience leads to submission, to aggression and to despotism. Doubtless
China has fewer crimes than England. The power of resistance is so
crushed that no one thinks of defying a master, resenting an injury,
violating a rule, claiming any personal rights or protesting against
caste, age, or privilege.

Always there are certain men who believe that all reform in criminal
procedure must come by abolishing juries and submitting every question
to a court. Those who are rich and strong and the lawyers who advocate
their interests are mainly arrayed on this side. The poor and
rebellious, with those who naturally or otherwise advocate their cause,
stand for the juries as against the courts. Those who strive to be fair
are often misled from a lack of experience and little judgment of human
nature. The public is always against the accused. The press is against
him. The machinery of the law is against him. The dice are loaded for
his conviction. Some people have childish faith in the courts. But
judges are neither infinitely wise nor infinitely good; they come from
the ranks of lawyers and for the most part from those who have been long
engaged in defending property rights; they are generally conservative;
they are not independent of public opinion; almost invariably they
reflect public opinion, which means the public opinion of the community
in which they live. Few of them have much knowledge of biology, of
psychology, of sociology, or even of history.

One curse of our political life comes from the fact that as soon as a
man has secured an office, he has his eye on another and his whole
effort is to please the people, that is, the people who express
themselves the most easily. Very few judges rise to a great degree of
independence or defy popular clamor. A jury is less bound by public
opinion; their responsibility is divided; they are not as a rule seeking
office; while swayed by the crowd they are still more independent than
judges and with them the common man, the accused, has a better chance.

No doubt judges are abler, better educated, more accustomed to weighing
evidence and able to arrive at a more logical conclusion than most
juries. Still none of these qualities necessarily leads to just
findings. Questions of right and wrong are not determined by strict
rules of logic. If public opinion could come to regard the criminal as
it does the insane, the imbecile, or the ill, then a judicial
determination would be the best. But as long as crime is regarded as
moral delinquency and punishment savors of vengeance, every possible
safeguard and protection must be thrown around the accused. In the
settling of opinions and the passing of judgments, mob psychology is
all-powerful and really, in the last analysis, every human question
comes down to the power of public opinion.

The first thing necessary to lessen crime and to relieve victims from
the cruelty of moral judgments is a change of public opinion as to human
responsibility. When scientific ideas on this important subject shall be
generally accepted, all things that are possible will follow from it.
Some headway has already been made in the direction of considering
heredity and environment. Theoretically we no longer hold the insane
responsible, and some allowance is made for children and the obviously
defective. The discouraging thing is that the public is fickle and
changeable, and any temporary feeling overwhelms the patient efforts of
years. In the present mad crusade against crime consequent upon the
Great War, penalties have been increased, new crimes created, and
paroles and pardons have been made almost impossible. The public and
press virtually declare that even insanity should not save the life of
one who slays his fellow. Repeatedly the insane are hanged without a
chance, and sentences of death are pronounced, where before, a term of
years, or life imprisonment would have been the penalty for the offense.
Individual men and collections of men are ruled not by judgment but by
impulse; the voice of conscience and mercy is always very weak and
drowned by the hoarse cry for vengeance.

As long as men collectively impose their will upon the individual
units, they should consider that this imposition calls for intelligence,
kindliness, tolerance and a large degree of sympathy and understanding.
In considering the welfare of the public: the accused, his family and
his friends should be included as a part. It need not be expected that
all maladjustments can ever be wiped out. Organization with its close
relation of individual units implies conflict. Nevertheless, the effort
should be to remove all possible inducement for the violent clashing of
individuals and to minimize the severity of such conflicts as are
inevitable.

THE END



Produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed Proofreaders.




    With them and all they had, 'twas lightly come and lightly go; and
    when we left them my master said to me: "This is thy first lesson,
    but to-night we shall be at Hamburgh. Come with me to the 'rotboss'
    there, and I'll show thee all our folk and their lays, and
    especially 'the loseners,' 'the dutzers,' 'the schleppers.'" ...
    "Enow!" cried I, stopping him, "art as gleesome as the evil one
    a-counting of his imps. I'll jot down in my tablet all these
    caitiffs and their accursed names; for knowledge is knowledge. But
    go among them alive or dead, that I will not with my good will."

    --THE CLOISTER AND THE HEARTH.



TRUE STORIES OF CRIME
FROM THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY'S OFFICE

BY ARTHUR TRAIN

FORMERLY DISTRICT ATTORNEY
NEW YORK COUNTY

1908




PREFACE


The narratives composing this book are literally true stories of crime.
In a majority of the cases the author conducted the prosecutions
himself, and therefore may claim to have a personal knowledge of that
whereof he speaks. While no confidence has been abused, no essential
facts have been omitted, distorted, or colored, and the accounts
themselves, being all matters of public record, may be easily verified.

The scenes recorded here are not literature but history, and the
characters who figure in them are not puppets of the imagination, but
men and women who lived and schemed, laughed, sinned and suffered, and
paid the price when the time came, most of them, without flinching. A
few of those who read these pages may profit perhaps by their example;
others may gain somewhat in their knowledge of life and human nature;
but all will agree that there are books in the running brooks, even if
the streams be turbid, and sermons in stones, though these be the hearts
of men. If in some instances the narratives savor in treatment more of
fiction than of fact, the writer must plead guilty to having fallen
under the spell of the romance of his subject, and he proffers the
excuse that, whereas such tales have lost nothing in accuracy, they may
have gained in the truth of their final impression.

ARTHUR TRAIN.

CRIMINAL COURTS BUILDING,
  NEW YORK CITY,
    April 20, 1908.




CONTENTS

I.    THE WOMAN IN THE CASE
II.   FIVE HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS
III.  THE LOST STRADIVARIUS
IV.   THE LAST OF THE WIRE-TAPPERS
V.    THE FRANKLIN SYNDICATE
VI.   A STUDY IN FINANCE
VII.  THE "DUC DE NEVERS"
VIII. A FINDER OF MISSING HEIRS
IX.   A MURDER CONSPIRACY
X.    A FLIGHT INTO TEXAS
XI.   A CASE OF CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE




ILLUSTRATIONS

Envelope on the back of which Parker's forged order was written
Parker's order on Rogers, Peet & Co., in the name of Lang
A letter-head "frill" of Mabel Parker's
Examples of Mabel Parker's penmanship, regular and forged
Practice signatures of the name of Alice Kauser
The check on which the indictment for forgery was brought
Parker's copy of the signature of Alice Kauser
One of the sheets upon which Mabel Parker illustrated her skill
One of Miller's Franklin Syndicate Receipts.
Ammon's deposit slips and a receipt signed by Mrs. Ammon.
A group of H. Huffman Browne's forgeries
Last page of the forged Rice will of 1900
The forged cremation letter
Forged assignment and Rice signatures
First page of the "Black Hand" letter written by Strollo




I

The Woman in the Case


On a sultry August afternoon in 1903, a dapper, if somewhat anaemic,
young man entered the Broadway store of Rogers, Peet & Company, in New
York City, and asked to be allowed to look at a suit of clothes. Having
selected one to his fancy and arranged for some alterations, he produced
from his wallet a check for $280, drawn to the order of George B. Lang,
and signed E. Bierstadt, and remarked to the attentive salesman:

"I haven't got quite enough cash with me to pay for these, but I have
been intending to cash this check all the afternoon. Of course, you
don't know me or even that my name is Lang, but if you will forward the
check to the bank they will certify it, and to-morrow I will send for
the suit and the balance of the money."

"Certainly, Mr. Lang," replied the salesman. "I will hold the suit and
the money to await your orders."

The customer thanked him and took his departure. The check was sent to
the bank, the bank certified it, then cancelled its certification and
returned the check to Rogers, Peet & Company, and the store detectives,
having communicated with Police Headquarters, anxiously awaited the
arrival of Mr. Lang's messenger.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Envelope on the back of which Parker's forged
order was written.]

Their efforts were rewarded a couple of days later by the appearance at
the store of a lad who presented a written order (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2)
inscribed upon the back of an envelope bearing a cancelled stamp and
addressed to Geo. B. Lang, No. 13 West Twenty-sixth Street, New York
City, which read as follows:

    ROGERS, PEET & Co.

    Please give to bearer the clothes I purchased on
    Tuesday--suit--pants--S. coat, and also kindly put change in
    envelope in inside coat pocket.  Trusting the alterations are
    satisfactory, and thanking you in advance for the favor and for past
    courtesies, I am,

    Resp. yours,

    GEO. B. LANG.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Parker's order on Rogers, Peet & Company, in the
name of Lang.]

The boy was immediately placed under arrest, and after proclaiming his
own innocence and vociferating that he was only doing an errand for a
"gent," who was waiting close by, was directed to return with his bundle
as if nothing had occurred. This he did, and Mr. George B. Lang was
soon in the clutches of the law.

Interrogated by his captors, the supposed Lang admitted that his real
name was James Parker, that he lived at 110 West Thirty-eighth Street,
and only requested that his wife be immediately notified of what had
happened. At Headquarters the prisoner was identified as a gentleman who
had been very actively engaged during the preceding months in passing
bad checks throughout the city, his more recent operations having
consisted in cashing a check on the Lincoln National Bank for $160 on
July 20th, one for $290 on the same bank on July 30th, still another for
$510.50 on August 4th, and one for $440.50 on the National Shoe and
Leather Bank, "to bearer," on August 8th. This last, in some
inexplicable way, had been cashed at the very bank itself.

Believing that the forger had at last been caught, the precinct
detectives later on, during the evening of Parker's arrest, visited no
West Thirty-eighth Street, and on inquiring for "Mrs. Parker," were
introduced to a young girl of attractive appearance to whom they
delivered their unwelcome message. Mrs. Parker seemed overwhelmed at the
news and strongly asserted her confidence in her husband's innocence of
any wrong-doing. Having performed their errand the officers departed.

A certain ineradicable jealousy has always existed between the
plain-clothes men of the various precincts and the sleuths attached to
the Central Office, and in this instance the precinct men, having gained
the credit for the arrest, it did not occur to them as necessary to
communicate the knowledge of their acquaintance with Mrs. Parker to
Detective Sergeants Peabody and Clark, originally assigned at
Headquarters to investigate the case.

It seemed, however, to Peabody very unlikely that Parker had conducted
his operations alone, and he therefore at once inquired at the Tombs
what character of visitors came to see the prisoner. The gateman replied
that as yet none had arrived. At that very instant a young girl stepped
to the wicket and asked if she could be allowed to see Mr. James Parker.
It took the detective but a moment to run across to the Criminal Courts
Building and to telephone the warden to detain her temporarily and then
to refuse her request. Five minutes later the girl emerged
disconsolately from the Tombs and boarded a car going uptown. Peabody
followed her to 110 West Thirty-eighth Street, not for an instant
supposing that the girl herself could be the forger, but believing that
possibly through her he might learn of other members of the gang and
secure additional evidence against Parker himself.

Of course, no intelligent person to-day supposes that, outside of Sir
Conan Doyle's interesting novels, detectives seek the baffling criminal
by means of analyzing cigar butts, magnifying thumb marks or
specializing in the various perfumes in favor among the fair sex, or by
any of those complicated, brain fatiguing processes of ratiocination
indulged in by our old friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. There are still,
however, genuine detectives, and some of them are to be found upon the
New York police force. The magnifying glass is not one of the ordinary
tools of the professional sleuth, and if he carries a pistol at all it
is because the police rules require it, while those cases may be
numbered upon the fingers of two hands where his own hair and whiskers
are not entirely sufficient for his purposes in the course of his
professional career.

The next morning Peabody donned the most disreputable suit in his
wardrobe, neglected his ordinary visit to the barber, and called at 110
West Thirty-eighth Street, being, of course, at this time entirely
unaware of the fact that the girl was Parker's wife. He found her
sitting in a rocking chair in a comfortable, well-furnished room, and
reading a magazine. Assuming an expression of sheepish inanity he
informed her that he was an old pal of "Jim's" who had been so
unfortunate as to be locked up in the same cell with him at
Headquarters, and that the latter was in desperate need of morphine.
That Parker was an habitual user of the drug could be easily seen from
the most casual inspection, but that it would prove an open sesame to
the girl's confidence was, as the detective afterward testified, "a
hundred-to-one shot."

"Poor Jim!" exclaimed the girl. "Couldn't you smuggle some into the
Tombs for him?"

Peabody took the hint. Of course he could. It would be a hard job--those
turnkeys were so suspicious. But _he_ could do it for her if anybody
could. He rambled on, telling his experiences with Parker in the past,
how he had been in Elmira Reformatory and elsewhere with him, and
gaining each moment valuable information from the girl's exclamations,
questions, and expression. He soon learned that she was Parker's wife,
that they were living in comparative comfort, and that she was an
exceedingly clever and well-educated woman, but she said nothing during
the conversation which would indicate that she knew anything of her
husband's offenses or of any persons connected with them.

After a few moments the girl slipped on her coat and hat and the two
started down to the Tombs, where, by prearrangement with the officials,
the detective succeeded in convincing her that he had been able to send
in to her husband a small hypodermic syringe (commonly called "the
needles") which she had purchased at a neighboring drug store.

The apparent success of this undertaking put Mrs. Parker in excellent
humor and she invited the supposed crook to breakfast with her at the
Broadway Central Hotel. So far, it will be observed, Peabody had
accomplished practically nothing. At breakfast the girl inquired of her
companion what his particular "graft" was, to which he replied that he
was an expert "second story man," and then proceeded to indulge his
imagination in accounts of bold robberies in the brown stone districts
and clever "tricks" in other cities, which left Mrs. Parker in no doubt
but that her companion was an expert "gun" of long experience.

Then he took, as he expressed it, "another chance."

"Jim wanted me to tell you to put the gang 'wise,'" said he.

The girl looked at him sharply and contracted her brows.

"Gang?" she exclaimed. "What gang? Oh, perhaps he meant 'Dutch' and
'Sweeney.'"

Peabody bit his lip. He had had a close call.

"Don't know," he replied, "he didn't say who they were--just to put them
'wise.'"

A second time the detective had made a lucky hit, for Mrs. Parker
suddenly laid aside all pretense and asked:

"Do you want to make a lot of money?"

Peabody allowed that he did.

"Do you know what they have got Jim for?" asked the girl.

"'Phoney' paper, wasn't it?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Parker, "but Jim didn't write those checks. I wrote
them myself. If you want to go in with me, we can earn enough money to
get Jim out and you can do a good turn for yourself besides."

The detective's blood leaped in his veins but he held himself under
control as well as he could and answered indifferently.

"I guess not. I never met a woman that was very good at that sort of
game."

"Oh, you don't know _me_," she persisted. "Why, I can copy anything in a
few moments--really I can."

"Too dangerous," remarked Peabody. "I might get settled for ten years."

"No, you wouldn't," she continued. "It's the easiest thing in the world.
All you have to do is to pick the mail out of some box on a corner. I
can show you how with a copper wire and a little piece of wax--and you
are sure to find among the letters somebody's check in payment of a
bill. There at once you have the bank, and the signature. Then all you
have to do is to write a letter to the bank asking for a new check book,
saying yours is used up, and sign the name that appears on the check. If
you can fool the cashier into giving your messenger a check book you can
gamble pretty safely on his paying a check signed with the same name. In
that way, you see, you can get all the blank checks you need and test
the cashier's watchfulness at the same time. It's too easy. The only
thing you have to look out for is not to overdraw the account. Still,
you find so many checks in the mail that you can usually choose
somebody's account that will stand the strain. Do you know, I have made
_hundreds_ of checks and the banks have certified every single one!"

Peabody laughed good naturedly. Things were looking up a bit.

"What do you think I am, anyhow?" he asked. "I must look like a
'come-on.'"

"I'm giving it to you straight," she said simply. "After you have made
out a good fat check, then you go to a store, buy something, tell them
to forward the check to the bank for certification, and that you'll send
for the goods and the change the next day. The bank always certifies the
check, and you get the money."

"Not always," said Peabody with a grin.

"No, not always," acquiesced Mrs. Parker. "But Jim and I have been
averaging over a hundred dollars a day for months."

"Good graft, all right," assented the detective. "But how does the one
who lays down the check identify himself? For instance, suppose I go
into Tiffany's and pick out a diamond, and say I'm Mr. John Smith, of
100 West One Hundredth Street, and the floorwalker says, 'Sorry, Mr.
Smith, but we don't know you,' what then?"

"Just flash a few letters on him," said the girl. "Letters and
envelopes."

"Where do you get 'em?" asked Peabody.

"Just write them, silly, and send them to yourself through the mail."

"That's all right," retorted the "second story man." "But how can I mail
myself a letter to 100 West One Hundredth Street _when I don't live
there_?"

Mrs. Parker smiled in a superior manner.

"I'm glad I can put you wise to a new game, I invented it myself. You
want letters of identification? In different names and addresses on
different days? Very good. Buy a bundle of stamped envelopes and write
your own name and address on them _in pencil_. When they arrive rub off
the pencil address. Then if you want to be John Smith of 100 West One
Hundredth Street, or anybody else, just address the cancelled envelope
_in ink_."

"Mabel," said Peabody with admiration, "you've got the 'gray matter' all
right. You can have _me_, if you can deliver the rest of the goods."

[Illustration: FIG.3.--A letter-head frill of Mabel Parker's.]

"There's still another little frill," she continued, pleased at his
compliment, "if you want to do the thing in style. Maybe you will find a
letter or bill head in the mail at the same time that you get your
sample check. If you do, you can have it copied and write your request
for the check book and your order for the goods on paper printed
exactly like it. That gives a sort of final touch, you know. I remember
we did that with a dentist named Budd, at 137 West Twenty-second
Street." (Fig. 3.)

"You've got all the rest whipped to a standstill," cried Peabody.

"Well, just come over to the room and I'll show you something worth
while," exclaimed the girl, getting up and paying their bill.

"Now," said she, when they were safely at no West Thirty-eighth Street,
and she had closed the door of the room and drawn Peabody to a desk in
the bay window. "Here's my regular handwriting."

She pulled towards her a pad which lay open upon the desk and wrote in a
fair, round hand:

"Mrs. James D. Singley." (Fig. 4.)

"This," she continued, changing her slant and dashing off a queer
feminine scrawl, "is the signature we fooled the Lincoln National Bank
with--Miss Kauser's, you know. And this," she added a moment later,
adopting a stiff, shaky, hump-backed orthography, "is the signature that
got poor Jim into all this trouble," and she inscribed twice upon the
paper the name "E. Bierstadt." "Poor Jim!" she added to herself.

"By George, Mabel," remarked the detective, "you're a wonder! See if
you can copy _my_ name." And Peabody wrote the assumed name of William
Hickey, first with a stub and then with a fine point, both of which
signatures she copied like a flash, in each case, however, being guilty
of the lapse of spelling the word Willia_m_ "Willia_n_."

The pad now contained more than enough evidence to convict twenty women,
and Peabody, with the remark, "You don't want to leave this kind of
thing lying around, Mabel," pretended to tear the page up, but
substituted a blank sheet in its place and smuggled the precious bit of
paper into his pocket.

"Yes, I'll go into business with you,--sure I will!" said Peabody.

"And we'll get enough money to set Jim free!" exclaimed the girl.

They were now fast friends, and it was agreed that "Hickey" should go
and make himself presentable, after which they would dine at some
restaurant and then sample a convenient mail box. Meantime Peabody
telephoned to Headquarters, and when the two set out for dinner at six
o'clock the supposed "Hickey" was stopped on Broadway by Detective
Sergeant Clark.

"What are you doing here in New York?" demanded Clark. "Didn't I give
you six hours to fly the coop? And who's this woman?"

[Illustration: Fig. 4--The upper signature is an example of Mabel
Parker's regular penmanship; the next two are forgeries from memory; and
the last is a dashing imitation of her companion's handwriting.]

"I was going, Clark, honest I was," whined "Hickey," "and this lady's
all right--she hasn't done a thing."

"Well, I guess I'll have to lock you up at Headquarters for the night,"
said Clark roughly. "The girl can go."

"Oh, Mr. Clark, do come and have dinner with us first!" exclaimed Mrs.
Parker. "Mr. Hickey has been very good to me, and he hasn't had anything
to eat for ever so long."

"Don't care if I do," said Clark. "I guess I can put up with the company
if the board is good."

The three entered the Raleigh Hotel and ordered a substantial meal. With
the arrival of dessert, however, the girl became uneasy, and apparently
fearing arrest herself, slipped a roll of bills under the table to
"Hickey" and whispered to him to keep it for her. The detective,
thinking that the farce had gone far enough, threw the money on the
table and asked Clark to count it, at the same tune telling Mrs. Parker
that she was in custody. The girl turned white, uttered a little scream,
and then, regaining her self-possession, remarked as nonchalently as you
please:

"Well, clever as you think you are, you have destroyed the only evidence
against me--my handwriting."

"Not much," remarked Peabody, producing the sheet of paper.

The girl saw that the game was up and made a mock bow to the two
detectives.

"I take off my hat to the New York police," said she.

At this time, apparently, no thought of denying her guilt had entered
her mind, and at the station house she talked freely to the sergeant,
the matron and the various newspaper men who were present, even drawing
pictures of herself upon loose sheets of paper and signing her name,
apparently rather enjoying the notoriety which her arrest had
occasioned. A thorough search of her apartment was now made with the
result that several sheets of paper were found there bearing what were
evidently practice signatures of the name of Alice Kauser. (Fig. 5.)
Evidence was also obtained showing that, on the day following her
husband's arrest, she had destroyed large quantities of blank check
books and blank checks.

Upon the trial of Mrs. Parker the hand-writing experts testified that
the Bierstadt and Kauser signatures were so perfect that it would be
difficult to state that they were not originals. The Parker woman was
what is sometimes known as a "free hand" forger; she never traced
anything, and as her forgeries were written by a muscular imitation of
the pen movement of the writer of the genuine signature they were almost
impossible of detection. When Albert T. Patrick forged the signature of
old Mr. Rice to the spurious will of 1900 and to the checks for $25,000,
$65,000 and $135,000 upon Swenson's bank and the Fifth Avenue Trust Co.,
the forgeries were easily detected from the fact that as Patrick had
_traced_ them they were _all almost exactly alike and practically could
be superimposed one upon another, line for line, dot for dot_.[1]

[Footnote 1: See _Infra_, p. 304.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Practice signatures of the name of Alice
Kauser.]

Mabel Parker's early history is shrouded in a certain amount of
obscurity, but there is reason to believe that she was the offspring of
respectable laboring people who turned her over, while she was still an
infant, to a Mr. and Mrs. Prentice, instructors in physical culture in
the public schools, first of St. Louis and later of St. Paul, Minnesota.
As a child, and afterwards as a young girl, she exhibited great
precocity and a considerable amount of real ability in drawing and in
English composition, but her very cleverness and versatility were the
means of her becoming much more sophisticated than most young women of
her age, with the result that while still in her teens she gave her
adopted parents ground for considerable uneasiness. Accordingly they
decided to place her for the next few years in a convent near New York.
By this time she had attained a high degree of proficiency in writing
short stories and miscellaneous articles, which she illustrated herself,
for the papers and inferior magazines. Convent life proved very dull for
this young lady, and accordingly one dark evening, she made her exit
from the cloister by means of a conveniently located window.

Waiting for her in the grounds below was James Parker, twenty-seven
years old, already of a large criminal experience, although never yet
convicted of crime. The two made their way to New York, were married,
and the girl entered upon her career. Her husband, whose real name was
James D. Singley, was a professional Tenderloin crook, ready to turn his
hand to any sort of cheap crime to satisfy his appetites and support
life; the money easily secured was easily spent, and Singley, at the
time of his marriage, was addicted to most of the vices common to the
habitués of the under world. His worst enemy was the morphine habit and
from her husband Mrs. Singley speedily learned the use of the drug. At
this time Mabel Prentice-Parker-Singley was about five feet two inches
in height, weighing not more than 105 or 110 pounds, slender to
girlishness and showing no maturity save in her face, which, with its
high color, brilliant blue eyes, and her yellow hair, often led those
who glanced at her casually to think her good looking. Further
inspection, however, revealed a fox-like expression, an irregularity in
the position of the eyes, a hardness in the lines of the mouth and a
flatness of the nose which belied the first impression. This was
particularly true when, after being deprived of morphine in the Tombs,
her ordinary high color gave way at her second trial to a waxy paleness
of complexion. But the story of her career in the Tenderloin would
prove neither profitable nor attractive.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--The check on which the indictment for forgery
was brought.]

The subsequent history of the Parker case is a startling example of the
credulity of the ordinary jury. The evidence secured was absolutely
conclusive, but unfortunately juries are generally unwilling to take the
uncorroborated word of a policeman against that of a
defendant--particularly if the defendant be a young and pretty woman.
Here at the very outset was a complete confession on the part of Mrs.
Parker, supplemented by illustrations from her own pen of what she could
do. Comparison showed that the signatures she had written without a
model upon the Peabody sheet were identical with those upon the forged
checks (Fig. 6) and with Mr. Bierstadt's and Miss Kauser's handwriting.
When Mrs. Parker's case, therefore, came on for pleading, her counsel,
probably because they could think of nothing else to do, entered a plea
of _insanity_. It was also intimated that the young woman would probably
plead guilty, and the case was therefore placed upon the calendar and
moved for trial without much preparation on the part of the prosecution.
Instead of this young person confessing her guilt, however, she amused
herself by ogling the jury and drawing pictures of the Court, the
District Attorney and the various witnesses.

Probably no more extraordinary scene was ever beheld in a court of law
than that exhibited by Part II of the General Sessions upon Mabel
Parker's first trial for forgery. Attired in a sky blue dress and
picture hat, with new white gloves, she sat jauntily by the side of her
counsel throughout the proceedings toying with her pen and pencil and in
the very presence of the jury copying handwriting which was given her
for that purpose by various members of the yellow press who crowded
close behind the rail. From time to time she would dash off an aphorism
or a paragraph in regard to the trial which she handed to a reporter. If
satisfactory this was elaborated and sometimes even illustrated by her
for the evening edition of his paper.

The Assistant District Attorney complained that this was clearly a
contempt of court, particularly as the defendant had drawn a picture
not only of himself, but of the presiding justice and a witness, which
had appeared in one of the evening papers. The Court, however, did not
see that anything could be done about it and the girl openly continued
her literary and artistic recreation. The Court itself was not a little
amused at the actions of the defendant, and when Detective Peabody was
called to the stand the general hilarity had reached such a pitch that
he was unable to give his testimony without smiling. The natural result,
therefore, at the first trial, was that the detective succeeded in
giving the unqualified impression that he was drawing the long bow in a
most preposterous fashion.

At the conclusion of the People's case the evidence that Mrs. Parker had
forged the checks amounted simply to this: That an officer who was
greatly interested in her conviction had sworn to a most astonishing
series of facts from which the jury must infer that this exceedingly
astute young person had not only been entirely and completely deceived
by a detective, but also that at almost their first meeting she had
confessed to him in detail the history of her crimes. Practically the
only other evidence tending to corroborate his story were a few
admissions of a similar character made by her to newspaper men, matrons
and officers at the police station. Unless the jury were to believe that
Mrs. Parker had actually written the signatures on "the Peabody sheet"
there was no evidence that she was the actual forger; hence upon
Peabody's word alone depended the verdict of the jury. The trouble with
the case was that it was _too_ strong, _too_ good, to be entirely
credible, and had there been no defense it is exceedingly probable that
the trial would have resulted in an acquittal, since the prosecution had
elected to go to the jury upon the question of whether or not the
defendant had actually signed the checks herself.

Mrs. Parker, however, had withdrawn her plea of insanity and determined
to put in a defense, which proved in its turn to be even more
extraordinary than the case against her. This, in brief, was to the
effect that she had known Peabody to be a police officer all along, but
that it had occurred to her that if she could deceive him into believing
that it was she _herself_ who had committed the forgeries her husband
might get off, and that later she might in turn establish her own
innocence. She had therefore hastily scratched her name on the top of a
sheet already containing her husband's handwriting and had told Peabody
that the signatures had been written by herself. That the sheet had been
written in the officer's presence she declared to be a pure invention
on his part to secure her conviction. She told her extremely illogical
story with a certain winsome naïveté which carried an air of
semi-probability with it. From her deportment on the stand one would
have taken her for a boarding school miss who in some inconsequent
fashion had got mixed up in a frolic for which no really logical
explanation could be given.

Then the door in the back of the court room opened and James Parker was
led to the bar, where in the presence of the jury he pleaded guilty to
the forgery of the very signature for which his wife was standing trial.
(Kauser check, Fig. 6.) He was then sworn as a witness, took the stand
and testified that _he_ had written all the forged signatures to the
checks, including the signatures upon "the Peabody sheet."

The District Attorney found himself in an embarrassing position. If
Parker was the forger, why not challenge him to write the forged
signatures upon the witness stand and thus to prove his alleged capacity
for so doing? The obvious objection to this was that Parker, in
anticipation of this test, had probably been practicing the signature in
the Tombs for months. On the other hand if the District Attorney did not
challenge him to write the signatures, the defense would argue that he
was afraid to do so, and that as Parker had sworn himself to be the
forger it was not incumbent upon the defense to prove it further--that
that was a matter for cross examination.

With considerable hesitation the prosecuting attorney asked Parker to
write the Kauser signature, which was the one set forth in the
indictment charging the forgery, and after much backing and filling on
the part of the witness, who ingeniously complained that he was in a bad
nervous condition owing to lack of morphine, in consequence of which his
hand trembled and he was in no condition to write forgeries, the latter
took his pen and managed to make a very fair copy of the Kauser
signature from memory, good enough in fact to warrant a jury in forming
the conclusion that he was in fact the forger. (Fig. 7.) This closed the
case.

The defense claimed that it was clear that James Parker was the forger,
since he had admitted it in open court, pleaded guilty to the indictment
and proved that he had the capacity. The prosecution, upon the other
hand, argued that the evidence was conclusive that the defendant herself
was the writer of the check. The whole thing boiled down to whether or
not the jury was going to believe that Mrs. Parker had written "the
Peabody sheet" in the presence of the detective, when her husband
claimed that, with the exception of Mabel's signature, he had done it
himself and carelessly left the paper in his desk in the room.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Parker's copy of the signature of Alice Kauser,
made in court in an attempt to shield his wife.]

The prosecuting attorney was at his wits' end for an argument to meet
the fact that Parker had written a sample forgery of the Kauser
signature before the very eyes of the jury. He found it at last in an
offer on his own part in open court during his "summing up" to write for
the jury from memory a better forgery of the Kauser signature than that
written by Parker himself, and thus to show how simple a matter it was
to learn to do so. He had taken up his pen and was about to give a
sample of his handiwork in this respect when the defendant grasped her
counsel's arm and whispered: "For God's sake, don't let him do it!"
whereupon the lawyer arose and objected, saying that such evidence was
improper, as the case was closed. As might have been expected under the
circumstances, considering the blunders of the prosecution and the
ingenuous appearance of the defendant, the trial ended in a
disagreement, the jury standing eight to four for acquittal.

The District Attorney's office now took up a thorough investigation of
the case, with the result that on a second prosecution Mrs. Parker was
confronted with a mass of evidence which it was impossible for her to
refute. A boy named Wallace Sweeney, sentenced to the Elmira
Reformatory, was found to have been an active accomplice of the Parkers
for several years, and he was accordingly brought down to New York,
where he gave a complete history of his relations with them. His story
proved beyond any doubt that Mrs. Parker was the forger of the checks in
the possession of the District Attorney, and of many others beside, some
of them for very large amounts. The evidence of Sweeney was of itself
quite sufficient to warrant a conviction. To make assurance doubly sure,
however, the District Attorney upon the second trial moved a new
indictment, setting forth as the forgery a check signed "E. Bierstadt,"
so that when Parker took the stand, as he had done in the former trial
and testified that he was the forger, he found himself unable to write
this new signature, and hence his testimony went for nothing.

But even the testimony of Sweeney was that of an accomplice, requiring
corroboration, while that of Peabody remained the evidence of "a mere
policeman," eager to convict the defendant and "add another scalp to his
official belt." With an extraordinary accumulation of evidence the case
hinged on the veracity of these two men, to which was opposed the denial
of the defendant and her husband. It is an interesting fact that in the
final analysis of the case the jury were compelled to determine the
issue by evidence entirely documentary in character. It is also an
illustration of what tiny facts stamp whole masses of testimony as true
or false.

On her examination Mrs. Parker had sworn among other things: (1) That
she had no knowledge of the envelope, the back of which had been used by
Parker for the purpose of directing Rogers, Peet & Co. to deliver the
clothes and money to his messenger--and, of course, that the words "Mr.
Geo. B. Lang" were not in her handwriting. This was one of the envelopes
claimed by the prosecution to have been originally addressed in pencil
and sent to themselves by the Parkers through the mail for this precise
purpose. (2) That she had never seen the "Kauser practice sheets," and
that the words "Alice Kauser," repeated hundreds of times thereon, were
not in her handwriting. For some reason unknown to the District
Attorney, however, she admitted having written the words "I am upstairs
in the bath-room" upon a similar sheet, but claimed that at the time
this was done the reverse of the paper was entirely blank.

Microscopic examination showed that among the words "Alice" and "Kauser"
on the practice sheets some one had written a capital "M." One of the
legs of the "M" crossed and was superimposed upon a letter in the word
"Alice." Hence, whoever wrote the "M" knew what was on the practice
sheet. An enlargement of this "M" and a comparison of it with the "M" in
the defendant's signature to her formal examination in the police court,
with the "M" in "_Mr._" in the address on the envelope and with that in
the "Mrs." on the "Peabody sheet," rendered it obvious that they were
all written by one and the same hand. Therefore it was clear that the
defendant was familiar with the contents of the practice sheets (Fig.
8.), even if she had not written them herself and had not told the truth
in this regard.

Moreover, it was fairly easy to see that the same hand that had written
the words "I am upstairs in the bath-room" upon the second practice
sheet had at the same time and with the same pen written the rest of the
sheet. This was clearly perceptible on examining the "e's" and "a's."

A comparison of the address "Mr. Geo. B. Lang" (on Fig. 1) with the name
Mrs. James D. Singley (on Fig. 4) also shows clearly that one and the
same person wrote them both. And to the accuracy of all these
self-evident propositions a leading handwriting expert in New York added
his unqualified opinion.

Thus, but for a little carelessness in failing to destroy odd scraps of
paper and to disguise her penmanship which it seemed to her quite
unnecessary to do, as in the address of the "Lang" envelope, Mrs. Parker
might well have gone free after all.

It is impossible to describe all the varied dramatic features of this
interesting case. No one who was present is likely to forget the
impression made by the defendant at her second trial, when in defiance
of overwhelming proof she still struggled to vindicate herself.

Her counsel contended throughout the trial that she was a hitherto
innocent young woman led astray and started upon a criminal career by a
rascally husband, whom she still loved devotedly and for whose sake
she had prepared to confess herself a criminal. That James Parker
introduced his wife to a life of crime there can be no doubt, but that
she had a natural predilection for it must be equally obvious. It is
probably true that Mabel Parker's affection for her convict husband was
unfeigned and deep. The natural repugnance of the American jury for
convicting a woman was shown when in spite of the overwhelming proof
upon the Parker woman's second trial the jury remained out eight hours
and then found her guilty of "uttering only," with a strong
recommendation for mercy. She was sentenced to the Bedford Reformatory.

[Illustration: Fig. 8--One of the loose sheets upon which Mabel Parker
illustrated her methods and her skill as a penman to the supposed
ex-convict "Hickey."]




II

Five Hundred Million Dollars


This story, which ends in New York, begins in the Department of the
Gironde at the town of Monségur, seventy-five kilometers from Bordeaux,
in the little vineyard of Monsieur Emile Lapierre--"landowner." In 1901
Lapierre was a happy and contented man, making a good living out of his
modest farm. To-day he is--well, if you understand the language of the
Gironde, he will tell you with a shrug of his broad shoulders that he
might have been a Monte Cristo had not _le bon Dieu_ willed it
otherwise. For did he not almost have five hundred million dollars--two
and a half _milliards_ of francs--in his very hands? _Hein_? But he did!
Does M'sieu' have doubts? Nevertheless it is all true. _C'est trop
vrai_! Is M'sieu' tired? And would he care to hear the story? There is a
comfortable chair _sous le grand arbre_ in front of the veranda, and
Madame will give M'sieu' a glass of wine from the presses, across the
road. Yes, it _is_ good wine, but there is little profit in it, when one
thinks in _milliards_.

The landowner lights his pipe and seats himself cross-legged against the
trunk of the big chestnut. Back of the house the vineyard slopes away
toward the distant woods in straight, green, trellised alleys. A dim
haze hangs over the landscape sleeping so quietly in the midsummer
afternoon. Down the road comes heavily, creaking and swaying, a wain
loaded with a huge tower of empty casks and drawn by two oxen, their
heads swinging to the dust. Yes, it is hard to _comprendre_ twenty-five
hundred million francs.

It was this way. Madame Lapierre was a Tessier of Bordeaux--an ancient
_bourgeois_ family, and very proud indeed of being _bourgeois_. You can
see her passing and repassing the window if you watch carefully the
kitchen, where she is superintending dinner. The Tessiers have always
lived in Bordeaux and they are connected by marriage with
everybody--from the blacksmith up to the Mayor's notary. Once a Tessier
was Mayor himself. Years and years ago Madame's great-uncle Jean had
emigrated to America, and from time to time vague rumors of the wealth
he had achieved in the new country reached the ears of his
relatives--but no direct word ever came.

Then one hot day--like this--appeared M. le Général. He came walking
down the road in the dust from the _gare_, in his tall silk hat and
frock coat and gold-headed cane, and stopped before the house to ask if
one of the descendants of a certain Jean Tessier did not live
hereabouts. He was fat and red-faced, and he perspired, but--_Dieu_!--he
was _distingué_, and he had an order in his buttonhole. Madame Lapierre,
who came out to answer his question, knew at once that he was an
aristocrat.

Ah! was she herself the grandniece of Jean Tessier? Then, Heaven be
thanked! the General's toilsome journey was ended. He had much to tell
them--when he should be rested. He removed the silk hat and mopped his
shining forehead. He must introduce himself that he might have credit
with Madame, else she might hardly listen to his story, for there had
never been a tale like it before since the world was. Let him present
himself--M. le Général Pedro Suarez de Moreno, Count de Tinoco and
Marquis de la d'Essa. Although one was fatigued it refreshed one to be
the bearer of good news, and such was his mission. Let Madame prepare
herself to hear. Yes, it would be proper for her to call M'sieu', her
husband, that he might participate.

Over a draft of this same vintage M. le Général imparted to them the
secret. Lapierre laughs and shrugs his shoulders as he recalls the
scene--the apoplectic General, with the glass of wine in one hand,
waving the other grandiloquently as he described the wealth about to
descend upon them.

Yes, the General must begin at the beginning, for it was a long story.
First, as to himself and how he came to know of the affair. It had been
on his return from the Philippines after the surrender of Manila, where
he had been in command of the armies of Spain, that he had paused for
repose in New York and had first learned of the Tessier inheritance. The
precise manner of his discovery was left somewhat indefinite, but the
Lapierres were not particular. So many distinguished persons had played
a part in the drama that the recital left but a vague impression as to
individuals. A certain Madame Luchia, widow of one Roquefailaire, whom
he had accidentally met, had apparently been the instrument of
Providence in disclosing the history of Jean Tessier to the General. She
herself had been wronged by the villains and knew all the secrets of the
conspirators. But she had waited for a suitable opportunity to speak.
Jean Tessier had died possessed of properties which to-day, seventy
years after, were worth in the neighborhood of five hundred million
dollars! The General paused for the effect, solemnly nodding his head
at his astounded auditors in affirmance. Yes, it was even so!

Five hundred million dollars! No more--and no less! Then he once more
took up the thread of his narrative.

Tessier's lands, originally farms, were to-day occupied by huge
_magasins_, government buildings, palaces and hotels. He had been a
frugal, hardworking, far-seeing man of affairs whose money had doubled
itself year by year. Then had appeared one Emmeric Lespinasse, a
Frenchman, also from Bordeaux, who had plotted to rob him of his estate,
and the better to accomplish his purpose had entered the millionaire's
employ. When Tessier died, in 1884, Lespinasse had seized his papers and
the property, destroyed his will, dispersed the clerks, secretaries,
"notaries" and accountants of the deceased, and quietly got rid of such
persons as stood actively in his way. The great wealth thus acquired had
enabled him to defy those who knew that he was not entitled to the
fortune, and that the real heirs were in far-away France.

He had prospered like the bay tree. His daughter, Marie Louise, had
married a distinguished English nobleman, and his sons were now the
richest men in America. Yet they lived with the sword of Damocles over
their heads, suspended by a single thread, and the General had the knife
wherewith to cut it. Lespinasse, among other things, had caused the
murder of the husband of Madame Luchia, and she was in possession of
conclusive proofs which, at the proper moment, could be produced to
convict him of his many crimes, or at least to oust his sons and
daughter from the stolen inheritance.

It was a weird, bizarre nightmare, no more astonishing than the novels
the Lapierres had read. America, they understood, was a land where the
rivers were full of gold--a country of bronzed and handsome savages, of
birds of paradise and ruined Aztec temples, of vast tobacco fields and
plantations of thousands of acres of cotton cultivated by naked slaves,
while one lay in a hammock fanned by a "_petite nègre_" and languidly
sipped _eau sucrée_. The General had made it all seem very, very real.
At the weak spots he had gesticulated convincingly and digressed upon
his health. Then, while the narrative was fresh and he might have had to
answer questions about it had he given his listeners opportunity to ask
them, he had hastily told of a visit to Tunis. There he had by chance
encountered Marie Louise, the daughter of Lespinasse, living with her
noble husband in a "handsome Oriental palace," had been invited to dine
with them and had afterward seized the occasion while "walking in the
garden" with the lady to disclose the fact that he knew all, and had it
in his power to ruin them as impostors. Marie Louise had been
frightfully angry, but afterward her better nature had suggested the
return of the inheritance, or at least a hundred millions or so, to the
rightful heirs. The General had left the palace believing all would be
well, and had retired to Paris to await letters and further
developments, but these had never come, and he had discovered that he
had been deceived. It had been merely a ruse on the part of the woman
and her husband to gain time, and now every step that he took was dogged
by spies in the pay of the Lespinasses, who followed him everywhere. But
the right would triumph! He had sworn to run the conspiracy to earth!

Many hours were consumed in the telling of the story. The Lapierres were
enchanted. More than that, they were convinced--persuaded that they were
heirs to the richest inheritance in the world, which comprised most of
the great American city of New York.

Persons who were going to participate in twenty-five hundred millions of
francs could afford to be hospitable. M. le Général stayed to dinner. A
list of the heirs living in or near Bordeaux was made out with the share
of each in the inheritance carefully computed. Madame Lapierre's was
only fifty million dollars--but still that was almost enough to buy up
Bordeaux. And they could purchase Monségur as a country place. The
General spoke of a stable of automobiles by means of which the journey
from Bordeaux to the farm could be accomplished in the space of an hour.

That night the good man and his wife scarcely closed their eyes, and the
next day, accompanied by the General, they visited Bordeaux and the
neighboring towns and broke the news gently to the other heirs. There
was M. Pettit, the veterinary at Mormand; Tessier, the blacksmith in
Bordeaux; M. Pelegue and his wife, M. Rozier, M. Cazenava and his son,
and others. One branch of the family lived in Brazil--the Joubin Frères
and one Tessier of "Saint Bezeille." These last had to be reached by
post, a most annoyingly slow means of communication--_mais que
voulez-vous_?

Those were busy days in and around Bordeaux, and the General was the
centre of attraction. What a splendid figure he cut in his tall silk hat
and gold-headed cane! But they were all very careful to let no inkling
of their good fortune leak out, for it might spoil everything--give some
opportunity to the spies of the impostor Lespinasse to fabricate new
chains of title or to prepare for a defense of the fortune. The little
blacksmith, being addicted to white wine, was the only one who did not
keep his head. But even he managed to hold his mouth sufficiently shut.
A family council was held; M. le Général was given full power of
attorney to act for all the heirs; and each having contributed an
insignificant sum toward his necessary expenses, they waved him a
tremulous good-by as he stood on the upper deck of the steamer, his silk
hat in one hand and his gold-headed cane in the other.

"He will get it, if any one can!" cried the blacksmith enthusiastically.

"It is as good as ours already!" echoed Rozier.

"My friends," Madame Lapierre assured them, "a General of the armies of
Spain and a Chevalier of the Order of Jiminez would die rather than fail
in his mission. Besides," she added, her French blood asserting itself,
"he is to get nineteen per cent. of the inheritance!"

As long as the steamer remained in sight the General waved
encouragingly, his hat raised toward Heaven.

"_Mais_," says Lapierre, with another shrug as he lights his pipe, "even
you would have believed him. _Vraiment_! He would have deceived the
devil himself!"

Up the road the wain comes creaking back again. A crow flaps across the
vineyard, laughing scornfully at good M. Lapierre, and you yourself
wonder if such a thing could have been possible.

On a rainy afternoon in March, 1905, there entered the writer's office
in the Criminal Courts Building, New York City, a ruddy, stoutly-built
man, dressed in homespun garments, accompanied by an attractive and
vivacious little woman, who, while unable to speak a single word of
English, had no difficulty in making it obvious that she had a story to
tell of the most vital importance. An interpreter was soon found and the
names of the visitors disclosed. The lady, who did the talking for both
of them, introduced herself as Madame Valoie Reddon, of Bordeaux, and
her companion as M. Emile Lapierre, landowner, of Monségur, They had
come, she explained, from France to take possession of the inheritance
Tessier. She was a personal friend of Madame Lapierre, and as the
Tessiers had exhausted all their money in paying the expenses connected
with securing the fortune, she, being a well-to-do gentlewoman, had come
to their assistance, and for the last few months had been financing the
enterprise on a fifteen per cent. basis. If Madame Lapierre was to
receive ten million dollars, then, to be sure, Madame Reddon would have
one million five hundred thouand dollars; but, of course, it was not for
the money, but on account of friendship, that she was aiding them. I
would understand that three years had elapsed since a certain
distinguished General Pedro Suarez de Moreno had disclosed to the
Lapierres the fact that Madame was the heiress to the greatest estate in
America. M. Lapierre solemnly nodded confirmation as the lady proceeded.
It was the one subject talked about in the Gironde and Bordeaux--that
is, among those who had been fortunate enough to learn anything about
it. And for three years the Tessiers, their wives, their sons' wives,
and their connections, had been waiting to receive the glad tidings that
the conspirators had been put to rout and the rightful heirs reinstated.

It was some time before the good lady succeeded in convincing her
auditor that such a ridiculous fraud as she described had actually been
perpetrated. But there was M. Lapierre and there was Madame Valerie
Reddon sitting in the office as living witnesses to the fact. What
wonderful person could this General Moreno be, who could hypnotize a
hard-headed, thrifty farmer from the Gironde and a clever little French
woman from Bordeaux into believing that five hundred million dollars was
waiting for them on the other side of the Atlantic! I expressed my
surprise. Madame Reddon shrugged her sloping shoulders. Well, perhaps it
was hard for M'sieu' to believe, but then there were the proofs, the
documents, the _dossier_, and, most of all, there was the General
himself. Oh' if M'sieu' could see the General in his tall silk hat and
gold-headed cane!

I asked for the documents. Madame Reddon opened her bag and produced a
package of nearly one hundred letters, written in a fine Spanish hand.
Oh! he had been a wonderful writer, this gorgeous Count de Tinoco and
Marquis de la d'Essa. She had met him herself when he had been in
Bordeaux. Madame Lapierre had introduced him to her, and she had heard
him talk. How beautifully he talked! The stories of his experiences as
General of the armies of Spain under Don Carlos and as Brigadier-General
in the Philippines were as fascinating as a romance. But it was his
letters which had really led her to take a personal interest in the
undertaking. With a sigh Madame Valoie untied the little blue ribbon
which bound up the pitiful little history. If M'sieu' would be good
enough to grant the time she would begin at the beginning. Here was his
first letter written after the General's return to America:

    _June 25, '02._

    My dear M. Lapierre:

    We have had a terrible voyage. A horrible storm broke loose in
    mid-ocean, endangering all our lives.... The waves, like mountains,
    threatened every instant to swallow us all; the spectacle was
    terrifying. I fell from the top of the stairs 'way down into the
    hole (_sic_), hurting my right leg in the centre of the tibia bone.
    The ship's doctor, who is nothing but a stupid fool, left me
    helpless almost the entire day.... If ever I should have dreamt what
    would occur to me in this trip, not for all the gold in the world
    would I have embarked. But, now that I am here, I shall not retreat
    before any obstacle, in order to arrive at the fulfillment of my
    enterprise, and no matter at what cost, even at that of my life. It
    is necessary that I succeed--my pride demands it. Those who are in
    the right shall triumph, that is sure.... In the mean time, will you
    kindly give my regards to Madame and your son, and all of your
    relatives, not forgetting your good old servant. Squeezing your hand
    cordially, I bid you adieu.

    Your devoted,

    Pedro S. de Moreno.

"Can you not see the waves, and observe him falling down the hole?" asks
Madame Reddon,

"Mais, voici une autre."

    _July 11, 1902._

    M. Jean Lapierre.

    _My dear M. Lapierre_: As soon as I could walk a little I began my
    research for the impostors of the inheritance Tessier. Without a
    doubt some person who is interested in the case has already advised
    them of my arrival in New York, and to take the necessary
    precautions to lead me astray in my researches.

    Already I have discovered almost everything. I know even the house
    in which resided the deceased before his death. It is a house of
    twenty-five stories high, which resembles the Church of Saint
    Magdalene in Paris. To-day it is the biggest bank in New York. I
    have visited it from top to bottom, ascending and descending in
    steel elevators. This is a marvelous palace; it is worth more than
    five million dollars. The house itself has the numbers 100, 102,
    104, 106, 108, 110, 112, 114, 116 and 118. In other words, it covers
    the ground of ten other houses made into one.

    I have also visited six houses belonging to him, which are worth
    millions and are located around Central Park....

    As soon as the brothers Lespinasse knew that I had arrived in New
    York they immediately took their departure, one for Paris to find
    his father, Emmeric Lespinasse, the other to the city of Tuxpan, in
    Mexico, to visit the properties stolen from the heirs. I have come
    to an understanding with the Reverend Father Van Rensselaer, Father
    Superior of the Jesuits, and have offered him two millions for his
    poor, in recompense for his aid to recover and to enter into
    possession of the inheritance. He takes great pains, and is my
    veritable guide and confidant....

    I have visited Central Park, also a property of the deceased; this
    property alone is worth more than twenty million dollars.... I have
    great confidence in my success, and I am almost sure to reach the
    goal, if you are the heirs, for here there is a mix-up by all the
    devils....

    The wound of my leg has much improved, the consequences which I
    feared have disappeared, and I expect soon my complete
    convalescence, but the devil has bestowed upon me a toothache, which
    makes me almost crazy with pain. I shall leave, nevertheless, to
    begin my campaign.

    Will you be kind enough to give my regards to your wife and son, and
    to our old friend, etc., etc.

    PEDRO S. DE MORENO.

"May the devil bestow upon him five hundred million toothaches!"
exclaims Lapierre, for the first time showing any sign of animation.

The other letters were read in their order, interspersed with Madame
Reddon's explanations of their effect upon the heirs in France. His
description of the elevators of steel and of the house that covered an
entire block had caused a veritable sensation. Alas! those wonders are
still wonders to them, and they still, I fancy, more than half believe
in them. The letters are lying before me now, astonishing emanations,
totally ridiculous to a prosaic American, but calculated to convince and
stimulate the imagination of a _petit bourgeois_.

The General in glowing terms paints his efforts to run down the
Lespinasse conspirators. Although suffering horribly from his fractured
tibia (when he fell into the "hole"), and from other dire ills, he has
"not taken the slightest rest." He has been everywhere--"New Orleans,
Florida, to the city of Coney Island"--to corner the villains, who "flee
in all directions." The daughter, Marie Louise, through whom the General
expects to secure a compromise, has left for New Orleans. "Wonderful
coincidence," he writes, "they were all living quietly and I believe had
no intention whatever to travel, and two days after my arrival in New
York they all disappeared. The most suspicious of it all is that the
banker, his wife and children had left for Coney Island for the summer
and to spend their holidays, and certainly they disappeared without
saying good-by to their intimate friends.... I have the whole history of
Tessier's life and how he made his fortune. There is a family for the
use of whom we must give at least a million, for the fortune of Tessier
was not his alone. He had a companion who shared his troubles and his
work. According to the will they were to inherit one from the other; the
companion died, and Tessier inherited everything. I do not see the
necessity of your trip to New York; that might make noise and perhaps
delay my negotiations." Then follows the list of properties embraced in
the inheritance:

PROPERTY AND PERSONAL ESTATE OF THE HEIRS

1   The land of Central Park ceded to the
    city of New York, of the value of             $5,000,000.00

2   He had at the National Bank--United
    States Bank--deposited in gold--twenty
    to thirty million dollars. He
    never withdrew anything; on the
    contrary, he always deposited his income
    there                                         25,000,000.00

3   The big house on Broadway, Nos. 100
    to 118, of twenty-five stories, to-day
    the largest bank in New York                   5,000,000.00

4   The house on Fifth Avenue, No. 765,
    facing Central Park, to-day one of
    the first hotels of New York--Hotel
    Savoy                                          8,000,000.00

5   House on Fifth Avenue, No. 767, facing
    Central Park, to-day the biggest
    and most handsomest of American
    hotels, where the greatest people and
    millionaires stop--Hotel Netherland           20,000,000.00

6   Two coal mines at Folkustung in Texas          9,000,000.00

7   A petroleum mine in Pennsylvania
    (Mexican frontier)                             6,000,000.00

8   Shares of silver mine at Tuxpan,
    Mexico                                        10,000,000.00

9   The house at Tuxpan and its grounds,
    Mexico                                            15,000.00

10  The pleasure home and grounds in
    Florida (New Orleans) in the city of
    Coney Island                                     500,000.00

11  The house which covers all the Esquare
    Plaza (no number because it is all
    alone). It is an immense palace,
    with a park and gardens, and waters
    forming cascades and labyrinths,
    facing Central Park                           12,000,000.00

12  The block of houses on Fifth and Sixth
    Avenues, facing on this same Central
    Park, which, as all these grounds belong
    to him, he had put up. They
    are a hundred houses, that is called
    here a block                                  30,000,000.00

13  He is the owner of two railroads and
    owns shares of others in Pennsylvania
    and Canada                                    40,000,000.00

14  A line of steam and sail boats--Atlantic.
    The Pennsylvania and the Tessier
    and other names                              100,000,000.00

15  A dock and a quay of eight hundred
    meters on the Brooklyn River for
    his ships                                    130,000,000.00

16  Several values and debts owed him and
    which at his death had not been collected        $40,000.00
                                               ----------------
                                                $390,555,000.00


    Which is in francs                  1,952,775,000
    Plus 5 per cent                           976,388
                                       --------------
    Total in francs                     1,953,751,388


"Do you blame us?" asks Madame Valoie, as I listen as politely as
possible to this Arabian Nights' dream of riches.

The letters continue: The General is surrounded by enemies, of which the
worst are French, and he is forced continually to change his residence
in order to escape their machinations. But all this takes money. How can
he go to Tuxpan or to the city of Coney Island? "You cannot know nor
imagine the expense which I have had to discover that which I have
discovered. I cannot live here like a miser, for the part I represent
demands much of me. Every moment I change my residence, and that costs
money." He adds a little touch of detail. "I must always be dressed
properly, and laundry is very dear here--a shirt costs twenty-five cents
to wash, and there are other necessary expenses.... You have forgotten
to tell me if you have received the album of views of New York in which
I have indicated the properties of the deceased, I squeeze your hand."

"Yes, and our purses too," adds Madame Valoie. "Would M'sieu' care to
see the album of the Tessier properties? Yes? M'sieu' Lapierre, kindly
show the gentleman."

Lapierre unbuttons his homespun coat and produces a cheap paper-covered
blank book in which are pasted small photographs and woodcuts of various
well-known New York buildings. It is hard not to smile.

"M'sieu' will see," continues Madame Valoie, "that the dream had
something substantial about it. When we saw these pictures in Bordeaux
we were on the point of giving up in despair, but the pictures convinced
us that it was all true. Moreover, just at that time the General
intimated that unless he had more money he might yield to the efforts of
the Lespinasse family to buy him off."

Madame Valoie points vindictively to a certain paragraph in one of the
letters: "Of course they are convinced that I am not for sale, not for
anything.... To my regret, my very great regret, I shall be forced to
capitulate if you do not come to my aid and that quickly, for I repeat
to you that my funds are all gone."

"And here is his bill," continues Madame Valoie, producing a folded
document composed of countless sheets of very thin paper, bound
together at the edges by strips of heavier material. This, when
unfolded, stretches entirely across the room and is seen to be composed
of hundreds of typewritten items, of which the following may serve as
illustrations:


            EXPENSES IN NEW YORK

July 12, Train to New Orleans   ..........   $25.50
"    16, Train to Florida       ...........  $ 2.50
"     "  Dinner on train        ...........  $ 2.00
"    17, Hotel in Florida       ...........  $ 2.00
"    18, Trip to Coney Island   ...........  $  .50
"    19, Return to Florida      ...........  $  .50
"    21, Return from Florida to New Orleans  $ 2.50
"     "    Laundry              ...........  $ 1.15
Dec.  3, Return to New York     ...........  $ 6.50
"    24, Train to Vera Cruz     ...........  $57.50
Jan.  4, Trip to Tuxpan         ...........  $ 2.50
"     5, Return to Vera Cruz    ...........  $ 2.50
"     6, Sudden night trip to Halifax,
         Nova Scotia, via Buffalo and
         Niagara Falls          ...........  $50.50
"    18, Laundry for three months .........  $ 5.00
          Etc., etc.


            EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES

To Agent Pushyt John, a meerschaum and amber
    cigar-holder and pipe       ...........  $ 7.00
Tobacco jar of shell and silver ...........  $ 4.00
To Indian Peter South-Go, a watch, a suit,
    and a pair of shoes         ...........  $16.50
To my general agent of confidential reports
    for his daughter, a gold ring and a
    feather fan                 ...........  $ 7.00
A necktie for himself and scarf pin in
    gold and with stone for the necktie ...  $ 8.60
To the letter-carrier to bring me my
    correspondence and not give it to any
    one else when I should change address .  $ 4.00
Invitation to the Consul and his two
    agents in Washington hotel  ...........  $12.00
Several invitations to cafés and saloons
    to the Police Agents        ...........  $ 2.00
Invitations to old employees of Jean
    Tessier, to tear from them the
    declarations                ...........  $ 1.50
Barber expenses                 ...........  $11.50
Tobacco and matches, July to December,
    three packages each week, ten cents
    each                        ...........  $ 7.80
Changing hotels to lead astray the agents
    of the impostors            ...........  $ 9.50
          Etc., etc.


"To obtain a collossal fortune as yours will be, it is necessary to
spend money unstintingly and to have lots of patience. Court proceedings
will be useless, as trickery and lies are necessary to get the best of
the scoundrels. It is necessary also to be a scoundrel."

"That he might well say," interpolates Lapierre. "He succeed, _c'est
sure_."

I rapidly glanced over the remaining letters. The General seems always
to be upon the verge of compelling a compromise. "I have already
prepared my net and the meshes are tightly drawn so that the fish will
not be able to escape.... For an office like this one needs money--money
to go quickly from one place to another, prosecute the usurpers, not
allow them an instant's rest. If they go to some city run after them at
once, tire them with my presence and constantly harass them, and by this
means compel them to hasten a compromise--"

The General is meeting with superhuman obstacles. In addition to his
enemies he suffers all sorts of terrible bodily afflictions. Whenever
the remittances from the Lapierres do not arrive the difficulties and
diseases increase.

At last, however, after an interval of two years, things took a turn for
the better. A "confidential representative" of the conspirators--one
"Mr. Benedict-Smith"--arrived to make a bona fide offer of one hundred
and fifty million dollars in settlement of the case. The General writes
at great length as to exactly in what proportion the money should be
divided among the heirs. The thing is so near a culmination that he is
greatly exercised over his shabby appearance.

    I am without a son and too badly dressed to go before the banker in
    the very likely case of his arrival here. Send me my baggage at once
    with the first steamer, and mark each piece "fragile." This is all.
    My regards to Madame Lapierre and your son. I am cordially yours,
    squeezing your hand.

    PEDRO S. DE MORENO.

But the Lapierres and Tessiers, while not for an instant distrusting the
honesty of the General, had become extremely weary of sending him
money. Each heir felt that he had contributed enough toward the
General's "expenses and invitations." Even the one hundred and fifty
millions within easy reach did not prompt immediate response.

About the same time an extraordinary messenger arrived at the Lapierre
farm, purporting to come from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and
instructing Lapierre to repair immediately to Paris. The messenger
explained that the presence of Lapierre was desired at the Ministry in
connection with some investigation then in progress into the affairs of
one Jean Tessier. Then the messenger departed as mysteriously as he had
arrived.

Good M. Lapierre was highly excited. Here was indubitable evidence of
the truth of the General's assertions. But, just as the latter had
intended, perhaps, the worthy farmer jumped to the conclusion that
probably the messenger from Paris had been sent by the conspirators.

"At the last moment," wrote Lapierre to Moreno, "I received from Paris a
letter commanding me to go to the Ministry, and at the same time a
telegram recommending that I leave at once. I shall write you from Paris
all that I learn to your interest. If this letter should not reach you
sealed in red wax, with small indentations made with a sewing thimble
and my initials, which I always sign, it is that our correspondence is
seized and read."

Events followed in rapid succession. Lapierre, the Tessiers, including
the little blacksmith, became almost hysterical with excitement. A
gentleman, by name "Mr. Francis Delas," called upon Lapierre and offered
him twenty-five million dollars spot cash for his wife's share in the
Tessier inheritance. This person also claimed that he had a power of
attorney from all the other heirs, with the exception of Pettit and
Rozier, and asserted that he was on the point of embarking for New York
in their interest. He urged Lapierre to substitute him for Moreno. But
Lapierre, now convinced that everything was as the General had claimed
it to be, indignantly rejected any such proposition aimed at his old
friend, and sent Mr. Francis Delas packing about his business.

    "This is what my answer has been to him: 'Sir, we have already an
    agent with whom we can only have cause to be satisfied, so that your
    services are not acceptable or needed.' He left me most dissatisfied
    and scolding."

The sending of this confederate on the part of the wily General had
precisely the effect hoped for. Lapierre and his friends were now
convinced that the inheritance Tessier was a reality, and that powerful
personages were not only exerting their influence to prevent the
rightful heirs from obtaining their property, but had also in some way
secured the cooperation of government officials. It was agreed, on all
hands, that the worthy landowner, accompanied by Madame Reddon, had
better proceed at once to the scene of operations and unite with the
General in their common purpose. Once on the ground Lapierre could
assume direction of his own campaign.

Lapierre and Madame Reddon accordingly sailed for America and arrived in
New York on the fourth of December, 1904, where they were met on the
dock by the General, who, freshly barbered, and with a rose in his
buttonhole, invited them, as soon as they had recovered from the fatigue
of landing, to make a personal inspection of their properties.

These heirs to hundreds of millions of dollars were conducted by the
"Marquis de la d'Essa and Count de Tinoco" to the Battery, where he
gallantly seated them in an electric surface car, and proceeded to show
them the inheritance. He pointed out successively Number 100 Broadway,
the "Flatiron" Building, the Fifth Avenue Hotel and the Holland House,
the Waldorf-Astoria, the Vanderbilt mansion at Fifty-seventh Street and
Fifth Avenue, the Hotel Savoy and the Hotel Netherland, incidentally
taking a cross-town trip to the ferry station at East Twenty-third
Street, and to Bellevue Hospital. A public omnibus conveyed them around
Central Park--also their own. And, in spite of the cold weather, the
General insisted on showing them the "Tessier mansion and estate at Fort
George"--visible from the Washington Bridge--"a beautiful property in
the centre of a wood." Returning, he took them to the Museum of Natural
History and to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contained
"Tessier's collections."

Having thus given them a bird's-eye view of the promised land, the
General escorted them to his apartments and allowed them to see the Ark
of the Covenant in the shape of a somewhat dilapidated leather trunk,
which contained a paper alleged to be the will of Jean Tessier, made in
Bellevue Hospital (one of his possessions), and unlawfully seized by the
Lespinasse family. It was only, Moreno alleged, through the powerful
influence of the Jesuits that he had been able to secure and keep a copy
of this will.

Although the Marquis de la d'Essa must have known that his days were
numbered, he was as gay and as entertaining as ever. Then, suddenly, the
scales began to fall from Madame Reddon's eyes. The promised meeting
with Marie Louise Lespinasse and her mysterious representative, "Mr.
Benedict-Smith," was constantly adjourned; the "police agents," whom it
had been so necessary to entertain and invite to saloons and cafés, were
strangely absent, and so were the counsellors, Jesuit Fathers, bankers,
and others who had crowded the General's antechambers. A slatternly
Hibernian woman appeared, claiming the hero as her husband; his landlady
caused him to be evicted from her premises; and his trunk containing the
famous "_dossier_" was thrown into the street, where it lay until the
General himself, placing it upon his princely shoulders, bore it to a
fifteen-cent lodging-house.

"And now, M'sieu'," said little Madame Reddon, raising her hands and
clasping them entreatingly before her, "we have come to seek vengeance
upon this _misérable_! This _villain m'sieu_! He has taken our money and
made fools of us. Surely you will give us justice!"

"Yes," echoed Lapierre stubbornly, "and the money was my own money,
which I had made from the products of my farming."

A month later Don Pedro Suarez de Moreno, Count de Tinoco, Marquis de la
d'Essa, and Brigadier-General of the Royal Armies of the Philippines and
of Spain, sat at the bar of the General Sessions, twirling his mustache
and uttering loud snorts of contempt while Lapierre and Madame Reddon
told their story to an almost incredulous yet sympathetic jury.

But the real trial began only when he arose to take the witness chair in
his own behalf. Apparently racked with pain, and laboring under the most
frightful physical infirmities, the General, through an interpreter,
introduced himself to the jury by all his titles, asserting that he had
inherited his patents of nobility from the "Prince of Arras," from whom
he was descended, and that he was in very truth "General-in-Chief of the
Armies of the King of Spain, General Secretary of War, and Custodian of
the Royal Seal." He admitted telling the Lapierres that they were the
heirs of five hundred million dollars, but he had himself honestly
believed it. When he and the rest of them had discovered their common
error they had turned upon him and were now hounding him out of revenge.
The courtly General was as _distingué_ as ever as he addressed the
hard-headed jury of tradesmen before him. As what _canaille_ he must
have regarded them! What a position for the "Count de Tinoco"!

Then two officers entered the courtroom bearing the famous trunk of the
General between them. The top tray proved to contain thousands of
railroad tickets. The prosecutor requested the defendant to explain
their possession.

"Ah!" exclaimed Moreno, twirling his mustaches, "when I was General
under my King Don Carlos, in the Seven Years' War of '75 and also in
Catalonia in '80, I issued these tickets to wounded soldiers for their
return home. At the boundaries the Spanish tickets were exchanged for
French tickets." He looked as if he really meant it.

Then the prosecutor called his attention to the fact that most of them
bore the date of 1891 and were printed in French--not in Spanish. The
prisoner seemed greatly surprised and muttered under his breath vaguely
about "plots" and "conspiracies." Then he suddenly remembered that the
tickets were a "collection," made by his little son.

Beneath the tickets were found sheaves of blank orders of nobility and
blank commissions in the army of Spain, bearing what appeared to be the
royal seal. These the General asserted that he had the right to confer,
by proxy, for his "King Don Carlos." Hundreds of other documents bearing
various arms and crests lay interspersed among them. The prisoner drew
himself up magnificently.

"I was the General Secretary of War of my King," said he. "When I had to
give orders to the generals under me, of whom I was the chief, I had the
right to put thereon the royal imprint of Don Carlos. I was given all
the papers incident to the granting of orders and grades in the army,
and I had the seal of the King--the seal of the Royal King."

But, unfortunately for the prisoner, the seals upon the papers turned
out to be the legitimate arms of Spain and not those of Don Carlos, and
as a finale he ingenuously identified the seal of the Mayor of Madrid as
that of his "Royal King."

Next came a selection of letters of nobility, sealed and signed in the
name of Pope Leo the Thirteenth. These, he asserted, must have been
placed there by his enemies. "I am a soldier and a general of honor, and
I never did any such trafficking," he cried grandly, when charged with
selling bogus patents of nobility.

He explained some of his correspondence with the Lapierres and his
famous bill for twelve thousand dollars by saying that when he found out
that the inheritance Tessier did not exist he had conceived the idea of
making a novel of the story--a "fantastic history"--to be published "in
four languages simultaneously," and asserted solemnly that he had
intended printing the whole sixteen feet of bill as part of the romance.

Then, to the undisguised horror of the unfortunate General, at a summons
from the prosecutor an elderly French woman arose in the audience and
came to the bar. The General turned first pale, then purple. He hotly
denied that he had married this lady in France twenty-three years ago.

"Name of a name! He had known her! Yes--certainly! But she was no wife
of his--she had been only his servant. The other lady--the
Hibernian--was his only wife." But the chickens had begun to come home
to roost. The pointed mustaches drooped with an unmistakable look of
dejection, and as he marched back to his seat his shoulders no longer
had the air of military distinction that one would expect in a general
of a "Royal King." His head sank on his chest as his deserted wife took
the stand against him--the wife whom, he had imagined, he would never
see again.

Any one could have seen that Elizabeth de Moreno was a good woman. Her
father's name, she said, was Nichaud, and she had first met the prisoner
twenty-three years ago in the village of Dalk, in the Department of the
Tarne, where, in 1883, he had been convicted and sentenced for stealing
bed linen from the Hôtel Kassam. She had remained faithful to him in
spite of his disgrace, and had visited him daily in prison, bringing him
milk and tobacco. On his liberation she had married him and they had
gone to live in Bordeaux. For years they had lived in comfort, and she
had borne him eight children. He had never been to any war and was
neither a general nor, so far as she had known, a friend of Don Carlos.
She had supposed that her husband held some position in connection with
the inspection of railroads, but, in 1902, it had come out that he was
in the business of selling counterfeit railroad tickets, and had
employed a printer named Paul Casignol to print great numbers of
third-class tickets for the purpose of selling them to ignorant soldiers
and artisans. Moreno had fled to America. She had then discovered that
he had also made a practice of checking worthless baggage, _stealing it
himself_ and then presenting claims therefor against the railroad
companies. She had been left without a sou, and the rascal had taken
everything she had away with him, including even the locket containing
the hair of her children. By the time she had finished her story
Moreno's courage had deserted him, the jury without hesitation returned
a verdict of guilty, and the judge then and there sentenced the prisoner
to a term at hard labor in State's prison.

       *        *        *        *        *

"_Mais oui_," grunts Lapierre, as the crow, with a final caw of
contempt, alights in a poplar farther down the road, "I don't blame the
bird for laughing at me. But, after all, there is nothing to be ashamed
of. Is one to be blamed that one is fooled? _Hein_! We are all made
fools of once and again, and, as I said before, he would have deceived
the devil himself. But perhaps things are better as they are. Money is
the root of all evil. If I had an automobile I should probably be thrown
out and have my neck broken. But if M'sieu' intends to take the next
train for Bordeaux it is as well that he should be starting."




III

The Lost Stradivarius


In the year 1885 Jean Bott, a native of Hesse Cassel, Germany, emigrated
with his wife Matilda to this country, bringing with him a celebrated
violin known as "The Duke of Cambridge Stradivarius," which he had
purchased in 1873 for about three thousand thalers--a sum representing
practically the savings of a lifetime. Bott had been leader of a small
orchestra in Saxe Meiningen as early as 1860, and was well advanced in
years before he determined to seek his fortune in America. His wife was
an elderly woman and they had no offspring.

"This violin, my husband and myself made up the family--I loved it like
a child," she testified at the trial.

So also did Bott, the old musician, love his instrument, and no hand but
his own was ever permitted to lift it from its case or dust its
darkly-glowing surface.

Whatever may have been its owner's genius, he prospered little in the
new world, and, although he labored conscientiously at his profession,
the year 1894 found him still giving lessons upon the violin to only
half a dozen pupils, and living in two rooms at 355 West Thirty-first
Street. But Bott, having the soul of a true musician, cared but little
for money and was happy enough so long as he could smoke his old
meerschaum pipe and draw the bow across the cherished violin held
lovingly to his cheek. Then hard times came a-knocking at the door. The
meagre account in the savings-bank grew smaller and smaller. The
landlord, the doctor and the grocer had to be paid. One night Bott laid
down his pipe and, taking his wife's wrinkled hand in his, said gently:

"Matilda, there is nothing else--we must sell our violin!"

"Even so!" she answered, turning away her face that her husband might
not see the tears. "As God wills."

The next day "The Duke of Cambridge Stradivarius" was offered for sale
by Victor S. Flechter, a friend of Bott's, who was a dealer in musical
instruments at 23 Union Square. It so happened that Nicolini, the
husband of Adelina Patti, was ambitious to own a genuine Stradivarius,
and had been looking for one for a long time, and, although he was but
an indifferent player, he had, in default of skill to perform, the money
to buy. The matter was easily adjusted by Flechter, and Nicolini drew
his check for the sum specified, which, properly certified, was tendered
to Bott. But Bott had never seen a certified check and was unaccustomed
to the ways of business.

"If I part with my violin I must have real money--money that I can
feel--money that I can count. It was that kind of money that I paid for
my violin," said he doggedly.

Nicolini, in a rage, believing himself insulted, tore the check to bits
and declared the transaction at an end.

Now the price agreed upon for the violin had been forty-five hundred
dollars, of which Flechter was to receive five hundred dollars as his
commission, and when, through old Professor Bott's stubbornness, the
sale fell through, the dealer was naturally very angry. Out of this
incident grew the case against Flechter.

The old musician was accustomed to leave his treasured instrument in the
lowest drawer of his bureau at the boarding-house. He always removed it
before his pupils arrived and never put it back until their departure,
thus insuring the secrecy of its hiding-place, and only his wife, his
sister-in-law, Mollenhauer, a friend, and Klopton, a prospective
purchaser, knew where it lay.

On the morning of March 31, 1894, not long after the Nicolini incident,
Bott gave a single lesson to a pupil at the boarding-house, and after
his midday meal set out with his wife for Hoboken to visit a friend. The
violin was left in its customary place. It was dark when they returned,
and after throwing off his coat and lighting the gas the old man
hastened to make sure that his precious violin was safe. When he pulled
out the drawer it was empty. The Stradivarius was gone, with its leather
case, its two bows and its wooden box.

Half distracted the musician and his wife searched everywhere in the
room, in closets, under beds, even behind the curtains, before they
could bring themselves to admit that the violin had in fact disappeared.
Frantically Bott called for Ellen, the servant girl. Yes, there had been
a caller--a young man with dark hair and a small, dark mustache--at
about five o'clock. He had waited about half an hour and then had said
that he guessed he would go. She had not noticed that he took anything
away with him. In his despair the old man turned to his old friend
Flechter, and the next day the dealer came to express his sympathy. He
urged Bott to notify the police of the theft, but the old man was
prostrated with grief, and it was the wife who, with Ellen Clancy,
finally accompanied Flechter to Police Headquarters. The police had no
idea who had taken the old fellow's fiddle, and did not particularly
care anyway. Later they cared a good deal.

Bott now began an endless and almost hopeless search for his beloved
instrument, visiting every place where violins were sold, every pawnshop
and second-hand store again and again until the proprietors began to
think the old man must be crazy. Sometimes Flechter went with him. Once,
the two travelled all the way over to New Jersey, but the scent proved
to be a false one. Bott grew thinner and older week by week, almost day
by day. When the professor did not feel equal to going outdoors Mrs.
Bott went for him, and on these occasions often called at Flechter's
store to report progress, ask his advice and secure his encouragement.

One day during one of these visits in the July following the loss of the
violin Flechter handed Mrs. Bott a sheet of paper, saying:

"I have written something down here. If you have that printed and put a
reward to it you will get your violin back."

The wording, partly printed and partly written in script, ran as
follows:

    VIOLIN LOST. $500 REWARD.

    No questions asked for return of instrument taken from residence of
    Jean Bott March 31, 1894, 355 W. 31st St. Absolute safety and
    secrecy guaranteed. Victor S. Flechter, No. 21 Union Square, violin
    maker and dealer.

Mrs. Bott thanked him and took the notice away with her, but its
publication had no result. The old professor began to fail, he no longer
had an instrument upon which to teach his pupils, and those he could
avail himself of seemed harsh and discordant. He had no appetite, and
even found no solace in his pipe. Almost penniless they were forced to
give up their lodgings and move to Hoboken. Mrs. Bott still kept up the
search, but the professor could no longer tramp the streets looking for
his violin. He sat silent in his room, slowly, surely, dying of a broken
heart.

In course of time some one advised Mrs. Bott to lay her case before the
District Attorney, and accordingly, during the summer, she visited the
Criminal Courts Building and told her story to Colonel Allen, one of the
assistants, who became greatly interested. The overwrought old woman had
begun to suspect everybody, and even to accuse her husband's friend,
Flechter, of a lack of any real interest. She thought he ought to be
able to find the violin if he really made the effort. Allen began to
take notice. The sleuth in him pricked up its ears. Why, sure,
certainly, Flechter was the one man who knew what Bott's violin was
really worth--the one man who could sell it to advantage--and he had
been done out of five hundred dollars by the old musician's stupidity.
Allen thought he'd take a look into the thing. Now, there lived in the
same boarding-house with Allen a friend of his named Harry P. Durden,
and to Durden Allen recounted the story of the lost violin and voiced
his suspicions of Flechter. Durden entered enthusiastically into the
case, volunteering to play the part of an amateur detective. Accordingly
Durden, accompanied by a Central Office man named Baird, visited
Flechter's place of business and the two represented themselves as
connoisseurs in violins and anxious to procure a genuine Strad. for a
certain Mr. Wright in St. Paul. Flechter expressed entire confidence in
his ability to procure one, and did almost succeed in purchasing for
them the so-called "Jupiter Strad."

All this took time, and at last, on April 28th, 1895, poor old Bott died
in his boarding-house in Hoboken. After the funeral the widow settled up
her affairs, changing her boarding place temporarily, and, having no
ties in this country, determined to return to end her days in the
Fatherland. On May 21st she wrote to Flechter, who had lost all track of
her, that her husband had died, that she had moved to 306 River Street,
Hoboken, and that she thought seriously of going back to Germany. Two
days later Flechter wrote the following letter to the Central Office
man, who had given his name as Southan, an employe of the alleged Mr.
Wright:

    MR. SOUTHAN, care of H. P. Durden.

    _Dear Sir_: Write to inform you that I have a genuine Strad. to
    offer you and would like to see you at your earliest convenience.

    Very respectfully yours,

    VICTOR S. FLECHTER.

When Allen saw this letter it seemed to him absolutely to confirm his
suspicions. Now that the only person in the world who had been
authoritatively able to identify the "Duke of Cambridge" Stradivarius
was dead, Flechter was offering one for sale.

Then occurred the strangest thing of all. On May 28th, five days after
Flechter's letter to Southan, Mrs. Bott received the following
extraordinary epistle. Like the notice given her by Flechter in his
office, it was partly written in printed capitals and partly in script.

    _May 28, 1895._

    To MRS. BOTT, 306 River Street, Hoboken, N. J.

    _Dear Madam_: I wish to inform you that the violin taken from your
    house some time ago will be returned if you are willing to abide by
    agreements that will be made between you and I later on. It was my
    intention first to dispose of it, but on account of its great value
    and the danger it would place me in by offering for sale being a
    violin maker and dealer and not being able to sell with safety for
    such a large sum of money I concluded to wait. I have now thought
    the matter over and come to the conclusion that a little money is
    better than none and if you are anxious for the return of the violin
    and willing to pay a sum of money, small compared with the value of
    the violin, I think we can make a deal. You can put a personal in
    the New York Sun saying I am willing to give a sum of money for the
    return of the violin. No questions asked. Mrs. J. Bott. When I see
    your personal in the Sun I will let you know how the exchange can be
    made. CAVE DWELLER.

This letter appeared to be written in a somewhat similar hand to that
which penned the offer of the reward, which, according to Mrs. Bott, was
Flechter's. By this time the widow and Allen, were in close
communication. The "Cave Dweller" letter, could it be shown to be in
Flechter's penmanship, seemed to fix the crime on the violin dealer.

Flechter's store is two flights up and looks out into Union Square.
Before the window hangs a large gilded fiddle and the walls are
decorated with pictures of famous musicians. In the rear is a safe where
the more valuable instruments are kept; in the front sits Flechter
himself, a stoutish man of middle height, with white hair and mustache.
But on June 23, 1895, Flechter was out when Durden and Baird called, and
only his clerk and office-boy were on hand. Durden wished, he said, to
see the genuine Strad. about which Mr. Flechter had written him. The boy
went to the safe and brought back a violin in a red silk bag. Inside was
inscribed:

"Antonius Stradivarius Cremonis fecit Anno Domini 1725."

The figures 17 were printed and the 25 written in ink. Durden examined
it for some fifteen minutes and noted certain markings upon it.

On June 26th they called again, found Flechter in and asked to see the
violin. This time the dealer look it himself from the safe, and, at
their request, carried it to 22 Gramercy Park, where Durden said he
desired some experts to pass upon its genuineness. On the way over
Flechter guaranteed it to be a genuine Strad., and said it belonged to a
retired merchant named Rossman, who would expect to get four thousand
dollars for it. He himself would want five hundred dollars, and Durden
should have five hundred dollars, so that they must not take less than
five thousand dollars.

Once at Allen's boarding-house Flechter played upon the violin for
Durden and the supposed Southan, and then the former asked to be allowed
to take the instrument to a rear room and show it to a friend. Here
Mrs. Bott, positively identified the violin as that of her husband,
clasping it to her bosom like a long-lost child. This was enough for
Durden, who gave the instrument back to Flechter and caused his arrest
as he was passing out of the front gate. The insulted dealer stormed and
raged, but the Car of Juggernaut had started upon its course, and that
night Flechter was lodged in the city prison. Next morning he was
brought before Magistrate Flammer in the Jefferson Market Police Court
and the violin was taken out of its case, which the police had sealed.
At this, the first hearing in this extraordinary case, Mrs. Bott, of
course, identified the violin positively as "The Duke of Cambridge," and
several other persons testified that, in substance, it was Bott's
celebrated violin. But for the defendant a number of violin makers swore
that it was not the Bott violin at all, and more--that it was not even a
Stradivarius. One of them, John J. Eller, to whom it will be necessary
to revert later, made oath that the violin was _his_, stolen from him
and brought to Flechter by the thief. On this testimony the magistrate
naturally decided that the identity of the instrument had not been
established and ordered that Flechter be discharged and the violin
returned to him.

Ordinarily that would have been the end of the case, but Allen had his
own private views as to the guilt of the dealer and on August 28th the
Grand Jury filed an indictment against Flechter accusing him of
feloniously receiving stolen property--the violin--knowing it to have
been stolen. Great was Flechter's anger and chagrin, but he promptly
gave bail and employed the ablest counsel he could afford.

Now began the second act of this tragedy of errors. The case was called
for trial with the People's interests in the hands of James W. Osborne,
just advancing into the limelight as a resourceful and relentless
prosecutor. I say the _People's_ case but perhaps _Allen's_ case would
be a more fitting title. For the defense Arthur W. Palmer held the fort,
directing his fire upon Osborne and losing no advantage inadvertently
given him. The noise of the conflict filled the court house and drowned
the uproar on Broadway. Nightly and each morning the daily press gave
columns to the proceedings. Every time the judge coughed the important
fact was given due prominence. And every gibe of counsel carried behind
it its insignia of recognition--"[_Laughter_]" It was one of those first
great battles in which the professional value of compressed air as an
explosive force and small pica type as projectiles was demonstrated. It
was a combat of wind and lead--an endurance contest during which the
jury slept fitfully for three long weeks.

Two things, the prosecution claimed, proved Flechter's guilt: first, the
fact that the violin found in his possession was "The Duke of
Cambridge"; second, that the "Cave-Dweller" letter was in the same
handwriting as Flechter's notice of reward.

Of course the latter proposition carried with it the necessity of
proving in the first place that the notice itself was in Flechter's
penmanship. Flechter through his counsel said it wasn't, and that he had
never told Mrs Bott that it was. He claimed that his brother-in-law,
John D. Abraham, had written it. Mrs. Bott, he alleged, was an old lady
and was mistaken in her testimony when she swore that he had said, "I
have written down something." He had not said so. Mr. Abraham
corroborated him. He had written it himself sitting in an armchair, all
but the words "355 West Thirty-first Street," which had been put in by a
certain Mr. Jopling who had been present. Mr. Jopling swore that that
was so, too. But, on cross-examination, it developed that Mr. Abraham
had been practicing making copies of the notice at the suggestion of the
lawyer for the defense, and, when Mr. Jopling took the stand, he was
called upon to explain an affidavit made by him for Assistant District
Attorney Allen, in which he affirmed that he did not know _who_ wrote
the words "355 West Thirty-first Street." His explanation did not
explain, and, anyhow, there did not seem to be any particular reason why
Abraham and Jopling should have written Flechter's notice for him.
Besides, even if Flechter did _not_ write it and Abraham _did_, it would
still remain almost as bad for Flechter if it was shown that "Cave
Dweller" was his own brother-in-law.

But Mrs. Bott was a woman who appealed strongly to a jury's sympathies,
and she was clear that Flechter had said that he had written the notice.
Moreover, she recalled that the date had first been written _May_ and
that Flechter had erased it and inserted _March_ in its place. A
microscopic examination revealed the fact that such an erasure had been
made. When the smoke cleared the credibility of the defense appeared
badly damaged. But the precise point was of little importance, after
all. The great question was: the identity of 'CAVE DWELLER.' On this
point a number of witnesses testified from a general knowledge of
Flechter's handwriting that the "Cave Dweller" letter was his, and three
well-known handwriting "experts" (Dr. Persifor Frazer, Mr. Daniel T.
Ames and Mr. David Carvalho) swore that, in their opinion, the same hand
had written it that had penned the notice.

It is not unlikely that Flechter's fear of a conviction led him to
invite testimony in his behalf which would not bear the test of careful
scrutiny. Many an innocent man has paid the penalty for uncommitted
crime because he has sought to bolster up his defense with doubtful
evidence without the incubus of which he would have been acquitted.

Naturally the chief point against Flechter, if it could be established,
was his actual possession of the Bott Stradivarius when he was arrested.
Upon this proposition Mrs. Bott was absolutely positive beyond the
possibility of error. So were eight other witnesses for the prosecution.
Then the defense produced a violin alleged to be the same one exhibited
in the police court and brought by Flechter to Durden's house, and asked
Mrs. Bott and her witnesses what they thought of it. Mrs. Bott could not
identify it, but she swore no less positively that it was an entirely
_different_ violin from the one which she had seen before the
magistrate. Then Osborne hurled his bomb over his enemy's parapet and
cried loudly that a monstrous wicked fraud had been perpetrated to
thwart Justice--that the defense had "faked" another violin and were now
trying to foist the bogus thing in evidence to deceive the Court. _Ten
witnesses_ for the prosecution now swore that the violin so produced
was _not_ the one which Flechter had tried to sell Durden. Of course it
would have been comparatively easy to "fake" a violin, just as Osborne
claimed, and the case sheds some light upon the possibilities of the
"old violin" industry.

The star witness for the prosecution to prove that the instrument
produced in the police court _was_ the Bott violin was August M.
Gemunder, and his testimony upon the trial before Recorder Goff is
worthy of careful examination, since the jury considered it of great
importance in reaching a verdict, even requesting that it should be
re-read to them some hours after retiring to deliberate. Gemunder
testified, in substance, that he belonged to a family which had been
making violins for three generations and had himself been making them
for twenty years, that he was familiar with Bott's Stradivarius, having
seen it three times, and that he firmly believed a large part of the
violin produced before the magistrate _was_ the missing Bott--certainly
the back and scroll. Moreover, he was able to describe the markings of
the Bott violin even to the label inside it. It should be mentioned,
however, that in the magistrate's court he had been called only to
_describe_ the Bott violin and not to _identify_ the one produced as the
Bott itself. He further swore that the violin now offered by the defense
on the trial was _not_ the one in evidence before the magistrate, but
was one which he had sold some years before to one Charles Palm.

The defense, on the other hand, called among its witnesses John P.
Frederick, a violin maker, who testified that he was familiar with the
Bott Strad. and had seen it in 1873 at Bott's house, Grenecher Castle,
in Germany; that he had repaired it in this country in 1885; that the
instrument in court was not a Strad. nor even a good imitation of one,
and, of course, was not the "Duke of Cambridge," but that it _was_ the
identical instrument produced before the magistrate, and one which he
recognized as having been sent him for repair by Charles Palm in 1885.

Thus both sides agreed that the fiddle now offered in evidence was a
bogus Strad. once belonging to a man named Palm, the only element of
conflict being as to whether or not the violin which Flechter had
offered for sale was the Palm instrument, or, in fact, Bott's famous
"Duke of Cambridge."

All this technical testimony about violins and violin structure
naturally bored the jury almost to extinction, and even the bitter
personal encounters of counsel did not serve to relieve the dreariness
of the trial. One oasis of humor in this desert of dry evidence gave
them passing refreshment, when a picturesque witness for the defense, an
instrument maker named Franz Bruckner, from South Germany, having been
asked if the violin shown him was a Strad., replied, with a grunt of
disgust: "Ach Himmel, nein!" Being then invited to describe all the
characteristics of genuine Stradivarius workmanship, he tore his hair
and, with an expression of utter hopelessness upon his wrinkled face,
exclaimed despairingly to the interpreter:

"Doctor, if I gave you lessons in this every day for three weeks you
would know no more than you do now!"--an answer which was probably true,
and equally so of the jury who were shouldered with the almost
impossible task of determining from this mass of conflicting opinion
just where the truth really lay.

The chief witness for the defense was John J. Eller, who testified that
he had been a musician for thirty years and a collector of violins; that
the violin in court was the same one produced before the magistrate, and
was not Bott's, but _his own_; that he had first seen it in the
possession of Charles Palm in 1886 in his house in Eighth Street and St.
Mark's Place, New York City, had borrowed it from Palm and played on it
for two months in Seabright, and had finally purchased it from Palm in
1891, and continued to play in concerts upon it, until having been
loaned by him to a music teacher named Perotti, in Twenty-third Street,
it was stolen by the latter and sold to Flechter.

It appeared that Eller had at once brought suit against Flechter for the
possession of the instrument, which suit, he asserted, he was still
pressing in the courts, and he now declared that the violin was in
exactly the same condition in every respect as when produced in the
police court, although it had been changed in some respects since it had
been stolen. It had originally been made of baked wood by one Dedier
Nicholas (an instrument maker of the first half of the nineteenth
century), and stamped with the maker's name, but this inscription was
now covered by a Stradivarius label. Eller scornfully pointed out that
no Strad. had ever been made of baked wood, and showed the jury certain
pegs used by no other maker than Nicholas, and certain marks worn upon
the instrument by his, the witness', own playing. He also exhibited the
check with which he had paid for it.

In support of this evidence Charles Palm himself was called by the
defense and identified the violin as one which he had bought some twelve
years before for fifteen or twenty dollars and later sold to Eller. Upon
the question of the identity of the instrument then lying before the
jury this evidence was conclusive, but, of course, it did not satisfy
the jury as to whether Flechter had tried to sell the Palm violin or
Bott's violin to Durden. Unfortunately Eller's evidence threw a side
light on the defence without which the trial might well have resulted in
an acquittal.

Eller had sworn that he was still vigorously endeavoring to get the Palm
violin back from Flechter. As contradicting him in this respect, and as
tending to show that the suit had not only been compromised but that he
and Flechter were engaged in trying to put off the Palm violin as a
genuine Stradivarius and share the profit of the fraud, the prosecution
introduced the following letter from the witness to his lawyer:

    CLIFTON HOUSE, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS.

    _March 23, 1896._

    _Dear Counsellor_: Received your letter just now. I have been
    expecting Mr. Flechter's lawyer would settle with you; he got nine
    hundred dollars for the violin and Mr. Meyer arranged with myself
    for the half, four hundred and fifty dollars, which he proposed
    himself and have been expecting a settlement on their part long ago.
    I have assisted Mr. Palmer, his able lawyer, with the best of my
    ability, _and have covered Mr. Flechter's shortcomings of faking the
    violin to a Strad_.

    Yours most sincerely,

    JOHN ELLER,

    Metropolitan Opera Co., Chicago, Ill.

From this letter it was fairly inferable that although the defendant
might be innocent of the precise crime with which he was charged, he
was, nevertheless, upon his own evidence, guilty of having "faked" a
cheap Nicholas violin into a Strad., and of having offered it for sale
for the exorbitant price of five thousand dollars. This luckless piece
of evidence undoubtedly influenced the jury to convict him.

It will be recalled that ten witnesses for the prosecution had sworn
that the violin offered in evidence at the trial was _not_ the one
produced in the police court, as against the defendant's five who
asserted that it _was_.

The testimony was all highly technical and confusing, and the jury
probably relied more upon their general impressions of the credibility
of the witnesses than upon anything else. It is likely that most of the
testimony, on both sides, in regard to the identity of the violin was
honestly given, for the question was one upon which a genuine divergence
of opinion was easily possible.

Eller's letter from Chicago so affected the jury that they disregarded
his testimony and reverted to that of August Gemunder, to whose evidence
attention has already been called, and who swore that it was "The Duke
of Cambridge" which Flechter had tried to sell to Durden. Alas for the
fallibility of even the most honest of witnesses!

The case was ably argued by both sides, and every phase of this curious
tangle of evidence given its due consideration. The defense very
properly laid stress upon the fact that it would have been a ridiculous
performance for Flechter to write the "Cave Dweller" letter and state
therein that he was "a violin dealer or maker," thus pointing,
unmistakably, to himself, and to further state that for one in his
position to dispose of it would be difficult and dangerous. The only
explanation for the "Cave Dweller" letter which they could offer,
however, was that some one interested in procuring Flechter's downfall
had caused it to be sent for that purpose. This might either be a
business rival or some one connected with the prosecution.

While Palmer was summing up for the defense he noticed Assistant
District Attorney Allen smiling and dramatically turning upon him, he
shouted: "This is no laughing matter, Colonel Allen. It is a very
serious matter whether this man is to be allowed to-night to go home and
kiss his little ones, or whether he is to be cast into jail because you
used your brains to concoct a theory against him."

Another consideration, which seemed deserving of weight, was that if
Flechter did steal "The Duke of Cambridge" it would have been a piece of
incredible folly and carelessness upon his part to leave it in such an
exposed place as the safe of his store, where it could be found by the
police or shown by the office-boy to any one who called.

Yet the positive identification of August Gemunder and the fatal
disclosures of Eller, coupled with the vehement insistence of the
prosecution, led the jury to resolve what doubt they had in the case
against the prisoner, and, after deliberating eight or ten hours and
being out all night, they returned a verdict of guilty. Flechter broke
down and declared bitterly that he was the victim of a conspiracy upon
the part of his enemies, assisted by a too credulous prosecuting
attorney. Everybody admitted that it was an extraordinary case, but the
press was consistent in its clamor against Flechter, and opinion
generally was that he had been rightly convicted. On May 22nd he was
sentenced to the penitentiary for twelve months, but, after being
incarcerated in the Tombs for three weeks, he secured a certificate of
reasonable doubt and a stay until his conviction could be reviewed on
appeal. Then he gave bail and was released. But he had been in jail!
Flechter will never forget that! And, for the time being at least, his
reputation was gone, his family disgraced, and his business ruined.

A calm reading of the record of the trial suggests that the case
abounded in doubts more or less reasonable, and that the Court might
well have taken it from the jury on that account. But a printed page of
questions and answers carries with it no more than a suggestion of the
value of testimony the real significance of which lies in the manner in
which it is given, the tone of the voice and the flash of the eye.

Once again Flechter sat at his desk in the window behind the great
gilded fiddle. To him, as to its owner, the great Stradivarius had
brought only sorrow. But for him the world had no pity. Surely the
strains of this wonderful instrument must have had a "dying fall" even
when played by the loving hand of old Jean Bott.

At last, after several years, in 1899, the case came up in the Appellate
Division of the Supreme Court. Flechter had been led to believe that his
conviction would undoubtedly be reversed and a new trial ordered, which
would be tantamount to an acquittal, for it was hardly likely in such an
event that a second trial would be considered advisable upon the same
evidence. But to his great disappointment his conviction was sustained
by a divided court, in which only two of the five justices voted for a
new trial. Again Fortune had averted her face. If only one more judge
had thought the evidence insufficient! The great gilded fiddle seemed to
Flechter an omen of misfortune. Once more he gave bail, this time in
five thousand dollars, and was set at liberty pending his appeal to the
highest court in the State. Once more he took his seat in his office and
tried to carry on his business.

But time had dragged on. People had forgotten all about Flechter and the
lost Stradivarius, and when his conviction was affirmed little notice
was taken of the fact. It was generally assumed that having been
sentenced he was in jail.

Then something happened which once more dragged Flechter into the
limelight. Editors rushed to their files and dusted the cobwebs off the
issues containing the accounts of the trial. The sign of the gilded
fiddle became the daily centre of a throng of excited musicians, lawyers
and reporters. The lost Stradivarius--the great "Duke of Cambridge"--the
nemesis of Bott and of Flechter--was found--by Flechter himself, as he
claimed, on August 17, 1900. According to the dealer and his witnesses
the amazing discovery occurred in this wise. A violin maker named Joseph
Farr, who at one time had worked for Flechter and had testified in his
behalf at the trial (to the effect that the instrument produced in the
police court was _not_ Bott's Stradivarius) saw by chance a very fine
violin in the possession of a family named Springer in Brooklyn, and
notified Flechter of the fact. The latter, who was always ready to
purchase choice violins, after vainly trying for a long time to induce
the Springers to bring it to New York, called with Farr upon Mrs.
Springer and asked to examine it. To his utter astonishment she produced
for his inspection Bott's long-lost Stradivarius. Hardly able to control
his excitement Flechter immediately returned to New York and reported
the discovery to the police, who instantly began a thorough examination
of the circumstances surrounding its discovery.

The District Attorney's office and the Detective Bureau were at first
highly suspicious of this opportune discovery on the part of a convicted
felon of the precise evidence necessary to clear him, but it was soon
demonstrated to their pretty general satisfaction that the famous
Stradivarius had in fact been pawned in the shop of one Benjamin Fox on
the very day and within an hour of the theft, together with its case and
two bows, for the insignificant sum of four dollars. After the legal
period of redemption had expired it had been put up at auction and bid
in by the pawnbroker for a small advance over the sum for which it had
been pawned. It lay exposed for purchase on Fox's shelf for some months,
until, in December, 1895, a tailor named James Dooly visited the shop to
redeem a silver watch. Being, at the same time, in funds, and able to
satisfy his taste as a virtuoso, he felt the need of and bought a violin
for ten dollars, but, Fox urging upon him the desirability of getting a
good one while he was about it, was finally persuaded to purchase the
Bott violin for twenty dollars in its stead. Dooly took it home, played
upon it as the spirit moved, and whenever in need of ready money brought
it back to Fox as security, always redeeming it in time to prevent its
sale. One day, being at Mrs. Springer's, where he was accustomed to
purchase tailor trimmings, he offered it to her for sale, and, as her
son was taking violin lessons, induced her to buy it for thirty dollars.
And in the house of the Springers it had quietly remained ever since,
while lawyers and prosecutors wrangled and thundered and witnesses swore
positively to the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, to
prove that Flechter stole the violin and tried to sell it to Durden.

On these facts, which did not seem to admit of contradiction, Recorder
Goff ordered an oral examination of all the witnesses, the hearing of
which, sandwiched in between the current trials in his court, dragged
along for months, but which finally resulted in establishing to the
Court's satisfaction that the violin discovered in the possession of the
Springers was the genuine "Duke of Cambridge," and that it could not
have been in Flechter's possession at the time he was arrested.

On July 7, 1902, eight years after Bott's death and the arrest and
indictment of Flechter for the theft of the violin, a picturesque group
assembled in the General Sessions. There was Flechter and his lawyer,
Mrs. Springer and her son, the attorneys for the prosecution, and lastly
old Mrs. Bott. The seals of the case were broken and the violin
identified by the widow as that of her husband. The Springers waived all
claim to the violin, and the Court dismissed the indictment against the
defendant and ordered the Stradivarius to be delivered to Mrs. Bott,
with these words:

"Mrs. Bott, it affords very great pleasure to the Court to give the
violin to you. You have suffered many years of sorrow and trouble in
regard to it."

"Eight years," sighed the old lady, clasping the violin in her arms.

"I wish you a great deal of pleasure in its possession," continued the
Recorder.

Thus ended, as a matter of record, the case of The People against
Flechter. For eight years the violin dealer and his family had endured
the agony of disgrace, he had spent a fortune in his defense, and had
nevertheless been convicted of a crime of which he was at last proved
innocent.

Yet, there are those who, when the case is mentioned, shake their heads
wisely, as if to say that the whole story of the lost Stradivarius has
never been told.




IV

The Last of the Wire-Tappers


    "Sir," replied the knave unabashed, "I am one of those who do make a
    living by their wits."

John Felix, a dealer in automatic musical instruments in New York City,
was swindled out of $50,000 on February 2d, 1905, by what is commonly
known as the "wire-tapping" game. During the previous August a man
calling himself by the name of Nelson had hired Room 46, in a building
at 27 East Twenty-second Street, as a school for "wireless telegraphy."
Later on he had installed over a dozen deal tables, each fitted with a
complete set of ordinary telegraph instruments and connected with wires
which, while apparently passing out of the windows, in reality plunged
behind a desk into a small "dry" battery. Each table was fitted with a
shaded electric drop-light, and the room was furnished with the ordinary
paraphernalia of a telegraph office. The janitor never observed any
activity in the "school." There seemed to be no pupils, and no one
haunted the place except a short, ill-favored person who appeared
monthly and paid the rent.

On the afternoon of February 1st, 1905, Mr. Felix was called to the
telephone of his store and asked to make an appointment later in the
afternoon, with a gentleman named Nelson who desired to submit to him a
business proposition. Fifteen minutes afterward Mr. Nelson arrived in
person and introduced himself as having met Felix at "Lou" Ludlam's
gambling house. He then produced a copy of the _Evening Telegram_ which
contained an article to the effect that the Western Union Telegraph
Company was about to resume its "pool-room service,"--that is to say, to
supply the pool rooms with the telegraphic returns of the various
horse-races being run in different parts of the United States. The paper
also contained, in connection with this item of news, a photograph which
might, by a stretch of the imagination, have been taken to resemble
Nelson himself.

Mr. Felix, who was a German gentleman of French sympathies, married to
an American lady, had recently returned to America after a ten years'
sojourn in Europe. He had had an extensive commercial career, was
possessed of a considerable fortune, and had at length determined to
settle in New York, where he could invest his money to advantage and at
the same time conduct a conservative and harmonious business in musical
instruments. Like the Teutons of old, dwelling among the forests of the
Elbe, Mr. Felix knew the fascination of games of chance and he had heard
the merry song of the wheel at both Hambourg and Monte Carlo. In Europe
the pleasures of the gaming table had been comparatively inexpensive,
but in New York for some unknown reason the fickle goddess had not
favored him and he had lost upward of $51,000. "Zu viel!" as he himself
expressed it. Being of a philosophic disposition, however, he had
pocketed his losses and contented himself with the consoling thought
that, whereas he might have lost all, he had in fact lost only a part.
It might well have been that had not The Tempter appeared in the person
of his afternoon visitor, he would have remained _in status quo_ for the
rest of his natural life. In the sunny window of his musical store,
surrounded by zitherns, auto-harps, dulcimers, psalteries, sackbuts, and
other instrument's of melody, the advent of Nelson produced the effect
of a sudden and unexpected discord. Felix distrusted him from the very
first.

The "proposition" was simplicity itself. It appeared that Mr. Nelson was
in the employ of the Western Union Telegraph Company, which had just
opened a branch office for racing news at 27 East Twenty-second Street.
This branch was under the superintendence of an old associate and
intimate friend of Nelson's by the name of McPherson. Assuming that they
could find some one with the requisite amount of cash, they could all
make their everlasting fortunes by simply having McPherson withhold the
news of some race from the pool rooms long enough to allow one of the
others to place a large bet upon some horse which had in fact already
won and was resting comfortably in the stable. Felix grasped the idea
instantly. At the same time he had his suspicions of his visitor. It
seemed peculiar that he, an inconspicuous citizen who had already lost
$50,000 in gambling houses, should be selected as the recipient of such
a momentous opportunity. Moreover, he knew very well that gentlemen in
gambling houses were never introduced at all. He thought he detected the
odor of a rodent. He naïvely inquired why, if all these things were so,
Nelson and his friend were not already yet millionaires two or three
times? The answer was at once forthcoming that they _had_ been, but also
had been robbed--unmercifully robbed, by one in whom they had had
confidence and to whom they had entrusted their money.

"And now we are poor, penniless clerks!" sighed Nelson, "and if we
should offer to make a big bet ourselves, the gamblers would be
suspicious and probably refuse to place it."

"I think this looks like a schvindling game," said Felix shrewdly. So it
did; so it was.

By and by Felix put on his hat and, escorted by Nelson, paid a visit to
the "branch office" at 27 East Twenty-second Street. Where once solitude
had reigned supreme and the spider had spun his web amid the
fast-gathering dust, all was now tumultuous activity. Fifteen busy
operators in eye shades and shirt sleeves took the news hot from the
humming wires and clicked it off to the waiting pool rooms.

"Scarecrow wins by a neck!" cried one, "Blackbird second!"

"Make the odds 5 to 3," shouted a short, ill-favored man, who sat at a
desk puffing a large black cigar. The place buzzed like a beehive and
ticked like a clockmaker's. It had an atmosphere of breathless
excitement all its own. Felix watched and marvelled, wondering if dreams
came true.

The short, ill-favored man strolled over and condescended to make Mr.
Felix's acquaintance. An hour later the three of them were closeted
among the zitherns. At the same moment the fifteen operators were ranged
in a line in front, of a neighboring bar, their elbows simultaneously
elevated at an angle of forty-five degrees.

Felix still had lingering doubts. Hadn't Mr. McPherson some little
paper--a letter, a bill, a receipt or a check, to show that he was
really in the employ of the Western Union? No, said "Mac," but he had
something better--the badge which he had received as the fastest
operator among the company's employees. Felix wanted to see it, but
"Mac" explained that it was locked up in the vault at the Farmers' Loan
and Trust Co. To Felix this had a safe sound--"Farmers' Trust Co." Then
matters began to move rapidly. It was arranged that Felix should go down
in the morning and get $50,000 from his bankers, Seligman and Meyer.
After that he was to meet Nelson at the store and go with him to the
pool room where the big financiers played their money. McPherson was to
remain at the "office" and telephone them the results of the races in
advance. By nightfall they would be worth half a million.

"I hope you have a good large safe," remarked Nelson, tentatively. The
three conspirators parted with mutual expressions of confidence and
esteem.

Next morning Mr. Felix went to his bankers and procured $50,000 in five
ten-thousand-dollar bills. The day passed very slowly. There was not
even a flurry in zitherns. He waited impatiently for Nelson who was to
come at five o'clock. At last Nelson arrived and they hurried to the
Fifth Avenue Hotel where the _coup_ was to take place.

And now another marvel. Wassermann Brothers' stock-brokering office,
which closes at three hummed just as the "office" had done the evening
before--and with the very same bees, although Felix did not recognize
them. It was crowded with men who struggled violently with one another
in their eagerness to force their bets into the hands of a
benevolent-looking person, who, Felix was informed, was the "trusted
cashier" of the establishment. And the sums were so large that even
Felix gasped.

"Make that $40,000 on Coco!" cried a bald-headed "capper."

"Mr. Gates wants to double his bet on Jackstone,--make it $80,000!"
shrieked another.

"Gentlemen! Gentlemen!" begged the "trusted cashier," "not quite so
fast, if you please. One at a time."

"Sixty thousand on Hesper--for a place!" bawled one addressed as "Mr.
Keene," while Messrs. "Ryan," "Whitney," "Belmont," "Sullivan,"
"McCarren," and "Murphy" all made handsome wagers.

From time to time a sporty-looking man standing beside a ticker, shouted
the odds and read off the returns. Felix heard with straining ears:

"They're off!"

"Baby leads at the quarter."

"Susan is gaining!"

"They're on the stretch!"

"Satan wins by a nose--Peter second."

There was a deafening uproar, hats were tossed ceilingward, and great
wads of money were passed out by the "trusted cashier" to indifferent
millionaires. Felix wanted to rush in and bet at once on something--if
he waited it might be too late. Was it necessary to be introduced to the
cashier? No? Would he take the bet? All right, but--

At that moment a page elbowed his way among the money calling
plaintively for "Felix! Mr. Felix." Shrinking at the thought of such
publicity in such distinguished company, Felix caught the boy's arm and
learned that he was wanted at the telephone booth in the hotel.

"It must be 'Mac,'" said Nelson. "Now don't make any mistake!" Felix
promised to use the utmost care.

It was "Mac."

"Is this Mr. Felix?--Yes? Well, be very careful now. I am going to give
you the result of the third race which has already been run. I will hold
back the news three minutes. This is merely to see if everything is
working right. Don't make any bet. If I give you the winners correctly,
you can put your money on the fourth race. The horse that won the last
is Col. Starbottle--Don Juan is second. Now just step back and see if I
am right."

Felix rushed back to the pool room. As he entered the man at the tape
was calling out that "they" were off. In due course "they" reached the
quarter and then the half. A terrific struggle was in progress between
Col. Starbottle and Don Juan. First one was ahead and then the other.
Finally they came thundering down to the stretch, Col. Starbottle
winning by a neck. "Gates" won $90,000, and several others pocketed wads
running anywhere from $20,000 to $60,000.

Felix hurried back to the telephone. "Mac" was at the other end.

"Now write this down," admonished McPherson; "we can't afford to have
any mistake. Old Stone has just won the fourth race, with Calvert
second. Play Old Stone to win at 5 to 1. We shall make $250,000--and Old
Stone is safe in the stable all the time and his jockey is smoking a
cigarette on the club house veranda. Good luck, old man."

Felix had some difficulty in getting near the "trusted cashier" so many
financiers were betting on Calvert. Felix smiled to himself. He'd show
them a thing or two.

Finally he managed to push his envelope containing the five
ten-thousand-dollar bills into the "trusted cashier's" hand. The latter
marked it "Old Stone, 5 to 1 to win!" and thrust it into his pocket.
Then "Whitney" or somebody bet $70,000 on Calvert.

"They're off!" shouted the man at the tape.

How he lived while they tore around the course Felix never knew. Neck
and neck Old Stone and Calvert passed the quarter, the half, and the
three-quarter post, and with the crowd yelling like demons came hurtling
down the stretch.

"Old Stone wins!" cried the "booster" at the tape in a voice husky with
excitement. "Calvert a close second!" Felix nearly fainted. His head
swam. He had won a quarter of a million. Then the voice of the "booster"
made itself audible above the confusion.

"What! A mistake? Not possible!--Yes. Owing to some confusion at the
finish, both jockies wearing the same colors, the official returns now
read Calvert first; Old Stone second."

Among the zitherns Felix sat and wondered if he had been schvindled. He
had not returned to Wassermann Brothers. Had he done so he would have
found it empty five minutes after he had lost his money. The
millionaires were already streaming hilariously into Sharkey's. "Gates"
pledged "Belmont" and "Keene" pledged "Whitney." Each had earned five
dollars by the sweat of his brow. The glorious army of wire-tappers had
won another victory and their generals had consummated a campaign of
months. Expenses (roughly), $600. Receipts, $50,000. Net profits,
$48,400. Share of each, $16,133.

A day or two later Felix wandered down to Police Headquarters, and in
the Rogue's Gallery identified the photograph of Nelson, whom he then
discovered to be none other than William Crane, alias John Lawson, alias
John Larsen, a well-known "wire-tapper," arrested some dozen times
within a year or two for similar offences. McPherson turned out to be
Christopher Tracy, alias Charles J. Tracy, alias Charles Tompkins, alias
Topping, alias Toppin, etc., etc., arrested some eight or ten times for
"wire-tapping." The "trusted cashier" materialized in the form of one
Wyatt, alias, Fred Williams, etc., a "wire-tapper" and pal of "Chappie"
Moran and "Larry" Summerfield. Detective Sergeants Fogarty and Mundy
were at once detailed upon the case and arrested within a short time
both Nelson and McPherson. The "trusted cashier" who had pocketed
Felix's $50,000 has never been caught. It is said that he is running a
first-class hostelry in a Western city. But that is another story.

When acting Inspector O'Brien ordered McPherson brought into his private
room, the latter unhesitatingly admitted that the three of them had
"trimmed" Felix of his $50,000, exactly as the latter had alleged. He
stated that Wyatt (alias Williams) was the one who had taken in the
money, that it was still in his possession, and still intact in its
original form. He denied, however, any knowledge of Wyatt's whereabouts.

The reason for this indifference became apparent when the two prisoners
were arraigned in the magistrate's court, and their counsel demanded
their instant discharge on the ground that they had committed no crime
for which they could be prosecuted. He cited an old New York case,
McCord _vs._ The People,[2] which seemed in a general way to sustain his
contention, and which had been followed by another and much more recent
decision. The People _vs._ Livingston.[3] The first of these cases had
gone to the Court of Appeals, and the general doctrine had been
annunciated that where a person parts with his money for an unlawful or
dishonest purpose, even though he is tricked into so doing by false
pretences, a prosecution for the crime of larceny cannot be maintained.

[Footnote 2: 46 New York 470.]

[Footnote 3: 47 App. Div. 283.]

In the McCord case, the defendant had falsely pretended to the
complainant, a man named Miller, that he was a police officer and held a
warrant for his arrest. By these means he had induced Miller to give him
a gold watch and a diamond ring as the price of his liberty. The
conviction in this case was reversed on the ground that Miller parted
with his property for an unlawful purpose; but there was a very strong
dissenting opinion from Mr. Justice Peckham, now a member of the bench
of the Supreme Court of the United States.

In the second case, that of Livingston, the complainant had been
defrauded out of $500 by means of the "green goods" game; but this
conviction was reversed by the Appellate Division of the Second
Department on the authority of the McCord case. The opinion in this case
was written by Mr. justice Cullen, now Chief Judge of the New York Court
of Appeals, who says in conclusion:

"We very much regret being compelled to reverse this conviction. Even if
the prosecutor intended to deal in counterfeit money, that is no reason
why the appellant should go unwhipped of justice. We venture to suggest
that it might be Well for the Legislature to alter the rule laid down in
McCord _vs._ People."

Well might the judges regret being compelled to set a rogue at liberty
simply because he had been ingenious enough to invent a fraud (very
likely with the assistance of a shyster lawyer) which involved the
additional turpitude of seducing another into a criminal conspiracy.
Livingston was turned loose upon the community in spite of the fact that
he had swindled a man out of $500 because he had incidentally led the
latter to believe that in return he was to receive counterfeit money or
"green goods," which might be put into circulation. Yet, because some
years before, the Judges of the Court of Appeals had, in the McCord
matter, adopted the rule followed in civil cases, to wit that as the
complaining witness was himself in fault and did not come into court
with clean hands he could have no standing before them, the Appellate
Division in the next case felt obliged to follow them and to rule
tantamount to saying that two wrongs could make a right and two knaves
one honest man. It may seem a trifle unfair to put it in just this way,
but when one realizes the iniquity of such a doctrine as applied to
criminal cases, it is hard to speak softly. Thus the broad and general
doctrine seemed to be established that so long as a thief could induce
his victim to believe that it was to his advantage to enter into a
dishonest transaction, he might defraud him to any extent in his power.
Immediately there sprang into being hordes of swindlers, who, aided by
adroit shyster lawyers, invented all sorts of schemes which involved
some sort of dishonesty upon the part of the person to be defrauded. The
"wire-tappers," of whom "Larry" Summerfield was the Napoleon, the
"gold-brick" and "green-goods" men, and the "sick engineers" flocked to
New York, which, under the unwitting protection of the Court of Appeals,
became a veritable Mecca for persons of their ilk.

To readers unfamiliar with the cast of mind of professional criminals it
will be almost impossible to appreciate with what bold insouciance these
vultures now hovered over the metropolitan barnyard. Had not the Court
of Appeals itself recognized their profession? They had nothing to fear.
The law was on their side. They walked the streets flaunting their
immunity in the very face of the police. "Wire-tapping" became an
industry, a legalized industry with which the authorities might
interfere at their peril. Indeed, there is one instance in which a
"wire-tapper" successfully prosecuted his victim (after he had trimmed
him) upon a charge of grand larceny arising out of the same transaction.
One crook bred another every time he made a victim, and the disease of
crime, the most infectious of all distempers, ate its way unchecked into
the body politic. Broadway was thronged by a prosperous gentry, the
aristocracy and elite of knavery, who dressed resplendently, flourished
like the green bay-tree, and spent their (or rather their victims')
money with the lavish hand of one of Dumas's gentlemen.

But the evil did not stop there. Seeing that their brothers prospered in
New York, and neither being learned in the law nor gifted with the power
of nice discrimination between rogueries, all the other knaves in the
country took it for granted that they had at last found the Elysian
fields and came trooping here by hundreds to ply their various trades.
The McCord case stood out like a cabalistic sign upon a gate-post
telling all the rascals who passed that way that the city was full of
honest folk waiting to be turned into rogues and "trimmed."

    "And presently we did pass a narrow lane, and at the mouth espied a
    written stone, telling beggars by a word like a wee pitchfork to go
    that way."

The tip went abroad that the city was "good graft" for everybody, and in
the train of the "wire-tappers" thronged the "flimflammer," "confidence
man," "booster," "capper" and every sort of affiliated crook, recalling
Charles Reade's account in "The Cloister and the Hearth" of Gerard in
Lorraine among their kin of another period:

    With them and all they had, 'twas lightly come and lightly go; and
    when we left them my master said to me, "This is thy first lesson,
    but to-night we shall be at Hansburgh. Come with me to the 'rotboss'
    there, and I'll show thee all our folk and their lays, and
    especially 'the lossners,' 'the dutzers,' 'the schleppers,' 'the
    gickisses,' 'the schwanfelders,' whom in England we call 'shivering
    Jemmies,' 'the süntregers,' 'the schwiegers,' 'the joners,' 'the
    sessel-degers,' 'the gennscherers,' in France 'marcandiers a
    rifodés,' 'the veranerins,' 'the stabulers,' with a few foreigners
    like ourselves, such as 'pietres,' 'francmitoux,' 'polissons,'
    'malingreux,' 'traters,' 'rufflers,' 'whipjacks,' 'dommerars,'
    'glymmerars,' 'jarkmen,' 'patricos,' 'swadders,' 'autem morts,'
    'walking morts,'--" "Enow!" cried I, stopping him, "art as gleesome
    as the evil one a counting of his imps. I'll jot down in my tablet
    all these caitiffs and their accursed names: for knowledge is
    knowledge. But go among them alive or dead, that will I not with my
    good will."

And a large part of it was due simply to the fact that seven learned men
upon seven comfortable chairs in the city of Albany had said, many years
ago, that "neither the law or public policy designs the protection of
rogues in their dealings with each other, or to insure fair dealing and
truthfulness as between each other, in their dishonest practices."

The reason that the "wire-tapping" game was supposed to come within the
scope of the McCord case was this: it deluded the victim into the
belief that he was going to cheat the pool room by placing a bet upon a
"sure thing." Secondarily it involved, as the dupe supposed, the theft
or disclosure of messages which were being transmitted over the lines of
a telegraph company--a misdemeanor. Hence, it was argued, the victim was
as much a thief as the proposer of the scheme, had parted with his money
for a dishonest purpose, did not come into court with "clean hands," and
no prosecution could be sustained, no matter whether he had been led to
give up his money by means of false pretences or not.

While "wire-tapping" differed technically from the precise frauds
committed by McCord and Livingston, it nevertheless closely resembled
those swindlers in general character and came clearly within the
doctrine that the law was not designed to protect "rogues in their
dealings with each other."

No genuine attempt had ever been made to prosecute one of these gentry
until the catastrophe which deprived Felix of his $50,000. The
"wire-tappers" rolled in money. Indeed, the fraternity were so liberal
with their "rolls" that they became friendly with certain police
officials and intimately affiliated with various politicians of
influence, a friend of one of whom went on Summerfield's bond, when the
latter was being prosecuted for the "sick-engineer" frauds to the extent
of $30,000. They regularly went to Europe in the summer season and could
be seen at all the race-courses and gambling resorts of the Continent.
It is amusing to chronicle in this connection that just prior to
McPherson's arrest--that is to say during the summer vacation of
1904--he crossed the Atlantic on the same steamer with an assistant
district attorney of New York county, who failed to recognize his ship
companion and found him an entertaining and agreeable comrade.

The trial came on before Judge Warren W. Foster in Part 3 of the General
Sessions on February 27th, 1906. A special panel quickly supplied a
jury, which, after hearing the evidence, returned in short order a
verdict of guilty. As Judge Foster believed the McCord case to be still
the law of the State, he, of his own motion, and with commendable
independence, immediately arrested judgment. The People thereupon
appealed, the Court of Appeals sustained Judge Foster, and the defendant
was discharged. It is, however, satisfactory to record that the
Legislature at its next session amended the penal code in such a way as
to entirely deprive the wire-tappers and their kind of the erstwhile
protection which they had enjoyed under the law.




V

The Franklin Syndicate


When Robert A. Ammon, a member of the New York bar, was convicted, after
a long trial, on the 17th of June, 1903, of receiving stolen goods, he
had, in the parlance of his class, been "due" for a long time. The
stolen property in question was the sum of thirty thousand five hundred
dollars in greenbacks, part of the loot of the notorious "Franklin
Syndicate," devised and engineered by William F. Miller, who later
became the catspaw of his legal adviser, the subject of this history.

Ammon stood at the bar and listened complacently to his sentence of not
less than four years at hard labor in Sing Sing. A sneer curved his lips
as, after nodding curtly to his lawyer, he turned to be led away by the
court attendant. The fortune snatched from his client had procured for
him the most adroit of counsel, the most exhaustive of trials. He knew
that nothing had been left undone to enable him to evade the
consequences of his crime, and he was cynically content.

For years "Bob" Ammon had been a familiar figure in the Wall Street
district of New York. Although the legal adviser of swindlers and
confidence men, he was a type of American whose energies, if turned in a
less dubious direction, might well have brought him honorable
distinction. Tall, strong as a bull, bluff, good-natured, reckless and
of iron nerve, he would have given good account of himself as an Indian
fighter or frontiersman. His fine presence, his great vitality, his
coarse humor, his confidence and bravado, had won for him many friends
of a certain kind and engendered a feeling among the public that
somehow, although the associate and adviser of criminals, he was outside
the law, to the circumventing of which his energies were directed.
Unfortunately his experiences with the law had bred in him a contempt
for it which ultimately caused his downfall.

"The reporters arc bothering you, are they?" he had said to Miller in
his office. "Hang them! Send them to me. I'll talk to them!"

And talk to them he did. He could talk a police inspector or a city
magistrate into a state of vacuous credulity, and needless to say he was
to his clients as a god knowing both good and evil, as well as how to
eschew the one and avoid the other. Miller hated, loathed and feared
him, yet freely entrusted his liberty, and all he had risked his liberty
to gain, to this strange and powerful personality which held him
enthralled by the mere exercise of a physical superiority.

The "Franklin Syndicate" had collapsed amid the astonished outcries of
its thousands of victims, on November 24th, 1899, when, under the advice
and with the assistance of Ammon, its organizer, "520 per cent. Miller,"
had fled to Canada. It was nearly four years later, in June, 1903, that
Ammon, arraigned at the bar of justice as a criminal, heard Assistant
District Attorney Nott call William F. Miller, convict, to the stand to
testify against him. A curious contrast they presented as they faced one
another; the emaciated youth of twenty-five, the hand of Death already
tightly fastened upon his meagre frame, coughing, hollow-cheeked,
insignificant, flat-nosed, almost repulsive, who dragged himself to the
witness chair, and the swaggering athlete who glared at him from the bar
surrounded by his cordon of able counsel. As Ammon fixed his penetrating
gaze upon his former client, Miller turned pale and dropped his eyes.
Then the prosecutor, realizing the danger of letting the old hypnotic
power return, even for an instant, quickly stepped between them. Miller
raised his eyes and smiled, and those who heard knew that this miserable
creature had been through the fire and come forth to speak true things.

The trial of Ammon involved practically the reproving of the case
against Miller, for which the latter had been convicted and sentenced to
ten years in State's prison, whence he now issued like one from the tomb
to point the skeleton, incriminating finger at his betrayer. But the
case began by the convict-witness testifying that the whole business was
a miserable fraud from start to finish, carried on and guided by the
advice of the defendant. He told how he, a mere boy of twenty-one,
burdened with a sick wife and baby, unfitted by training or ability for
any sort of lucrative employment, a hanger-on of bucket shops and, in
his palmiest days, a speculator in tiny lots of feebly margined stocks,
finding himself without means of support, conceived the alluring idea of
soliciting funds for investment, promising enormous interest, and paying
this interest out of the principal intrusted to him. For a time he
preyed only upon his friends, claiming "inside information" of large
"deals" and paying ten per cent. per week on the money received out of
his latest deposits.

Surely the history of civilization is a history of credulity. Miller
prospered. His earlier friend-customers who had hesitatingly taken his
receipt for ten dollars, and thereafter had received one dollar every
Monday morning, repeated the operation and returned in ever-increasing
numbers. From having his office "in his hat," he took an upper room in a
small two-story house at 144 Floyd Street, Brooklyn--an humble tenement,
destined to be the scene of one of the most extraordinary exhibitions of
man's cupidity and foolishness in modern times. At first he had tramped
round, like a pedler, delivering the dividends himself and soliciting
more, but soon he hired a boy. This was in February, 1899. Business
increased. The golden flood began to appear in an attenuated but
constant rivulet. He hired four more employees and the whole top floor
of the house. The golden rivulet became a steady stream. From a
"panhandler" he rolled in ready thousands. The future opened into
magnificent auriferous distances. He began to call himself "The Franklin
Syndicate," and to advertise that "the way to wealth is as plain as the
road to the market." He copied the real brokers and scattered circulars
and "weekly letters" over the country, exciting the rural mind in
distant Manitoba and Louisiana.

There was an instantaneous response. His mail required the exclusive
attention of several clerks. The stream of gold became a rushing
torrent. Every Monday morning the Floyd Street house was crowded with
depositors who drew their interest, added to it, deposited it again, and
went upon their way rejoicing. Nobody was going to have to work any
more. The out-of-town customers received checks for their interest drawn
upon "The Franklin Syndicate," together with printed receipts for their
deposits, all signed "William F. Miller," by means of a rubber stamp. No
human hand could have signed them all without writer's cramp. The
rubber stamp was Miller's official signature. Then with a mighty roar
the torrent burst into a deluge. The Floyd Street quarters were besieged
by a clamoring multitude fighting to see which of them could give up his
money first, and there had to be a special delivery for Miller's mail.
He rented the whole house and hired fifty clerks. You could deposit your
money almost anywhere, from the parlor to the pantry, the clothes closet
or the bath-room. Fridays the public stormed the house _en masse_, since
the money must be deposited _on that day_ to draw interest for the
following week. The crush was so enormous that the stoop broke down.
Imagine it! In quiet Brooklyn! People struggling to get up the steps to
cram their money into Miller's pockets! There he sat, behind a desk, at
the top of the stoop, solemnly taking the money thrown down before him
and handing out little pink and green stamped receipts in exchange.
There was no place to put the money, so it was shoved on to the floor
behind him. Friday afternoons Miller and his clerks waded through it,
knee high. There was no pretense of bookkeeping. Simply in self-defense
Miller issued in October a pronunciamento that he could not in justice
to his business, consent to receive less than fifty dollars at one time.
Theoretically, there was no reason why the thing should not have gone
on practically forever, Miller and everybody else becoming richer and
richer. So long as the golden stream swelled five times each year
everybody would be happy. How could anybody fail to be happy who saw so
much money lying around loose everywhere?

[Illustration: One of Miller's Franklin Syndicate Receipts.]

But the business had increased to such an extent that Miller began to
distrust his own capacity to handle it. He therefore secured a partner
in the person of one Edward Schlessinger, and with him went to
Charlestown, Mass., for the purpose of opening another office, in charge
of which they placed a man named Louis Powers. History repeated itself.
Powers shipped the deposits to Miller every day or two by express. Was
there ever such a plethora of easy money?

But Schlessinger was no Miller. He decided that he must have a third of
the profits (Heaven knows how they computed them!) and have them,
moreover, each day _in cash_. Hence there was a daily accounting, part
of the receipts being laid aside to pay off interest checks and
interest, and the balance divided. Schlessinger carried his off in a
bag; Miller took the rest, cash, money orders and checks, and deposited
it in a real bank. How the money poured in may be realized from the fact
that the excess of receipts over disbursements for the month ending
November 16th was four hundred and thirty thousand dollars.

Hitherto Miller had been the central figure. Col. Robert A. Ammon now
became the _deus ex machina_. Miller's advertising had become so
extensive that he had been forced to retain a professional agent, one
Rudolph Guenther, to supervise it, and when the newspapers began to make
unpleasant comments, Guenther took Miller to Ammon's office in the
Bennett Building in Nassau Street. Ammon accepted a hundred dollars from
Miller, listened to his account of the business and examined copies of
the circulars. When he was handed one of the printed receipts he said
they were "incriminating." Miller must try to get them back. He advised
(as many another learned counsellor has done) incorporating the
business, since by this means stock could be sold and exchanged for the
incriminating receipts. He explained the mistakes of the "_Dean_ crowd,"
but showed how he had been able to safeguard them in spite of the fact
that they had foolishly insisted on holding the stock in their company
themselves instead of making their customers the stockholders.
Nevertheless "you do not see any of the Dean people in jail," boasted
Ammon. From now on Miller and he were in frequent consultation, and
Ammon took steps to incorporate, procuring for that purpose from Wells,
Fargo & Co. a certificate of deposit for one hundred thousand dollars.
Occasionally he would visit Floyd Street to see how things were going.
Miller became a mere puppet; Ammon twitched the wire.

It was now well on in November, and the press of both Boston and New
York was filled with scathing attacks upon the Syndicate. The reporters
became so inquisitive as to be annoying to the peaceful Miller. "Send
the reporters over to me!" directed Ammon.

The _Post_ (of Boston) said the whole thing was a miserable swindle.
Ammon, accompanied by Miller, carrying a satchel which contained fifty
thousand dollars in greenbacks, went to Boston, visited the offices of
the _Post_, and pitched into the editor.

"The business is all right; you must give us a fair deal!"

The pair also visited Watts, the chief of police.

"You keep your mouth shut," said Ammon to Miller. "I'll do all the
talking." He showed Watts the bag of money, and demanded what he had
meant by calling the enterprise a "green goods business." If the thing
wasn't all right, did Watts suppose that he, Col. Robert A. Ammon, would
be connected with it? The chief backed down, and explained that he had
jokingly referred to the color of one of the receipts--which happened
to be green.

In spite of Ammon's confidence, however, there was an uneasy feeling in
the air, and it was decided to put an advertisement in the _Post_
offering to allow any customer who so desired to withdraw his deposit,
_without notice_, upon the following Saturday. This announcement did not
have precisely the anticipated effect, and Saturday saw a large crowd of
victims eager to withdraw their money from the Boston office of the
Franklin Syndicate. Powers paid the "_Pauls_," of Boston, out of the bag
brought on by Miller containing the deposits of the "_Peters_," of
Brooklyn. Meantime, Ammon addressed the throng, incidentally
blackguarding a _Post_ reporter before the crowd, telling them that his
paper was a "yellow paper, had never amounted to anything, and never
would." Some timid souls took courage and redeposited their money. The
run continued one day and cost Ammon and Miller about twenty-eight
thousand dollars. Ammon took five thousand dollars cash as a fee out of
the bag, and the pair returned to New York. But confidence had been
temporarily restored.

The beginning of the end, however, was now in sight--at least for the
keen vision of Bob Ammon. He advised stimulating deposits and laying
hands on all the money possible before the crash came. Accordingly
Miller sent a telegram (collect) to all depositors:

    We have inside information of a big transaction, to begin Saturday
    or Monday morning. Big profits. Remit at once so as to receive the
    profits.

    WILLIAM F. MILLER,

    Franklin Syndicate.

A thousand or so were returned, the depositors having refused to pay the
charges. The rest of the customers in large measure responded. But the
game was nearly up. There were scare-heads in the papers. Miller saw
detectives on every corner, and, like a rat leaving a sinking ship,
Schlessinger scuttled away for the last time with a bag of money on the
evening of Tuesday, November 21st, 1899. The rest of the deposits were
crammed into Miller's desk and left there over night.

The next morning Miller returned to Floyd Street and spent that day in
the usual routine, and also on Thursday remained until about twelve
o'clock noon, when he placed thirty thousand five hundred dollars in
bills in a satchel and started for Ammon's office, where he found
Schlessinger--likewise with a satchel.

"The jig's up," announced Schlessinger.

"Billy, I think you'll have to make a run for it," said Ammon. "The
best thing for you is to go to Canada."

It still remained to secure the money, which Miller had deposited in the
banks, in such a way that the customers could not get hold of it. Ammon
explained how that could easily be done. The money should be all turned
over to him, and none of the creditors would ever see it again. He did
not deem it necessary to suggest that neither would Miller. Accordingly
the two, the lawyer and the client, went to the office of Wells, Fargo &
Co., Ammon obligingly carrying the satchel containing the thirty
thousand five hundred dollars. Here Ammon deposited the contents to his
own account, as well as the certificate of deposit for one hundred
thousand dollars previously mentioned, and a check for ten thousand
dollars, representing the balance of Miller's loot. In addition to this
he received an order for forty thousand dollars United States Government
bonds, which were on deposit with Wells, Fargo & Co., and later, through
Miller's father, sixty-five thousand dollars in bonds of the New York
Central Railroad and the United States Government. Thus Ammon secured
from his dupe the sum of two hundred and forty-five thousand five
hundred dollars, the actual market value of the securities bringing the
amount up to two hundred and fifty thousand five hundred dollars,
besides whatever sums he had been paid by Miller for legal services,
which could not have been less than ten or fifteen thousand dollars. The
character of the gentleman is well illustrated by the fact that later
when paying Mrs. Miller her miserable pittance of five dollars per week,
he explained to her that "he was giving her that out of his own money,
and that her husband _owed him_."

[Illustration: Ammon's deposit slips and a receipt signed by Mrs.
Ammon.]

There still remained, however, the chance of getting a few dollars more
and Ammon advised Miller "to try to get Friday's receipts, which were
the heaviest day's business." Acting on this suggestion, Miller
returned to Floyd Street the next morning at about half past nine,
finding a great crowd of people waiting outside. About one o'clock he
started to go home, but discovering that he was being followed by a man
whom he took to be a detective, he boarded a street car, dodged through
a drug store and a Chinese laundry, finally made the elevated railroad,
with his pursuer at his heels, and eventually reached the lawyer's
office about two o'clock in the afternoon. Word was received almost
immediately over the telephone that Miller had been indicted in Kings
County for conspiracy to defraud, and Ammon stated that the one thing
for Miller to do was to go away. Miller replied that he did not want to
go unless he could take his wife and baby with him, but Ammon assured
him that he would send them to Canada later in charge of his own wife.
Under this promise Miller agreed to go, and Ammon procured a man named
Enright to take Miller to Canada, saying that "he was an ex-detective
and could get him out of the way." Ammon further promised to forward to
Miller whatever money he might need to retain lawyers for him in
Montreal. Thereupon Miller exchanged hats with some one in Ammon's
office and started for Canada in the custody of the lawyer's
representative.

How the wily colonel must have chuckled as poor Miller trotted down the
stairs like a sheep leaving his fleece behind him. A golden fleece
indeed! Did ever a lawyer have such a piece of luck? Here was a little
fellow who had invented a brilliant scheme to get away with other
people's money and had carried it through successfully--more than
successfully, beyond the dreams of even the most avaricious criminal,
and then, richer than Midas, had handed over the whole jolly fortune to
another for the other's asking, without even taking a scrap of paper to
show for it. More than that, he had then voluntarily extinguished
himself. Had Ammon not chuckled he would not have been Bob Ammon. The
money was stolen, to be sure, but Ammon's skirts were clear. There was
nothing to show that the two hundred and forty-five thousand dollars he
had received was stolen money. There was only one man--a discredited
felon, who could hint that the money was even "tainted," and _he_ was
safely over the border, in a foreign jurisdiction, not in the custody of
the police, but of Ammon himself, to be kept there (as Mr. Robert C.
Taylor so aptly phrased it in arguing Ammon's case on appeal) "on
waiting orders. Ammon had Miller on a string, and as soon as Ammon (for
his own sake) was compelled either to produce Miller or to run the risk
of indictment, he pulled the string and brought Miller back into the
jurisdiction."

Needless to say great was the ado made over the disappearance of the
promoter of the Franklin Syndicate, and the authorities of King's County
speedily let it become known that justice required that some one should
be punished for the colossal fraud which had been perpetrated. The grand
jury of the county started a general investigation. Public indignation
was stirred to the point of ebullition. In the midst of the rumpus,
there came a knock on the office door of the Hon. John F. Clark,
District Attorney of King's County, and Col. Robert A. Ammon announced
himself. The two men were entire strangers to each other but this did
not prevent Ammon, with his inimitable assurance, from addressing the
District Attorney by his first name.

"How are you, John?" he inquired nonchalantly, "what can I do for you?"

Mr. Clark repressed his natural inclination to kick the insolent fellow
forcibly out of his office, invited him to be seated and rang for a
stenographer. Ammon asserted his anxiety to assist the District Attorney
by every means in his power, but denied knowing the whereabouts of
Miller, alleging that he was simply acting as his counsel. Mr. Clark
replied that in Miller's absence the grand jury might take the view
that Ammon himself was the principal. At this Ammon calmly assured his
host that as far as he was concerned he was ready to go before the grand
jury at any time.

"That is just what I want," returned Mr. Clark, "the grand jury is in
session. Come over."

Ammon arose with a smile and accompanied the District Attorney towards
the door of the grand jury room. Just outside he suddenly placed his
hand to his head as if recollecting something.

"One moment," he exclaimed. "I forgot that I have an engagement. I will
come over to-morrow."

"Ah!" retorted Mr. Clark, "I do not think you will be here to-morrow."

Two weeks later Miller was safely ensconced without bail in Raymond
Street jail.

Schlessinger, who got away with one hundred and seventy-five thousand
dollars in cash, fled to Europe where he lived high, frequenting the
race tracks and gaming tables until he was called to his final account a
year or two ago. The money which he took has never been traced. Miller
was tried, convicted and sent to Sing Sing. The Appellate Division of
the Supreme Court then reversed his conviction, but later, on appeal to
the Court of Appeals, it was sustained.

Of the enormous sums turned over to Ammon Miller received nothing save
the money necessary for his support in Montreal, for the lawyers who
defended him, and five dollars per week for his wife and child up to the
time he turned State's evidence. It is interesting to note that among
the counsel representing Miller upon his trial was Ammon himself.
Miller's wife and child were not sent to Montreal by Ammon, nor did the
latter secure bail for his client at any time during his different
periods of incarceration. The colonel knew very well that it was a
choice between himself and Miller and took no steps which might
necessitate the election falling upon himself.

The conviction of Miller, with his sentence to ten years in State's
prison did not, however, prevent the indictment of Ammon for receiving
stolen money in New York County, although the chance that he would ever
have to suffer for his crime seemed small indeed. The reader must bear
in mind that up to the time of Ammon's trial Miller had never admitted
his guilt; that he was still absolutely, and apparently irrevocably,
under Ammon's sinister influence, keeping in constant communication with
him and implicitly obeying his instructions while in prison; and that
Miller's wife and child were dependent upon Ammon for their daily bread.
No wonder Ammon strode the streets confident that his creature would
never betray him.

"Now, Billy, you don't want to be shooting off your mouth up here," was
his parting injunction to his dupe on his final visit to Sing Sing
before he became a guest there himself at the expense of the People.

Miller followed his orders to the letter, and the stipend was increased
to the munificent sum of forty dollars per month.

Meantime the case against Ammon languished and the District Attorney of
New York County was at his wits' end to devise a means to procure the
evidence to convict him. To do this it would be necessary to establish
affirmatively that the thirty thousand five hundred dollars received by
Ammon from Miller and deposited with Wells, Fargo & Co. was the
_identical_ money stolen by Miller from the victims of the Franklin
Syndicate. It was easy enough to prove that Miller stole hundreds of
thousands of dollars, that Ammon received hundreds of thousands, but you
had to prove that the same money stolen by Miller passed to the hands of
Ammon. Only one man in the world, as Ammon had foreseen, could supply
this last necessary link in the chain of evidence and he was a
convict--and mute.

It now became the task of the District Attorney to induce Miller to
confess the truth and take the stand against Ammon. He had been in
prison a considerable time and his health was such as to necessitate his
being transferred to the hospital ward. Several of the District
Attorney's assistants visited him at various times at Sing Sing in the
hope of being able to persuade him to turn State's evidence, but all
their efforts were in vain. Miller refused absolutely to say anything
that would tend to implicate Ammon.

At last the District Attorney himself, accompanied by Mr. Nott, who
later prosecuted Ammon, made a special trip to Sing Sing to see what
could be done. They found Miller lying upon his prison pallet, his harsh
cough and blazing eyes speaking only too patently of his condition. At
first Mr. Nott tried to engage him in conversation while the District
Attorney occupied himself with other business in another part of the
ward, but it was easily apparent that Miller would say nothing. The
District Attorney then approached the bed where Miller was lying and
inquired if it were true that he declined to say anything which might
tend to incriminate Ammon. After some hesitation Miller replied that,
even if he should testify against his old accomplice, there was nothing
to show that he would be pardoned, and that he would not talk unless he
had actually in his hands some paper or writing which would guarantee
that if he did so he would be set free.

The spectacle of a convicted felon haggling with an officer of the law
over the terms upon which he would consent to avail himself of an
opportunity to make the only reparation still possible angered the
District Attorney, and, turning fiercely upon the prisoner, he arraigned
him in scathing terms, stating that he was a miserable swindler and
thief, who had robbed thousands of poor people of all the money they had
in the world, that he showed himself devoid of every spark of decency or
repentance by refusing to assist the law in punishing his confederate
and assisting his victims in getting back what was left of the money,
and that he, the District Attorney, felt himself humiliated in having
consented to come there to visit and talk with such a heartless and
depraved specimen of humanity. The District Attorney then turned his
back upon Miller, whose eyes filled with tears, but who made no
response.

A few moments later the convict asked permission to speak to the
District Attorney alone. With some reluctance the latter granted the
request and the others drew away.

"Mr. District Attorney," said the wretched man in a trembling voice,
with the tears still suffusing his eyes, "I _am_ a thief; I did rob all
those poor people, and I am heartily sorry for it. I would gladly die,
if by doing so I could pay them back. But I haven't a single cent of all
the money that I stole and the only thing that stands between my wife
and baby and starvation is my keeping silence. If I did what you ask,
the only money they have to live on would be stopped. I can't see them
starve, glad as I would be to do what I can now to make up for the wrong
I have done."

The District Attorney's own eyes were not entirely dry as he held out
his hand to Miller.

"Miller," he replied, "I have done you a great injustice. I honor you
for the position you have taken. Were I in your place I should probably
act exactly as you are doing. I cannot promise you a pardon if you
testify against Ammon. I cannot even promise that your wife will receive
forty dollars a month, for the money in my charge cannot be used for
such a purpose; all I can assure you of is that, should you decide to
help me, a full and fair statement of all you may have done will be sent
to the Governor with a request that he act favorably upon any
application for a pardon which you may make. The choice must be your
own. Whatever you decide to do, you have my respect and sympathy. Think
well over the matter. Do not decide at once; wait for a day or two, and
I will return to New York and you can send me word."

The next day Miller sent word that he had determined to tell the truth
and take the stand, whatever the consequences to himself and his family
might be. He was immediately transferred to the Tombs Prison in New York
City, where he made a complete and full confession, not only assisting
in every way in securing evidence for the prosecution of Ammon, but
aiding his trustee in bankruptcy to determine the whereabouts of some
sixty thousand dollars of the stolen money, which but for him would
never have been recovered. At the same time Ammon was re-arrested upon a
bench warrant, and his bail sufficiently increased to render his
appearance for trial probable. As Miller had foreseen, the monthly
payment to his wife instantly stopped.

The usual effect produced upon a jury by the testimony of a convict
accomplice is one of distrust or open incredulity. Every word of
Miller's story, however, carried with it the impression of absolute
truth. As he proceeded, in spite of the sneers of the defence, an
extraordinary wave of sympathy for the man swept over the court-room,
and the jury listened with close attention to his graphic account of the
rise and fall of the outrageous conspiracy which had attempted to shield
its alluring offer of instant wealth behind the name of America's most
practical philosopher, whose only receipt for the same end had been
frugality and industry. Supported as Miller was by the corroborative
testimony of other witnesses and by the certificates of deposit which
Ammon had, with his customary bravado, made out in his own handwriting,
no room was left for even the slightest doubt, not only that the money
had been stolen but that Ammon had received it. Indeed so plain was the
proposition that the defence never for an instant contemplated the
possibility of putting Ammon upon the stand in his own behalf. It was in
truth an extraordinary case, for the principal element in the proof was
made out by the evidence of the thief himself that he was a thief.
Miller had been tried and convicted of the very larceny to which he now
testified, and, although in the eyes of the law no principle of _res
adjudicata_ could apply in Ammon's case, it was a logical conclusion
that if the evidence upon the first trial was repeated, the necessary
element of larceny would be effectually established. Hence, in point of
fact, Miller's testimony upon the question of whether the money had been
_stolen_ was entirely unnecessary, and the efforts of the defence were
directed simply to making out Miller such a miscreant upon his own
testimony that perforce the jury could not accept his evidence when it
reached the point of implicating Ammon. All their attempts in this
direction, however, only roused increased sympathy for the witness and
hostility toward their own client, and made the jury the more ready to
believe that Ammon had been the only one in the end to profit by the
transaction.

Briefly, the two points urged by the defence were:

(1) That Ammon was acting only as Miller's counsel, and hence was
immune, and,

(2) That there was no adequate legal evidence that the thirty thousand
five hundred dollars which Ammon had deposited, as shown by the deposit
slip, was the identical money stolen from the victims of the Franklin
syndicate. As bearing upon this they urged that the stolen money had in
fact been deposited by Miller himself, and so had lost the character of
stolen money before it was turned over to the defendant, and that
Miller's story being that of an accomplice required absolute
corroboration in every detail.

The point that Ammon was acting only as a lawyer was quickly disposed of
by Judge Newburger.

"Something has been said by counsel," he remarked in his charge to the
jury, "to the effect that the defendant, as a lawyer, had a perfect
right to advise Miller, but I know of no rule of law that will permit
counsel to advise how a crime can be committed."

As to the identity of the money, the Court charged that it made no
difference which person performed the physical act of placing the cash
in the hands of the receiving teller of the bank, so long as it was
deposited to Ammon's credit.

On the question of what corroboration of Miller's story was necessary,
Judge Ingraham, in the Appellate Division, expressed great doubt as to
whether in the eyes of the law Miller, the thief, could be regarded as
an accomplice of Ammon in receiving the stolen money at all, and stated
that even if he could be so regarded, there was more than abundant
corroboration of his testimony.

Ammon's conviction was affirmed throughout the courts, including the
Court of Appeals, and the defendant himself is now engaged in serving
out his necessarily inadequate sentence--necessarily inadequate, since
under the laws of the State of New York, the receiver of stolen goods,
however great his moral obliquity may be, and however great the amount
stolen, can only receive half the punishment which may be meted out to
the thief himself, "receiving" being punishable by only five years or
less in State's prison, while grand larceny is punishable by ten years.

Yet who was the greater criminal--the weak, ignorant, poverty-stricken
clerk, or the shrewd, experienced lawyer who preyed upon his client and
through him upon the community at large?

The confession of Miller, in the face of what the consequences of his
course might mean to his wife and child, was an act of moral courage.
The price he had to pay is known to himself alone. But the horrors of
life in prison for the "squealer" were thoroughly familiar to him when
he elected to do what he could to atone for his crime. In fact Ammon had
not neglected to picture them vividly to him and to stigmatize an
erstwhile client of his.

"Everything looks good," he wrote to Miller in Sing Sing, in reporting
the affirmance of Goslin's conviction, "especially since the _squealer_
is getting his just _deserts_."

With no certain knowledge of a future pardon Miller went back to prison
cheerfully to face all the nameless tortures inflicted upon those who
help the State--the absolute black silence of convict excommunication,
the blows and kicks inflicted without opportunity for retaliation or
complaint, the hostility of guards and keepers, the suffering of abject
poverty, keener in a prison house than on any other foot of earth.

It is interesting to observe that Miller's original purpose had been to
secure money to speculate with--for he had been bitten deep by the
tarantula of Wall Street, and his early experiences had led him to
believe that he could beat the market if only he had sufficient margin.
This margin he set out to secure. Then when he saw how easy it was to
get money for the asking, he dropped the idea of speculation and simply
became a banker. He did make one bona-fide attempt, but the stock went
down, he sold out and netted a small loss. Had Miller actually
_continued to speculate_ it is doubtful whether he could have been
convicted for any crime, since it was for that purpose that the money
was entrusted to him. He might have lost it all in the Street and gone
scot free. As it was, in failing to gamble with it, he became guilty of
embezzlement.

Ammon arrived in Sing Sing with a degree of éclat. He found numerous old
friends and clients among the inmates. He brought a social position
which had its value. Money, too, is no less desirable there than
elsewhere, and Ammon had plenty of it.

In due course, but not until he had served more than half his sentence
(less commutation), Miller a broken man, received his pardon, and went
back to his wife and child. When Governor Higgins performed this act of
executive clemency, many honest folk in Brooklyn and elsewhere loudly
expressed their indignation. District Attorney Jerome did not escape
their blame. Was this contemptible thief, this meanest of all mean
swindlers, who had stolen hundreds of thousands to be turned loose on
the community before he had served half his sentence? It was an outrage!
A disgrace to civilization! Reader, how say you?




VI

A Study in Finance


"He that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent."
  --PROVERBS 28:20.

The victim of moral overstrain is the central figure in many novels and
countless magazine stories. In most of them he finally repents him fully
of his sins past and returns to his former or to some equally desirable
position, to lead a new and better life. The dangers and temptations of
the "Street" are, however, too real and terrible to be studied other
than in actuality, and the fall of hundreds of previously honest young
men owing to easily remedied conditions should teach its lesson, not
only to their comrades, but to their employers as well. The ball and
chain, quite as often as repentance and forgiveness, ends their
experience.

No young man takes a position in a banking-house with the deliberate
intention of becoming an embezzler. He knows precisely, as well as does
the reader, that if he listens to the whisper of temptation he is
lost--and so does his employer. Yet the employer, who would hold himself
remiss if he allowed his little boy to have the run of the jam-closet
and then discovered that the latter's lips bore evidence of petty
larceny, or would regard himself as almost criminally negligent if he
placed a priceless pearl necklace where an ignorant chimney-sweep might
fall under the hypnotism of its shimmer, will calmly allow a condition
of things in his own brokerage or banking office where a
fifteen-dollars-a-week clerk may have free access to a million dollars'
worth of negotiable securities, and even encourage the latter by
occasional "sure" tips to take a flyer in the market.

It is a deplorable fact that the officers of certain companies
occasionally "unload" undesirable securities upon their employees, and,
in order to boom or create a "movement" in a certain stock, will induce
the persons under their control to purchase it. It would be a rare case
in which a clerk who valued his situation would refuse to take a few
shares in an enterprise which the head of the firm was fathering. Of
course, such occurrences are the exceptions, but there are plenty of
houses not far from Wall Street where the partners know that their
clerks and messengers are "playing the market," and exert not the
slightest influence to stop them. When these men find that they and
their customers, and not the clerks and messengers, are paying the loss
accounts of the latter, they are very much distressed, and tell the
District Attorney, with regret, that only by sending such wicked and
treacherous persons to State's prison can similar dishonesty be
prevented.

Not long ago the writer became acquainted with a young man who, as loan
clerk in a trust company, had misappropriated a large amount of
securities and had pleaded guilty to the crime of grand larceny in the
first degree. He was awaiting sentence, and in connection therewith it
became necessary to examine into the conditions prevailing generally in
the financial district. His story is already public property, for the
case attracted wide attention in the daily press; but, inasmuch as the
writer's object is to point a moral rather than adorn a tale, the
culprit's name and the name of the company with which he was connected
need not be given.

He is now serving a term in State's prison and is, the writer believes,
sincerely repentant and determined to make a man of himself upon his
release. For present purposes let him be called John Smith. He was born
in New York City, in surroundings rather better than the average. His
family were persons of good education and his home was a comfortable and
happy one. From childhood he received thorough religious instruction
and was always a straightforward, honest and obedient boy. His father,
having concluded from observation that the shortest route to success lay
in financial enterprise, secured a place in a broker's office for his
son after the latter's graduation from the high school. John began at
the bottom and gradually worked up to the position of assistant loan
clerk in a big trust company. This took fifteen years of hard work.

From the day that he started in filling inkwells and cleaning out ticker
baskets, he saw fortunes made and lost in a twinkling. He learned that
the chief business of a broker is acting as go-between for persons who
are trying to sell what they do not own to others who have not the money
to pay for what they buy. And he saw hundreds of such persons grow rich
on these fictitious transactions. He also saw others "wiped out," but
they cheerfully went through bankruptcy and began again, many of them
achieving wealth on their second or third attempt. He was earning five
dollars a week and getting his lunch at a "vegetarian health restaurant"
for fifteen cents. The broker, for whom he ran errands, gave away
thirty-five-cent cigars to his customers and had an elaborate luncheon
served in the office daily to a dozen or more of the elect. John knew
one boy of about his own age, who, having made a successful turn, began
as a trader and cleaned up a hundred thousand dollars in a rising market
the first year. That was better than the cleaning up John was used to.
But he was a sensible boy and had made up his mind to succeed in a
legitimate fashion. Gradually he saved a few hundred dollars and, acting
on the knowledge he had gained in his business, bought two or three
shares in a security which quickly advanced in value and almost doubled
his money. The next time as well fortune favored him, and he soon had a
comfortable nest-egg--enough to warrant his feeling reasonably secure in
the event of accident or sickness.

He had worked faithfully, had given great satisfaction to his employers,
and presently had a clerical position in a prominent trust company
offered to him. It seemed an advance. The salary was larger, even if
absurdly small, and he gladly accepted the place.

Shortly after this he had his first experience in real finance. The
president of the company sent for him--the reader will remember that
this is a true story--and the boy entered his private office and came
into the august presence of the magnate. This man is to-day what is
commonly known as a "power" in Wall Street.

"My boy," said the president, "you have been doing very well. I have
noticed the excellence of your work. I want to commend you."

"Thank you, sir," said John modestly, expecting to hear that his salary
was to be raised.

"Yes," continued the great man. "And I want you to have an interest in
the business."

The blood rushed to John's head and face. "Thank you very much," he
gasped.

"I have allotted you five shares in the trust company," said the
president. "If you take them up and carry them you will feel that you
have a real connection with the house and it will net you a handsome
return. Have you any money?"

It so happened that at this time John's savings were invested in a few
bonds of an old and conservatively managed railroad. His heart fell. He
didn't want to buy any bank stock.

"No," he answered. "My salary is small enough and I need it all. I don't
save any money."

"Oh, well," said the magnate, "I will try and fix it up for you. I will
arrange for a loan with the ---- Bank on the stock. Remember, I'm doing
this to help you. That is all. You may go back to your books."

Next day John was informed that he had bought five shares of ---- Trust
Company stock in the neighborhood of three hundred, and he signed a note
for one thousand four hundred and twenty-five dollars, and indorsed the
stock over to the bank from which the money had been borrowed for him.
The stock almost immediately dropped over fifty points. John paid the
interest on the note out of his salary, and the dividends, as fast as
they were declared, went to extinguish the body of the loan. Some time
afterward he learned that he had bought the stock from the magnate
himself. He never received any benefit from it, for the stock was sold
to cover the note, and John was obliged to make up the difference. He
also discovered that ten or fifteen other employees had been given a
similar opportunity by their generous employer at about the same time.
John, in prison, says it was a scheme to keep fifty or a hundred shares
where it could easily be controlled by the president, without risk to
himself, in case of need. Of course, he may be wrong. At any rate, he
feels bitterly now toward the big men who are at large while he is in
jail.

John continued to keep up with the acquaintances formed during his years
in the broker's office, many of whom had started little businesses of
their own and had done well. Part of their stock-in-trade was to appear
prosperous and they took John out to lunch, and told him what a fine
fellow he was, and gave him sure tips. But John had grown "wise." He had
had all the chances of that sort he wanted, and from a bigger man than
any of them. He ate their lunches and invited them in return. Then he
economized for a day or two to even up. He was not prosperous himself,
but he did not accept favors without repaying them.

One thing he observed and noted carefully--every man he knew who had
begun a brokerage business and kept sober, who attended to business and
did not speculate, made money and plenty of it. He knew one young firm
which cleared up fifteen thousand in commissions at the end of the
second year. That looked good to him, and he knew, besides, that _he_
was sober and attended to business. He made inquiries and learned that
one could start in, if one were modest in one's pretensions, for two
thousand five hundred dollars. That would pay office rent and keep
things going until the commissions began to come in. He started to look
around for some other young man who could put up the money in
consideration of John's contributing the experience. But all the men he
knew had experience without money.

Then by chance he met a young fellow of bright and agreeable personality
whom we shall call Prescott. The latter was five or six years older than
John, had had a large experience in brokerage houses in another city,
and had come to New York to promote the interests of a certain copper
company. John had progressed and was now assistant loan clerk of one of
the biggest trust companies in the city, which also happened to be
transfer agent for the copper company. Thus John had constantly to
handle its certificates. Prescott said it was a wonderful thing--that
some of the keenest men in the Street were in it, and, although it was a
curb stock, strongly advised his new friend to buy all he could of it.
He assured John that, although he was admittedly interested in booming
the stock, he was confident that before long it would sell at four times
its present quotation.

Meantime the stock, which had been listed at 2-1/4, began to go rapidly
up. Word went around the trust company that it was a great purchase
anywhere below 10, and John, as well as the other boys employed in the
company, got together what money he could and began to buy it. It
continued to go up--they had unconsciously assisted it in its
ascent--and they bought more. John purchased seventy-five shares--all
the way up to 8 and 9. One of his friends took eight hundred. Then it
dropped out of sight. They hadn't time to get out, and John, in prison,
has his yet. But he still had faith in Prescott, for he liked him and
believed in his business capacity.

The stock "operation" over, Prescott began to prospect for something
new, and suggested to John that they form a brokerage house under the
latter's name. John was to be president at "a fixed salary." It sounded
very grand. His duties at the trust company began to seem picayune.
Moreover, his loss in copper had depressed him and he wanted to recoup,
if he could. But how to get the two thousand five hundred dollars
necessary to start in business? Prescott pleaded poverty, yet talked
constantly of the ease with which a fortune might be made if they could
only once "get in right." It was a period of increased dividends, of
stock-jobbing operations of enormous magnitude, of "fifty-point
movements," when the lucky purchaser of only a hundred shares of some
inconspicuous railroad sometimes found that he could sell out next week
with five thousand dollars' profit. The air seemed full of money. It
appeared to rain banknotes and stock certificates.

In the "loan cage" at the trust company John handled daily millions in
securities, a great part of which were negotiable. When almost everybody
was so rich he wondered why any one remained poor. Two or three men of
his own age gave up their jobs in other concerns and became traders,
while another opened an office of his own. John was told that they had
acted on "good information," had bought a few hundred shares of Union
Pacific, and were now comfortably fixed. He would have been glad to
buy, but copper had left him without anything to buy with.

One day Prescott took him out to lunch and confided to him that one of
the big speculators had tipped him off to buy cotton, since there was
going to be a failure in the crop. It was practically a sure thing. Two
thousand dollars' margin would buy enough cotton to start them in
business, even if the rise was only a very small one.

"Why don't you borrow a couple of bonds?" asked Prescott.

"Borrow from whom?" inquired John.

"Why, from some customer of the trust company."

"No one would lend them to me," answered John.

"Well, borrow them, anyhow. They would never know about it, and you
could put them back as soon as we closed the account," suggested
Prescott.

John was shocked, and said so.

"You are easy," said his comrade. "Don't you know that the trust
companies do it themselves all the time? The presidents of the railroads
use the holdings of their companies as collateral. Even the banks use
their deposits for trading. Didn't old ---- dump a lot of rotten stuff
on you? Why don't you get even? Let me tell you something. Fully
one-half of the men who are now successful financiers got their start by
putting up as margin securities deposited with them. No one ever knew
the difference, and now they are on their feet. If you took two bonds
overnight you might put them back in the morning. Every one does it.
It's part of the game."

"But suppose we lost?" asked John.

"You can't," said Prescott. "Cotton is sure to go up. It's throwing away
the chance of your life."

John said he couldn't do such a thing, but when he returned to the
office the cashier told him that a merger had been planned between their
company and another--a larger one. John knew what that meant well
enough--half the clerks would lose their positions. He was getting
thirty-five dollars a week, had married a young wife, and, as he had
told the magnate, he "needed it all." That night as he put the
securities from the "loan cage" back in the vault the bonds burned his
fingers. They were lying around loose, no good to anybody, and only two
of them, overnight maybe, would make him independent of salaries and
mergers--a free man and his own master.

The vault was in the basement just below the loan cage. It was some
twenty feet long and ten wide. There were three tiers of boxes with
double combination doors. In the extreme left-hand corner was the "loan
box." Near it were two other boxes in which the securities of certain
customers on deposit were kept. John had individual access to the loan
box and the two others--one of which contained the collateral which
secured loans that were practically permanent. He thus had within his
control negotiable bonds of over a million dollars in value. The
securities were in piles, strapped with rubber bands, and bore slips on
which were written the names of the owners. Every morning John carried
up all these piles to the loan cage--except the securities on deposit.
At the end of the day he carried all back himself and tossed them into
the boxes. When the interest coupons on the deposited bonds had to be
cut he carried these, also, upstairs. At night the vault was secured by
two doors, one with a combination lock and the other with a time lock.
It was as safe as human ingenuity could make it. By day it had only a
steel-wire gate which could be opened with a key. No attendant was
stationed at the door. If John wanted to get in, all he had to do was to
ask the person who had the key to open it. The reason John had the
combination to these different boxes was in order to save the loan clerk
the trouble of going downstairs to get the collateral himself.

Next day when John went out to lunch he put two bonds belonging to a
customer in his pocket. He did not intend to steal them or even to
borrow them. It was done almost automatically. His will seemed
subjugated to the idea that they were to all intents and purposes _his_
bonds to do as he liked with. He wanted the feeling of
bonds-in-his-pocket. As he walked along the street to the restaurant, it
seemed quite natural that they should be there. They were nearly as safe
with him as lying around loose in the cage or chucked into a box in the
vault. Prescott joined him, full of his new idea that cotton was going
to jump overnight.

"If you only had a couple of bonds," he sighed.

Then somehow John's legs and arms grew weak. He seemed to disintegrate
internally. He tried to pull himself together, but he had lost control
of his muscles. He became a dual personality. His own John heard
Prescott's John say quite naturally:

"I can let you have two bonds, but mind we get them back to-morrow, or
anyhow the day after."

John's John felt the other John slip the two American Navigation 4s
under the table and Prescott's fingers close upon them. Then came a
period of hypnotic paralysis. The flywheel of his will-power hung on a
dead centre. Almost instantly he became himself again.

"Give 'em back," he whispered hoarsely. "I didn't mean you should keep
them," and he reached anxiously across the table. But Prescott was on
his feet, half-way toward the door.

"Don't be a fool, Smith," he laughed. "What's the matter with you? It's
a cinch. Go back and forget it." He shot out of the door and down the
street.

John followed, dazed and trembling with horror at what he had done. He
went back to the cage and remained the rest of the day in terror lest
the broker who owned the two bonds should pay off his loan. But at the
same time he had quickly made up his mind what he should do in that
event. There was more than one loan secured by American Navigation 4s.
He loosened a couple in one of the other piles. If the first broker came
in he would take two bonds from one of these. But the broker did not
come in.

That night John wandered the streets till nearly daylight. He saw
himself arrested, ruined, in prison. Utterly fagged next morning, he
called up Prescott on the telephone and begged him to return the bonds.
Prescott laughed at his fears and assured him that everything was all
right. Cotton was sure to go up. An hour later the broker who owned the
bonds came in and took up his loan, and John removed two American
Navigation 4s from another bundle and handed them to the loan clerk. Of
course, the numbers on the bonds were not the same, but few persons
would notice a little thing like that, even if they kept a record of it.
They had the bonds--that was the main thing.

Once more John rushed to the 'phone, told Prescott what had occurred and
besought him for the bonds.

"It's too late now," growled Prescott. "Cotton has gone down. I could
only get one back at the most. We had better stand pat and get out on
the next bulge."

John was by this time almost hysterical. The perspiration broke out on
his forehead every now and then, and he shuddered as he counted his
securities and entered up his figures. If cotton should go down some
more! That was the hideous possibility. They would have to put up more
margin, and then--!

Down in the vault where the depositors' bonds were kept were two piles
of Overland 4s. One contained about two hundred and the other nearly six
hundred bonds. The par value of these negotiable securities alone was
nearly eight hundred thousand dollars. Twice a year John cut the coupons
off of them. Each pile was marked with the owner's name. They were never
called for, and it appeared that these customers intended to keep them
there permanently. John, realizing that the chances of detection were
smaller, removed two bonds from the pile of two hundred Overlands and
substituted them with Prescott for the two Navigation 4s.

Then cotton went down with a slump. Prescott did not wait even to
telephone. He came himself to the trust company and told John that they
needed two more bonds for additional margin to protect their loan. But
he said it was merely temporary, and that they had better even up by
buying some more cotton. John went down into the vault and came back
with four more Overland 4s bonds under his coat. He was in for it now
and might as well be hung for a sheep as for a lamb. He was beginning to
get used to the idea of being a thief. He was, to be sure, wretchedly
unhappy, but he was experiencing the excitement of trying to dodge Fate
until Fortune looked his way. Cotton still went down. It never occurred
to him that Prescott perhaps had not bought all the cotton. Now that he
is in prison he thinks maybe Prescott didn't. But he kept going down
into the vault and bringing up more bonds, and, getting reckless, bought
more cotton--quantities of it. In a month sixty bonds were gone from the
pile of two hundred. John, a nervous wreck, almost laughed, grimly, at
the joke of _his_ being short sixty bonds!

At home they thought he was getting run down. His wife--! He was so
kind and thoughtful that she had never been so happy. It made her
fearful that he had some fatal disease and knew he was going to die. Up
at the bank John made a separate bundle of sixty bonds out of the pile
of six hundred so that he could substitute them for those first taken if
the owner called for them. It was not likely that both owners would call
for their bonds on the same day, so that he was practically safe until
one or the other had withdrawn his deposit.

About this time the special accountants came around to make their annual
investigation. It was apparently done in the regular and usual way. One
examiner stood inside the vault and another outside, surrounded by four
or five assistants. They "investigated" the loans. John brought them out
in armfuls and the accountants checked them off and sent them back. When
John brought out the one hundred and forty bonds left in the bundle of
two hundred Overland 4s he placed on top of them the pile of sixty bonds
taken from the other bundle of six hundred. Then he took them back,
shifted over the sixty and brought out the bundle of six hundred
Overland 4s made up in part of the same bonds. It was the easiest thing
going. The experts simply counted the sixty bonds twice--and John had
the sixty bonds (or Prescott had them) down the street. Later the same
firm of "experts" certified to the presence of three hundred thousand
dollars of missing bonds, counting the _same_ bundle, not only twice,
but five and six times! You see, Prescott's John had grown wise in his
generation.

After that he felt reasonably secure. It did seem almost unbelievable
that such a situation could exist, but it was, nevertheless, a fact that
it did. He expected momentarily that his theft would be detected and
that he would be thrown into prison, and the fear of the actual arrest,
the moment of public ignominy, the shock and agony of his wife and
family, were what drove him sleepless into the streets, and every
evening to the theatres to try to forget what must inevitably come; but
the fact that he had "gone wrong," that he was a thief, that he had
betrayed his trust, had lost its edge. He now thought no more of shoving
a package of bonds into his overcoat pocket than he did of taking that
garment down from its peg behind the door. He knew from inquiry that men
who stole a few hundred dollars, and were caught, usually got as long a
term as those who stole thousands. If he stole one bond he was just as
likely to get ten years in State's prison as if he stole fifty--so he
stole fifty, and when they were wiped out he stole fifty more--and,
well, if the reader is interested he will learn before the end of the
story just what John _did_ steal.

Somehow, Prescott's speculations never succeeded. Occasionally they
would make a good turn and get a few bonds back, but the next week there
would be a new fiasco, and John would have to visit the Overland 4s
again. That performance of the accountants had given him a huge contempt
for bankers and banking. He knew that if he wanted to he could grab up a
million any day and walk off with it, but he didn't want to. All he
desired now was to get back to where he was before. All the speculation
was in the hands of Prescott, and Prescott never seemed worried in the
least. He called on John almost daily for what extra bonds were needed
as additional collateral, and John took his word absolutely as to the
result of the transactions. He could not do otherwise, for one word from
Prescott would have ruined him.

Before long the pile of two hundred Overland 4s was gone. So was a large
quantity of other securities, for John and Prescott had dropped cotton
and gone plunging into the stock market. Here, however, they had no
better success than before. Of course, a difficulty arose when the
interest on the Overland 4s came due. The coupons had to be cut by some
one in the bank, and although John usually cut them he did not always
do so. Sometimes the loan clerk himself would take a hand, and call for
a particular lot of bonds. John, however, was now fertile in devices.
The owner of the larger pile of six hundred bonds usually wrote to have
his coupons cut about the twenty-seventh of April. John would make up a
collection of six hundred bonds of the same sort, carry them up and cut
the coupons in the loan cage. The other man generally sent in a draft
for his interest on the second or third of May. But now the bonds were
away, scattered all over the Street. So John started a new operation to
get the bonds back and straighten out the coupon tangle. He substituted
with the brokers an equal number of bonds of other companies, the
interest upon which was not yet due. There was a large block of Electric
5s and Cumberland 4s which served his purpose admirably, and thus he
kept up with the game. When the coupons became due on the latter he
carried back the first. It kept him and Prescott busy most of the time
juggling securities--at least John knew _he_ was kept busy, and Prescott
claimed to be equally so.

There were many loans of brokers and others all secured by the same sort
of collateral. Most of these John appropriated. When it was necessary to
check off the loans, John, having retained enough of the same kind of
bonds to cover the largest loan, would bring up the same bundle time
after time with a different name upon it. If one of the customers wanted
to pay off a loan and his bonds were gone he would be given some one
else's collateral. Apparently the only thing that was necessary was to
have enough of each kind of security on hand to cover the largest loan
on the books at any given time.

Once, when the examiners were at work on the vault, John had to make up
one hundred thousand dollars in Overland 4s or 5s from the different
small loans in the loan vault and put them in a package in the deposit
vault in order to make it appear that certain depositors' bonds were all
there.

The most extraordinary performance of all was when, upon one of the
annual examinations, John covered the absence of over fifty bonds in the
collateral covering a certain loan by merely shoving the balance of the
securities into the back of the vault, so that it was not examined at
all. He had taken these bonds to substitute for others in different
brokers' offices, and it so happened that there were no similar
securities in the building; thus the deficiency could not be covered up
even by John's expert sleight of hand. Of course, if there had been
other bonds of the same kind in another vault it would have been a
simple matter to substitute them. But there were not. So John pushed
the remaining one hundred and fifty bonds into a dark corner of the
vault and awaited the discovery with throbbing pulses. Yet, strange to
relate, these watchdogs of finance, did not see the bonds which John had
hidden, and did not discover that anything was wrong, since, for
purposes of its own, the bank had neglected to make any record of the
loan in question. It would really have been safer for John if he had
taken the whole pile, but then he did not know that the accountants were
going to do their business in any such crazy fashion. The whole thing
came to seem a sort of joke to John. He never took any bonds for his own
personal use. He gave everything to Prescott, and he rarely, if ever,
saw Prescott except to hand him securities.

One day Prescott walked right into the bank itself and John gave him one
hundred and sixty-five bonds, which he stuffed under his overcoat and
carried away. Remember that this is a _fact_.

The thing, which began in August, 1905, dragged over through the
following year and on into 1907. John weathered two examinations by the
accountants, the last being in October, 1906, when they certified that
the company was absolutely "O.K." and everything intact. On that
particular day John had over three hundred thousand dollars in Overland
4s and 5s scattered over the Street.

In the first six months they lost one hundred thousand dollars in
cotton. Then they played both sides of the market in stocks and got
badly bitten as bears in the temporary bull market in the autumn of
1906, selling Union Pacific at 165, which afterward went to 190,
Northern Pacific at 185, which went to 200, etc., etc. Then they shifted
their position, became bulls and went long of stock just at the
beginning of the present slump. They bought Reading at 118, American
Smelters at 126, Pennsylvania at 130, Union at 145, and Northern Pacific
at 180. At one time John had five hundred and fifty thousand dollars in
bonds out of the vaults.

The thing might have been going on still had it not been for the fact
that the anticipated merger between John's company and another was put
through and a new vault in a new building prepared to receive the
securities. Of course, on such an occasion a complete examination would
be made of all the securities and there would be practically no chance
to deceive the accountants. Moreover, a part of the securities had
actually been moved when the worst slump came and they needed more. It
was obvious that the jig was up. A few more days and John knew that the
gyves would be upon his wrists. Prescott and he took an account of the
stock they had lost and went into committee on ways and means. Neither
had any desire to run away. Wall Street was the breath of life to them.
Prescott said that the best thing to do was to take enough more to
"stand off" the company. He cited a case in Boston, where a clerk who
was badly "in" was advised by his lawyer to take a hundred and
twenty-five thousand dollars more. Then the lawyer dickered with the
bank and brought it to terms. The lawyer got twenty-five thousand
dollars, the bank got the rest, and the thief was let go. Prescott said
they ought to get away with enough more to make the bank's loss a
million. He thought _that_ would make them see what was the wise thing
to do. Prescott also said he would try to get a lawyer who could bring
some pressure to bear on the officials of the company. It would be a
rather unpleasant situation to have brought to the attention of the
State Superintendent of Banking. John agreed to get the additional
securities and turn them over to Prescott. Unfortunately, almost
everything had by this time been moved into the new vault, and all John
could get was a stock certificate for fifteen hundred railroad shares,
standing in his own name, and seventy-five thousand dollars in notes.
These he gave to Prescott, thus increasing the amount stolen from the
bank without discovery to between six and seven hundred thousand
dollars. This was on the day before the actuaries were to make their
investigation. Knowing that his arrest was now only a question of time,
John, about eleven o'clock on the following morning, left the trust
company for the last time. He was in telephonic communication with
Prescott, who, in turn, was in touch with their lawyer. Unfortunately,
the president of the company had gone out of town over Sunday, so that
again their plans went awry.

For nearly two years John had not known an hour devoid of haunting fear.
From a cheerful and contented youth he had become despondent, taciturn
and nervous. He was the same affectionate husband and attentive son as
before, and his general characteristics remained precisely the same. He
was scrupulous to a penny in every other department of his life, and
undoubtedly would have felt the same pricks of conscience had he been
guilty of any other act of dishonesty. The affair at the bank was a
thing apart. The embezzler of six hundred thousand dollars was not John
at all, but a separate personality wearing John's clothes and bearing
his name. He perceived clearly the enormity of his offense, but, because
he was the same John in every other respect, he had a feeling that
somehow the fact that _he_ had done the thing was purely fortuitous--in
other words, that the bonds had to be taken, were going to be taken
anyway, and that Fate had simply elected him to take them. Surely he had
not wanted the bonds--had had no intention of stealing half a million
dollars, and, in short, was not the kind of a man who would steal half a
million dollars. Each night he tossed, sleepless, till the light stole
in through the shutters. At every corner on his way uptown he glanced
over his shoulder behind him. The front doorbell never rang that his
muscles did not become rigid and his heart almost stop beating. If he
went to a theatre or upon an excursion he passed the time wondering if
the next day he would still be a free man. In short, he paid in full in
physical misery and mental anxiety and wretchedness for the real moral
obliquity of his crime. The knowledge of this maddened him for what was
coming. Yet he realized that he had stolen half a million dollars, and
that justice demanded that he should be punished for it.

After leaving the bank John called up Prescott and learned that the plan
to adjust matters with the president had miscarried by reason of the
latter's absence. The two then met in a saloon, and here it was arranged
that John should call up the loan clerk and tell him that something
would be found to be wrong at the bank, but that nothing had better be
said about it until the following Monday morning, when the president
would return. The loan clerk, however, refused to talk with him and hung
up the receiver. John had nowhere to go, for he dared not return home,
and spent the afternoon until six o'clock riding in street cars and
sitting in saloons. At that hour he again communicated with Prescott,
who said that he had secured rooms for him and his wife at a certain
hotel, where they might stay until matters could be fixed up. John
arranged to meet his wife at Forty-second Street with Prescott and
conduct her to the hotel. As Fate decreed, the loan clerk came out of
the subway at precisely the same time, saw them together and followed
them. Meantime a hurry call had been sent for the president, who had
returned to the city. John, fully aware that the end had come, went to
bed at the hotel, and, for the first time since the day he had taken the
bonds two years before, slept soundly. At three the next morning there
came a knock at the door. His wife awakened him and John opened it. As
he did so a policeman forced his way in, and the loan clerk, who stood
in the corridor just behind him, exclaimed theatrically, "Officer, there
is your man!"

John is now in prison, serving out the sentence which the court believed
it necessary to inflict upon him as a warning to others. Prescott is
also serving a term at hard labor--a sentence somewhat longer than
John's. The trust company took up their accounts, paid the losses of the
luckless pair, and, owing to a rise in prices which came too late to
benefit the latter, escaped with the comparatively trifling loss of a
little over one hundred thousand dollars. At once every banking house
and trust company upon the Street looked to its system of checks upon
the honesty of its employees, and took precautions which should have
been taken long before. The story was a nine days' wonder. Then Union
Pacific dropped twenty points more, the tide of finance closed over the
heads of John and Prescott, and they were forgotten.

Had the company, instead of putting itself at the mercy of a
thirty-five-dollar-a-week clerk, placed double combinations on the loan
and deposit vaults, and employed two men, one to act as a check upon the
other, to handle its securities, or had it merely adopted the even
simpler expedient of requiring an officer of the company to be present
when any securities were to be removed from the vaults, John would
probably not now be in jail. It would seem that it would not be a
difficult or complicated matter to employ a doorkeeper, who did not have
access himself, to stand at the door of the vault and check off all
securities removed therefrom or returned thereto. An officer of the bank
should personally see that the loans earned up to the cage in the
morning were properly returned to the vaults at night and secured with a
time lock. Such a precaution would not cost the Stockholders a tenth of
one per cent. in dividends.

It is a trite saying that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
cure. But this is as true, in the case of financial institutions at
least, from the point of view of the employe as of the company. It is an
ingenious expedient to insure one's self with a "fidelity corporation"
against the possible defalcations of one's servants, and doubtless
certain risks can only be covered in some such fashion. These methods
are eminently proper so far as they go, but they, unfortunately, do not
serve the public purpose of protecting the weak from undue and
unnecessary temptation. Banks and trust companies are prone to rely on
the fact that most peculations are easily detected and severely
punished, but the public interest demands that all business, State,
municipal and private, should be so conducted that dishonesty may not
only be punished, but prevented.

A builder who "took a chance" on the strength of a girder would have
small credit in his profession. A good bridge is one which will bear the
strain--not only of the pedestrian, but of the elephant. A deluge or an
earthquake may occur and the bridge may tumble, but next time it is
built stronger and better. Thus science progresses and the public
interest is subserved. A driver who overloads his beast is regarded as a
fool or a brute. Perhaps such names are too harsh for those who overload
the moral backbone of an inexperienced subordinate. Surely the fault is
not all on one side. While there are no formulas to calculate the
resiliency of human character, we may demand the same prudence on the
part of the officers of financial institutions as we do from nursemaids,
lumbermen and manufacturers of explosives. Though we may have confidence
in the rectitude of our fellows, we have no right to ignore the
limitations and weaknesses of mankind. It would not outrage the
principles of justice if one who placed needless and disproportionate
strain upon the morals of another were himself regarded as an accessory
to the crime.




VII

The "Duc de Nevers"


    "And God gives to every man
The virtue, temper, understanding, taste,
That lifts him into life, and lets him fall
Just in the niche he was ordained to fill."
      --"The Task"--COWPER.

One morning there lay on my desk a note finely written in pencil and
dated:

    TOMBS PRISON.

    MONSIEUR:

    Will you be so gracious as to extend to the undersigned the courtesy
    of a private interview in your office? I have a communication of the
    highest importance to make to you.

    Respectfully,

    CHARLES JULIUS FRANCIS DE NEVERS.

Across the street in the courtyard the prisoners were taking their daily
exercise. Two by two they marched slowly around the enclosure in the
centre of which a small bed of geraniums struggled bravely in mortal
combat with the dust and grime of Centre Street. Some of the prisoners
walked with heads erect and shoulders thrown back, others slouched along
with their arms dangling and their chins resting upon their chests. When
one of them failed to keep up with the rest, a keeper, who stood in the
shade by a bit of ivy in a corner of the wall, got after him. Somehow
the note on the desk did not seem to fit any one of the gentry whom I
could see so distinctly from my window. The name, too, did not have the
customary Tombs sound--De Nevers? _De Nevaire_--I repeated it slowly to
myself with varying accent. It seemed as though I had known the name
before. It carried with it a suggestion of the novels of Stanley J.
Weyman, of books on old towns and the châteaux and cathedrals of France.
I wondered who the devil Charles Julius Francis de Nevers could be.

Of course, if one answered all the letters one gets from the Tombs it
would keep a secretary busy most of the working hours of the day, and if
one acceded to all the various requests the prisoners make to interview
them personally or to see their fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers,
sweethearts and wives, a prosecutor might as well run an intelligence
office and be done with it. But as I re-read the note I began to have a
sneaking feeling of curiosity to see what Charles Julius Francis de
Nevers looked like, so I departed from the usual rule of my office, rang
for a messenger and directed him to ascertain the full name of the
prisoner from whom the note had come, the crime with which he was
charged, and the date of his incarceration, also to supply me at once
with copies of the indictment and the complaint; then I instructed him
to have De Nevers brought over as soon as he could be got into shape.

I had almost forgotten that I was expecting a visitor when, a couple of
hours later, an undersized deputy-sheriff entered my office and reported
that he had a prisoner in his custody for whom I had sent to the Tombs.
Glancing up from my desk I saw standing behind his keeper a tall and
distinguished-looking man in fashionably cut garments, whose well shaped
head and narrow face, thin aquiline nose, and carefully trimmed pointed
beard seemed to bespeak somewhat different antecedents from those of the
ordinary occupant of a cell in the City Prison. I should have
instinctively risen from my chair and offered my aristocratic looking
visitor a chair had not the keeper unconsciously brought me to a
realization of my true position by remarking:

"Say, Counsellor, I guess while you're talking to his nibs I'll step out
into the hall and take a smoke."

"Certainly," said I, glad to be rid of him, "I will be responsible for
the--er--prisoner."

Then, as the keeper hesitated in putting his suggestion into execution,
I reached into the upper right-hand drawer of my desk, produced two of
what are commonly known in the parlance of the Criminal Courts Building
as "cigars" and handed them to him.

"Well," said I, after the keeper had departed closing the door behind
him and leaving the visitor standing in the middle of the office, "I
have sent for you as you requested and shall be glad to hear anything
you have to say. Of course any communication which you may see fit to
make to me is voluntary and, in the event for your trial for--er--any
crime with which you may be charged, may be used against you." I had a
certain feeling of embarrassment in making this customary declaration
since the whole idea of this person being a criminal was so incongruous
as to put a heavy strain on one's credulity. However, I recalled that a
certain distinguished Englishman of letters has declared "that there is
no essential incongruity between crime and culture." He acknowledged my
remark with a slight smile of half-amused deprecation and with a
courteous bow took the seat to which I motioned him.

"I wish to thank you," he said in excellent English marked by the
slightest possible suggestion of a foreign accent, "for your exceeding
courtesy in responding so quickly to my request. I am aware," he added,
"that it is unusual for prisoners to seek interviews with the--what
shall I say--_juge d'instruction_, as we call him, but," he added with a
smile, "I think you will find that mine is an unusual affair."

I had already begun to think so, and reaching to the upper drawer on the
left-hand side of my desk, I produced from the box reserved for judges,
prominent members of the bar, borough presidents, commissioners of
departments and distinguished foreigners, a Havana of the variety known
in our purlieus as a "_good_ cigar," and tendered the same to him.

"Ah," he said, "many thanks, _merci, non_, I do not smoke the cigar.
M'sieu' perhaps has a cigarette? M'sieu' will pardon me if I say that
this is the first act of kindness which has been accorded to me since my
incarceration three weeks ago."

Somewhere I found a box of cigarettes, one of which he removed,
gracefully holding it between fingers which I noticed were singularly
white and delicate, and lighting it with the air of a diplomat at an
international conference.

"You can hardly appreciate," he ventured, "the humiliation to which I,
an officer and a gentleman of France, have been subjected."

I lighted the cigar which he had declined and with mingled feelings of
embarrassment, distrust and curiosity inquired if his name was Charles
Julius Francis de Nevers. I wish it were possible to describe the
precise look which flashed across his face as he answered my question.

"That is my name," he said, "or at least rather, I am Charles Julius
Francis, and I am of Nevers. May I speak confidentially? Were my family
to be aware of my present situation they would never recover from the
humiliation and disgrace connected with it."

"Certainly," said I, "anything which you may tell me which you wish to
be kept confidential I will treat as such, provided, of course, that
what you tell me is the truth."

"You shall hear nothing else," he replied. Then leaning back in his
chair he said simply and with great dignity, "I am by direct inheritance
today the Duc de Nevers, my father, the last duke, having died in the
month of February, 1905."

Any such announcement would ordinarily have filled me with amusement,
but that the gentleman sitting before me should declare himself to be a
duke or even a prince seemed entirely natural.

"Indeed!" said I, unable to think of any more appropriate remark.

"Yes," said De Nevers, "and M'sieu' is naturally surprised that one of
my distinguished position should be now a tenant of an American jail.
But if M'sieu' will do me the honor of listening for a few moments I
will explain my present extraordinary predicament. I am Charles Julius
François, eldest son of the late Oscar Odon, Duc de Nevers, Grand
Commander of the Legion of Honor, and Knight of the Garter. I was born
in Paris in the year 1860 at 148 Rue Champs Elysée; my mother, the
dowager duchess, is now residing at the Château de Nevers in the
Province of Nievre in France. My sister Jeanne married Prince Henry of
Aremberg, and now lives in Brussells at the Palais d'Aremberg, situated
at the corner of the Rue de Regence near the Palais de Justice. My
sister Louise, the Countess of Kilkenny, is living in Ireland. My sister
Camille married the Marquis of Londonderry and is residing in London at
the present time. My sister Evelyn married the Earl of Dudley and is
living in Dublin. I have one other sister, Marie, who is with my mother.
My brother, Count André de Nevers is at present Naval Attaché at Berlin.
My brother Fernand is an officer of artillery stationed in Madagascar,
and my youngest brother Marcel is also an officer of artillery attached
to the 8th Regiment in Nancy. I make this statement by way of
introduction in order that you may understand fully my situation. During
my childhood I had an English tutor in Paris, and when I reached the age
of ten years I was sent by my father to the College Louis le Grand where
I took the course of Science and Letters and graduated from the Lycée
with the degree of Bachelor on the 5th of August, 1877. Having passed my
examination for the Polytechnic I remained there two years, and on my
graduation received a commission as Sous-Lieutenant of Engineers, and
immediately entered the Application School at Fontainebleau, where I was
graduated in 1881 as Lieutenant of Engineers and assigned to the First
Regiment of Engineers at Versailles--"

De Nevers paused and exhaled the cigarette smoke.

"M'sieu' will pardon me if I go into detail for only in that way will he
be convinced of the accuracy of what I am telling him."

"Pray, go on," said I. "If what you tell me is true your case is
extraordinary indeed."

"My first act of service," continued De Nevers, "was on the 10th of
August when I was sent to Tonkin. I will not trouble you with the
details of my voyage on the transport to China, but will simply state
that I was wounded in the engagement at Yung Chuang on the 7th of
November of the same year and had the distinction of receiving the Cross
of the Legion of Honor therefor. I was immediately furloughed back to
France, where I entered the Superior School of War and took my Staff
Major brevet. At the same time I seized the opportunity to follow the
course of the Sorbonne and secured the additional degree of Doctor of
Science. I had received an excellent education in my youth and always
had a taste for study, which I have taken pains to pursue in whatever
part of the world I happened to be stationed. As a result I am able to
converse with considerable fluency in English, as perhaps you have
already observed, as well as in Spanish, Italian, German, Russian,
Arabic, and, to a considerable extent, in Japanese.

"In 1883 I was sent to Berlin as Military Attaché, but was subsequently
recalled because I had violated the rules of international etiquette by
fighting three duels with German officers. The Ambassador at this time
was Charles de Courcel. You will understand that there was no disgrace
connected with my recall, but the necessity of defending my honor was
incompatible with the rules of the service, and after fifteen months in
Berlin I was remanded to Versailles with the rank of First Lieutenant,
under Colonel Quinivet. Here I pursued my studies and was then ordered
to the Soudan, whence, after being wounded, I was sent to Senegal. Here
I acted as Governor of the City of St. Louis. As you are doubtless
aware, the climate of Senegal is exceedingly unhealthy. I fell ill with
a fever and was obliged to return to France where I was assigned to the
office of the General Staff Major in Paris. At the opening of the war
with Dahomey in 1892, I was sent in command of the Engineers of the
Corps Expeditional, and on the 17th of November of that year was
severely wounded at Dakar in Dahomey, having received a spear cut
through the lungs. On this occasion I had the distinction of being
promoted as Major of Engineers and was created an Officer of the Legion
of Honor on the battle field. The wound in my lungs was of such a
serious character that Colonel Dodds sent me back once more to France on
furlough, and President Carnot was kind enough to give me his personal
commendation for my services.

"I was now thirty-three years old and had already attained high rank in
my profession. I had had opportunity to pursue studies in chemistry,
medicine and science, and my only interest was in the service of my
country and in qualifying myself for my future duties. My life up to
that time had been uniformly happy; I was the eldest son and beloved
both of my father and mother. My social position gave me the entrée to
the best of society wherever I happened to be. As yet, however, I had
never been in love. At this time occurred the affair which in a measure
changed my career. The wound in my lungs was slow in healing, and at the
earnest invitation of my sister, Lady Londonderry, I went to London. At
that time she was living in Belgravia Square. It was here I met my first
wife."

De Nevers paused. The cigarette had gone out. For the first time he
seemed to lose perfect control of himself. I busied myself with some
papers until he should have regained his self possession.

"You will understand," he said in a few moments, "these things are not
governed by law and statute. The woman with whom I fell in love and who
was in every respect the equal in intellectual attainments, beauty and
charm of manner of my own people, was the nursery governess in my
sister's household. She returned my affection and agreed to marry me.
The proposed marriage excited the utmost antipathy on the part of my
family; my fiancée was dismissed from my sister's household, and I
returned to Paris with the intention of endeavoring by every means in my
power to induce my father to permit me to wed the woman I loved. It is
doubtless difficult for M'sieu' to appreciate the position of a French
officer. In America--Ah--America is free, one can marry the woman one
loves, but in France no officer can marry without the consent of the
Minister of War and of the President of the Republic; and more than that
he cannot marry unless his intended wife possesses a dowry of at least
fifty thousand francs which must be deposited with the Minister of War
for investment."

"In spite of the fact that I enjoyed the confidence and friendship of
President Carnot the latter, at my father's request, refused me
permission to marry. There was no choice left for me but to resign my
commission, and this I did. I returned to England and was married at St.
Thomas's Church, London, on the 21st of June, 1893.

"My education as an engineer had been of the most highly technical and
thorough character, and I had every reason to believe that in America I
could earn a comfortable living. My wife and I, therefore, sailed for
America immediately after our marriage. I first secured a position in
some iron works in South Boston, and for a time lived happily. A boy,
Oscar, named after my father, was born to us while we were living in the
town of Winchester near Boston. Another son was born a year later in the
same place, and still a third in Pittsburgh, where I had gone to assume
the position of general foreman of the Homestead Steel Works and
assistant master mechanic of the Carnegie Steel Company. I rapidly
secured the confidence of my employers and was sent upon several
occasions to study new processes in different parts of the country.
During one of my vacations we returned to England and visited my wife's
people, who lived in Manchester; here she died on the 17th of June,
1901."

De Nevers paused again and it was some moments before he continued.

"After the death of my wife my father expressed himself as ready for a
reconciliation, but although this took place I had not the heart to
remain in France. I liked America and had attained distinction in my
profession. I therefore expressed my intention of returning to continue
my career as an engineer, but at the earnest solicitation of my father,
left my three children with my parents. They are now living at the
château of my mother at Nievre.

"I was sent to Chicago to study a new blast furnace, and two years
later, when Mr. Schwab organized the Russo-American Company at
Mariopool, South Siberia, he offered me the position of general manager,
which I accepted. Here I remained until November, 1904, when all the
American engineers were arrested and imprisoned on the order of General
Kozoubsky of the Russian Engineers, who at the same time shot and
murdered my assistant, Thomas D. McDonald, for refusing to allow him to
remove pig iron from the storehouse without giving a receipt for it.
Ambassador McCormick secured our immediate release, and we returned to
the States. M'sieu' has no idea of the power of these Russian officers.
The murder of my assistant was of the most brutal character. Kozoubsky
came to my office and demanded the iron, but having secured it, refused
to sign the receipt which McDonald presented to him. McDonald said: 'You
shall not remove the iron if you do not sign the receipt.' As he spoke
the words the General drew his revolver and shot him down like a dog.

"I returned to America in January, 1905, and have since then been doing
work as a consulting engineer. Last January I visited my parents in
Paris at their home at 148 Champs Elysée. You have doubtless seen the
mansion with its two gates and black railing of decorative iron. I had
no sooner returned to America than I received a cable announcing the
death of my father."

De Nevers removed from his breast pocket a bundle of carefully folded
papers from which he produced a sheet of heavy stationery with a deep
border of mourning and a large black cross at the top, of which the
following is a copy:

    MM. Her Grace the Duchess Dowager of Nevers; his Grace the Duke
    Charles J. F. of Nevers and his children Oscar, Hilda and John;
    their Highnesses the Prince and Princess Henry of Aremberg; Captain
    the Count André of Nevers; Captain the Count Fernand of Nevers; the
    Earl and Countess of Kilkenny; the Marquis and Marchioness of
    Londonderry; the Earl and Countess of Dudley; the Countess Marie of
    Nevers; Lieutenant the Count Marcel of Nevers have the sorrow to
    announce the subite death at the family seat at Nevers (France), of
    His Grace Oscar Odon, Duke of Nevers, Grand Commander of the Legion
    of Honor, Knight of the Garter. Their husband, father, grandfather
    and uncle beloved.

    Masonic burial shall take place at Nevers on Tuesday, February 21,
    1905.

    New York, February 20, 1905.

    U. S. A.

The announcement was carefully engraved and was of an expensive
character, and I read it with considerable interest.

"Does M'sieu' care to see the photographs of my family? Here," producing
a photograph of a gentleman and lady and a group of children, "is my
wife with the three children, taken in London just before she died."

Another group, bearing the trade-mark of a Parisian photographer,
exhibited a distinguished looking man surrounded by a group of many
children of varying ages.

"These," said De Nevers, "are my father and my brothers and sisters."

Then came photographs of Lady Londonderry and the Earl and Countess of
Dudley. My interest in my visitor's story had for the moment completely
driven from my mind the real object of the interview, which, ostensibly,
was to explain the reason for his incarceration. His straightforward
narrative carried absolute conviction with it; that he was the
legitimate Duc de Nevers I accepted without hesitation; that he was a
man of education, culture and many accomplishments, was self evident.

"You have had an extraordinary career," I ventured.

"Yes," he replied, "it has been a life of action and I may say of
suffering. Permit me to show you the certificate of my general that what
I have told you is accurate."

And De Nevers unfolded from his pocket a document, bearing a seal of the
French Ministry of War, which read as follows:

    REPUBLIQUE FRANÇAISE

    MINISTERE DE LA GUERRE

    CABINET DU MINISTERE

    No. 195

    PARIS, _October 24, 1901._

    _To Whom It May Concern_:

    I, George André, General of Division of Engineers, Minister of War
    of the French Republic, certify that the Lieutenant Colonel Charles
    Jules Comte François de Nevers, is connected with the French Army,
    since the 10th day of September, 1877, and that the following is a
    true copy of his record:

    Born in Paris the 10th of June, 1859.

    Graduated, Bachelor of Sciences and of Letters, from the Lycée,
    Louis le Grand, the 5th of August, 1877.

    Received first as Chief of Promotion of the National Polytechnic
    School of France, the 10th of September, 1877.

    Graduated with the greatest distinction from the above school the
    1st of September, 1879.

    Entered at the Application School of Military Engineers at
    Fontainebleau as Second Lieutenant, Chief of Promotion the 15th of
    September, 1879.

    Graduated as Lieutenant of Engineers with great distinction, the 1st
    of August, 1881, and sent to the First Regiment of Engineers at
    Versailles.

    Sent to Tonkin the 1st day of August, 1881.

    Wounded at Yung Chuang (Tonkin) the 7th of November, 1881.

    Inscribed on the Golden Book of the French Army the 10th of
    November, 1881.

    Made Knight of the Legion of Honor the 10th of November, 1881.

    Wounded at Suai Sing the 4th of January, 1882.

    Sent to Switzerland in Mission where he was graduated at the Zurich
    Polytechnic University as Mechanical Engineer, 1884.

    Sent the 2nd of January, 1885, to Soudan.

    Wounded there twice.

    Made Captain of Engineers the 3rd of June, 1885.

    Called back to France the 6th of September, 1885, sent in Mission in
    Belgium, where he was graduated as Electrical Engineer from the
    Montefiore University at Liege. Made officer of Academy.

    Sent in Gabon, the 2nd of May, 1887. Wounded twice. Constructed
    there the Military Railroad.

    Sent to Senegal as Commander the 6th of July, 1888, to organize
    administration. Wounded once.

    Called back and sent to Germany the 7th of December, 1889.

    Called back from Germany and assigned to the Creusot as Assistant
    Chief Engineer.

    Sent to Dahomey, the 1st of January, 1891. Wounded the 19th of
    November, 1892, at Dahomey. Made Major of Engineers on the battle
    field. Made Officer of the Legion of Honor, on the battle field.

    By special decision of the Senate and the Chamber of Representatives
    the name of Commandant Charles Jules Comte François de Nevers is
    embroidered the 21st of November, on the flag of the Regiment of
    Engineers.

    Called back and sent to Algeria, the 3rd of January, 1893.

    Made Ordinance of the President Carnot, the 5th of February, 1893.

    Sent to the Creusot the 1st of July, 1893, as director.

    Sent to Madagascar the 2nd of April, 1894, in command of the
    Engineers.

    Wounded the 12th of July, 1894, at Majungua.

    Made Lieutenant Colonel of Engineers the 12th of July, 1894, on the
    battle field.

    Proposed as Commander of the Legion of Honor on the same date.

    Called back and sent as Ordinance Officer of the General in Chief in
    Command in Algeria, the 4th of March, 1896.

    Sent to America in special mission to the Klondike the 7th of July,
    1897.

    Put on disponsibility _Hors Cadre_ on his demand the 1st of
    November, 1897.

    Made Honorary Member of the National Defences. Commissioned the 28th
    of January, 1898.

    Made Honorary Member of the Commission on Railroads, Canals, and
    Harbors, the 7th of July, 1899.

    Made Honorary Member of the Commission on Bridges and Highways the
    14th of July, 1900.

    Made Corresponding Member of the Academy of Sciences, the 14th of
    July, 1901.

    Made Commander of the Legion of Honor the 22nd of October, 1901.

    I will say further that the Lieutenant Colonel Charles Jules Comte
    François de Nevers, is regarded as one of our best and most loyal
    officers, that he has the good will and best wishes of the
    government and of all his fellow officers, and is considered by
    everybody as a great worker and a thoroughly honest man. I
    personally will be pleased to do anything in my power to help him in
    any business he may undertake, and can recommend him to everybody as
    a responsible and trustworthy Engineer, knowing him for the last
    twenty-four years.

    GEO. ANDRÉ,

    _Minister of War_.

    [Seal]

The document seemed in substance merely a repetition of what De Nevers
had already told me, and I handed it back to him satisfied of its
correctness. But public business is public business, and if the Duc de
Nevers had anything to communicate to me in my official character it was
time for him to do so.

"Well, Duke," said I, not knowing very well how otherwise to address
him, "do you desire to communicate anything to me in connection with
your present detention in the Tombs?"

"Ah," he said with a gesture of deprecation, "I can hardly understand
that myself. Perhaps M'sieu' has the papers? Ah, yes, I see they are on
his desk. M'sieu' will observe that I am accused of the crime of--what
is it called in English? Ah, yes, perjury, but I assure M'sieu' that it
is entirely a mistake."

I picked up the indictment and found that the Grand Jury of the County
of New York accused one Charles de Nevers of the crime of perjury
committed as follows:

    That one William Douglas having been arrested by William W.
    Crawford, a member of the Police force of the City of New York, upon
    the charge of having violated the motor vehicle law of the State of
    New York [ordinance against speeding] he, the said Charles de
    Nevers, had then and there offered himself to go bail for the said
    Douglas, and did sign a certain written undertaking called a bond
    for the appearance of the said Douglas before the Magistrate,
    wherein he swore that he owned a certain house and lot situate at
    122 West 117th Street, in the County of New York, which was free and
    clear of all incumbrances and of the value of not less than twenty
    thousand dollars,

    Whereas in truth and in fact he the said Charles de Nevers did not
    own the said house and lot which did not then and there stand in the
    name of him the said Charles de Nevers, but was the property of one
    Helen M. Bent, and so recorded in the Registry of Deeds.

Which, said the grand jury, Charles de Nevers then and there well knew.
And so they accused him of feloniously, knowingly, wilfully, corruptly,
and falsely committing the crime of perjury against the form of the
statute in such cases made and provided, and against the peace of the
People of the State of New York and their dignity.

And this they did over the signature of William Travers Jerome, District
Attorney.

"How did this happen?" I inquired, hardly believing my senses. "Was it a
fact that you made this false statement to the Police for the purpose of
securing bail for Mr. Douglas?"

De Nevers leaned forward and was about to answer when a messenger
entered the room and stated that I was wanted in the court.

"Another time, if M'sieu' will permit me," said he. "I have much to
thank you for. If M'sieu' will give me another hearing it shall be my
pleasure to explain fully."

I rose and summoned the keeper. De Nevers bowed and offered his hand,
which I took.

"I have much to thank you for!" he repeated.

As I hurried out of the room I encountered the keeper outside the door.

"Say, Counsellor, what sort of a 'con' was he throwin' into you?" he
inquired with a wink.

De Nevers was well inside my office, looking drearily out of my window
towards the courtyard in the Tombs where his fellows were still pursuing
their weary march.

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"Why, who did his nibs tell you he was?"

"The Duc de Nevers," I replied.

"Say," said O'Toole, "you don't mean you swallowed that, do you? Do you
know what the feller did? Why, one afternoon when a swell guy and his
girl were out in their gas wagon a mounted cop in the park pulls them in
and takes them over to the 57th Street Court. Well, just as me friend is
taking them into the house along walks this Charley Nevers wid his tall
silk hat and pearl handle cane, wid a flower in his buttonhole, and his
black coat tails dangling around his heels, just like Boni de
Castellane, and says he, 'Officer,' says he, 'may I inquire what for
you're apprehending this gentleman and lady?' says he. With that me
friend hands him out some strong language for buttin' in, and Charley is
so much shocked at the insult to himself and the lady that he steps in
before the Sergeant and offers to go bond for Douglas, just to go the
cop one better, givin' the Sergeant the same line of drip that he has
been handin' out to us in the Tombs, about his bein' the son of Oscar,
the Duc de Nevers, and related to all the crowned heads in Europe. Then
he ups and signs the bail bond for a house and lot that he has never
seen in his life. And here he is up agin it. An' it's a good stiff one
His Honor will be handin' out to him to my way of thinkin', for these
high fallutin' foreigners has got to be put a stop to, and Charley
Nevers is a good one to begin on."

"I think you're wrong, O'Toole," said I. "But we can tell better later
on."

All that day my thoughts kept reverting to the Duc de Nevers. One thing
was more than certain and that was that of all the various personages
whom I had met during my journey through the world none was more fitted
to be a duke than he. I was obliged to confess that during my hour's
interview I had felt myself to be in the company of a superior being,
one of different clay from that of which I was composed, a man of better
brain, and better education, vastly more rounded and experienced, a
cultivated citizen of the world, who would be at home in any company no
matter how distinguished and who would rise to any emergency. As I ate
my dinner at the club the name De Nevers played mistily in the recesses
of my memory. _De Nevers_! Surely there was something historic about it,
some flavor of the days of kings and courtiers. Smoking my cigar in the
library I fell into a reverie in which the Tombs, with its towers and
grated windows, figured as a gray château of old Tourraine, and Charles
Julius Francis in hunting costume as a mediaeval monseigneur with a
hooded falcon on his wrist. I awoke to find directly in my line of
vision upon the shelf of the alcove in front of me the solid phalanx of
the ten volumes of Larousse's "Grand Dictionaire Universe du XIX
Siècle," and I reached forward and pulled down the letter "N."
"Nevers"--there it was--"Capitol of the Department of Nievre. Ducal
palace built in 1475. Charles III de Gonzagne, petit-fils de Charles
II," had sold the duchy of Nevers and his other domains in France to
Cardinal Mazarin "par acte du Jul. 11, 1659." So far so good. The
cardinal had left the duchy by will to Philippe Jules François Mancini,
his nephew, who had died May 8, 1707. Ah! _Julius Francis_! It was like
meeting an old friend. Philippe Jules François Mancini. Mazarin had
obtained letters confirming him in the possession of the Duchy of
Nivernais and Donzois in 1720. Then he had died in 1768, leaving the
duchy to Louis Jules Barbon Mancini-Mozarini. This son who was the last
Duc of Nivernais, had died in 1798! "He was the last of the name," said
Larousse. I rubbed my eyes. It was there fast enough--"last of the
name." Something was wrong. Without getting up I rang for a copy of
"Burke's Peerage."

"Londonderry, Marquess of, married Oct. 2nd, 1875, Lady Theresa Susey
Helen, Lady of Grace of St. John of Jerusalem, eldest daughter of the
19th Earl of Shrewsbury." Dear me! "Dudley, Earl of, married September
14, 1891, Rachael, Lady of Grace of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem,
youngest daughter of Charles Henry Gurney." I closed the book and began
to think, and the more I thought the more I wondered. There really
didn't seem particular need of going further. If the fellow was a fraud,
he was a fraud, that was all. But how in Heaven's name could a man make
up a story like that! That night I dreamed once more of the ducal palace
of Nivernais, only its courtyard resembled that of the Tombs and many
couples walked in a straggling line beneath its walls.

A day or two passed and I had heard no more of the Duc Charles Julius
when one afternoon a lady called at my office and sent in her name as
Mrs. de Nevers. She proved to be an attractive young woman a little over
twenty, dressed in black, whose face showed that she had suffered more
than a little. She explained that her husband was confined in the Tombs
on a charge of perjury. But that was not all--he was worse than a
perjurer. He was an impostor--_a bigamist_. He had another wife living
somewhere in England--in Manchester, she thought. Oh, it was too
terrible. He had told her that he was the Count Charles de Nevers,
eldest son of the Duc de Nevers--in France, you know. And she had
believed him. He had had letters to everybody in Montreal, her home, and
plenty of money and beautiful clothes. He had dazzled her completely.
The wedding had been quite an affair and presents had come from the Duke
and Duchess of Nevers, from the Marchioness of Londonderry and from the
Countess of Dudley. There were also letters from the Prince and Princess
of Aremberg (in Belgium) and the Counts André and Fernand of Nevers. It
had all been so wonderful and romantic! Then they had gone on their
wedding journey and had been ecstatically happy. In Chicago, they had
been received with open arms. That was before the death of the
Duke--yes, her mourning was for the Duke. She smiled sadly. I think she
still more than half believed that she was a duchess--and she deserved
to be if ever any girl did. Then all of a sudden their money had given
out and the Duke had been arrested for not paying their hotel bill.
Perhaps I would like to see a newspaper clipping? It was dreadful! She
was ashamed to be seen anywhere after that. She had even been obliged to
pawn his cross of the Legion of Honor, the Leopold Cross of Belgium, and
another beautiful decoration which he had been accustomed to wear when
they went out to dinner. This was the clipping:

    CHICAGO SOCIETY THE DUPE OF BOGUS COUNT

    HOTEL AND SEVERAL WHILOM FRIENDS FILLED WITH REGRET--THE "COUNT"
    ARRESTED

    Chicago, Jan. 29.--"Count Charles Julius François de Nevers" was in
    the Police court to-day for defrauding the Auditorium Annex of a
    board bill. The Count came to the French Consul, M. Henri Meron,
    amply supplied with credentials. He posed as Consulting Engineer of
    the United States Steel Corporation. He was introduced into all the
    clubs, including the Alliance Française, where he was entertained
    and spoke on literature.

    He was accompanied by a charming young "Countess," and the honors
    showered upon them and the adulation paid by society tuft-hunters
    was something they will never forget.

    They returned the entertainments. The Count borrowed several
    thousand dollars.

    President Furber, of the Olympic Games, said to-day of the "Count:"

    "This man confided to me that he had invented a machine for
    perpetual motion, the chief difficulty of which was that it
    accumulated energy so fast that it could not be controlled. He asked
    me to invest in some of his schemes, which I refused to do."

    The fate of the Count is still pending and he was led back to a
    cell. He has been a week behind the bars. The "Countess" is in
    tears.

"The Countess is me," she explained.

"Was he sent to prison?" I asked.

"Oh, no," she answered. "You see they really couldn't tell whether he
was a Count or not, so they had to let him go."

"He ought to be hung!" I cried.

"I really think he ought," she answered. "You see it is quite
embarrassing, because legally I have never been married at all, have I?"

"I don't know," I answered, lying like a gentleman. "Time enough to look
that up later."

"I found out afterwards," she said, apparently somewhat encouraged,
"that his first wife was a nurse maid in London."

"Yes," said I, "he told me so himself."

Just then there came a knock at my door and O'Toole appeared.

"How are you, Counsellor," he said with a grin. "You know Charley
Nevers, well, av all the pious frauds! Say, Counsellor, ain't he the
cute feller! What do you suppose, now? I got his record to-day. Cast yer
eye over it."

I did. This is it:

    No. 98

    No. B 7721

    The Central Office,

    Bureau of Detectives,

    Police Department of the City of New York,

    300 Mulberry Street.

    Name........................Charles François

    Alias.......................Count de Nevers

    Date of Arrest..............1903

    Place of Arrest.............London, England

    Cause of Arrest.............False Pretenses

    Name of Court...............Sessions

    To what Prison..............Penal Servitude

    Term of Imprisonment........Eighteen months.

    REMARKS: Fraudulently obtained motor-car in London under pretense
    that he was Charles Duke de Nevers, son of Oscar, Prince de Nevers."

"So he's an ex-convict!" I exclaimed.

"He's more than that!" cried O'Toole. "He's a bir-rd!"

I turned to Mrs. de Nevers or whoever she legally was.

"How did he come to do such a foolish thing as to offer to go on the
bail bond of a perfect stranger? What good could it do him? He was sure
to be caught."

"I don't know," said she. "He was always doing things like that. He
wanted to seem fine and grand, I guess. We always travelled in style.
Why, the afternoon he signed the bond he came home and told me how the
police had been troubling a gentleman who had a lady with him in an
automobile and how he was able to settle the whole affair without the
slightest difficulty and send them on their way. He was quite pleased
about it."

"But why do you suppose be did it?"

"He just thought he'd do 'em a favor," suggested O'Toole, "and in that
way get in wid 'em an' take their money later, mebbe!"

"Who is he? Do you know?" I asked the girl.

"I haven't the vaguest idea!" she sighed.

A week later Charles Julius Francis stood at the bar of justice
convicted of perjury. His degradation had wrought no change in the
dignity of his bearing or the impassiveness of his general appearance,
and he received the sentence of the Court without a tremor, and with
shoulders thrown back and head erect as befitted a scion of a noble
house.

"There's just one thing for me to do with you, Charles Francis," said
the Judge rudely, "And that is to send you to State Prison for a term of
five years at hard labor."

Francis made no sign.

"There is one other thing I should like to know, however," continued His
Honor, "And that is who you really are."

The prisoner bowed slightly.

"I am Charles Julius Francis," he replied quietly, "Duc de Nevers, and
Commander of the Legion of Honor."




VIII

A Finder of Missing Heirs


The professional prosecutor is continually surprised at the
insignificant amount of crime existing in comparison with the
extraordinary scope of criminal opportunity. To be sure, the number of
crimes actually detected is infinitesimal as contrasted with those
committed, but even so the conviction constantly grows that the world is
astonishingly honest when one considers the unlikelihood that any
specific prospective offence will be discovered. How few dishonest
servants there are, for example, out of the million or so composing that
class of persons who have an unlimited opportunity to snap up not only
unconsidered trifles, but personal property of great value. The actual
honesty of the servants is probably greater than that of the masters--in
the final analysis.

Men are not only "presumed to be innocent" in the eyes of the law, but
are found to be so, as a matter of daily experience, so far as honesty
in the ordinary affairs of life is concerned, and the fact that we rely
so implicitly upon the truthfulness and integrity of our fellows is the
principal reason why violations of this imperative social law should be
severely dealt with. If it were possible adequately to determine or deal
with any such issue mere lying should be made a crime.

It is matter of constant wonder that shrewd business men will put
through all sorts of deals, when thousands of dollars are at stake,
relying entirely upon the word of some single person, whom they do not
in fact know. John Smith is looking for a house. He finds one he likes
with an old lady, who says her name is Sarah Jones, living in it, and
offers her forty thousand dollars for her real estate. She accepts. His
lawyer searches the title and finds that Sarah Jones is the owner of
record. The old lady is invited to the lawyer's office, executes a
warranty deed, and goes off with the forty thousand dollars. Now in a
great number of instances no one really knows whether the aged dame is
Sarah Jones or not; and she perhaps may be, and sometimes is, only the
caretaker's second cousin, who is looking after the house in the
latter's absence.

There are thousands of acres of land and hundreds of millions of money
waiting at compound interest to be claimed by unknown heirs or next of
kin. Even if the real ones cannot be found one would think that this
defect could be easily supplied by some properly ingenious person.

"My Uncle Bill went to sea in '45 and was never heard from again. Will
you find out if he left any money?" wrote a client to the author.
Careful search failed to reveal any money. But if the money had been
found _first_ how easy it would have been to turn up a nephew! Yet the
industry of producing properly authenticated nephews, heirs, legatees,
next of kin and claimants of all sorts has never been adequately
developed. There are plenty of "agents" who for a moderate fee will
inform you whether or not there is a fortune waiting for you, but there
is no agency within the writer's knowledge which will supply an heir for
every fortune. From a business point of view the idea seems to have
possibilities.

Some few years after the Civil War a Swede named Ebbe Petersen emigrated
to this country to better his condition. Fortune smiled upon him and he
amassed a modest bank account, which, with considerable foresight, he
invested in a large tract of unimproved land in the region known as "The
Bronx," New York City.

In the summer of 1888 Petersen determined to take a vacation and revisit
Sweden, and accordingly deeded all his real estate to his wife. Just
before starting he decided to take his wife and only child, a little
girl of ten or twelve, with him. Accordingly they set sail from Hoboken
Saturday, August 11, upon the steamer _Geiser_, of the Thingvalla Line,
bound for Copenhagen. At four o'clock Tuesday morning, at a point thirty
miles south of Sable Island and two hundred miles out of Halifax, the
_Geiser_, in the midst of a thick fog, crashed suddenly into a sister
ship, the _Thingvalla_, of the same line, and sank. The _Thingvalla_ was
herself badly crippled, but, after picking up thirty-one survivors,
managed to limp into Halifax, from which port the rescued were brought
to New York. Only fourteen of the _Geiser's_ passengers had been saved
and the Petersens were not among them. They were never heard of again,
and no relatives came forward to claim their property, which, happening
to be in the direct line of the city's development, was in course of
time mapped out into streets and house lots and became exceedingly
valuable. Gradually houses were built upon it, various people bought it
for investment, and it took on the look of other semi-developed suburban
property.

In the month of December, 1905, over seventeen years after the sinking
of the _Geiser_, a lawyer named H. Huffman Browne, offered to sell "at a
bargain" to a young architect named Benjamin Levitan two house lots
adjacent to the southwest corner of One Hundred and Seventy-fourth
Street and Monroe Avenue, New York City. It so happened that Browne had,
not long before, induced Levitan to go into another real-estate deal, in
which the architect's suspicions had been aroused by finding that the
property alleged by the lawyer to be "improved" was, in fact, unbuilt
upon. He had lost no money in the original transaction, but he
determined that no such mistake should occur a second time, and he
accordingly visited the property, and also had a search made of the
title, which revealed the fact that Browne was not the record owner, as
he had stated, but that, on the contrary, the land stood in the name of
"William R. Hubert."

It should be borne in mind that both the parties to this proposed
transaction were men well known in their own professions. Browne,
particularly, was a real-estate lawyer of some distinction, and an
editor of what were known as the old "New York Civil Procedure Reports."
He was a middle-aged man, careful in his dress, particular in his
speech, modest and quiet in his demeanor, by reputation a gentleman and
a scholar, and had practised at the New York bar some twenty-five years.

But Levitan, who had seen many wolves in sheep's clothing, and had
something of the Sherlock Holmes in his composition, determined to seek
the advice of the District Attorney, and having done so, received
instructions to go ahead and consummate the purchase of the property.
He, therefore, informed Browne that he had learned that the latter was
not the owner of record, to which Browne replied that that was true, but
that the property really did belong to him in fact, being recorded in
Hubert's name merely as a matter of convenience (because Hubert was
unmarried), and that, moreover, he, Browne, had an unrecorded deed from
Hubert to himself, which he would produce, or would introduce Hubert to
Levitan and let him execute a deed direct. Levitan assented to the
latter proposition, and the fourteenth of December, 1905, was fixed as
the date for the delivery of the deeds and the payment for the property.

At two o'clock in the afternoon of that day Browne appeared at Levitan's
office (where a detective was already in attendance) and stated that he
had been unable to procure Mr. Hubert's personal presence, but had
received from him deeds, duly executed, to the property. These he
offered to Levitan. At this moment the detective stepped forward, took
possession of the papers, and invited the lawyer to accompany him to the
District Attorney's office. To this Browne offered no opposition, and
the party adjourned to the Criminal Courts Building, where Mr. John W.
Hart, an Assistant District Attorney, accused him of having obtained
money from Levitan by means of false pretences as to the ownership of
the property, and requested from him an explanation. Browne replied
without hesitation that he could not understand why this charge should
be made against him; that he had, in fact, received the deeds from Mr.
Hubert only a short time before he had delivered them to Levitan; that
Mr. Hubert was in New York; that he was the owner of the property, and
that no fraud of any sort had been attempted or intended.

Mr. Hart now examined the supposed deeds and found that the signatures
to them, as well as the signatures to a certain affidavit of title,
which set forth that William R. Hubert was a person of substance, had
all been executed before a notary, Ella F. Braman, on that very day. He
therefore sent at once for Mrs. Braman who, upon her arrival,
immediately and without hesitation, positively identified the defendant,
H. Huffman Browne, as the person who had executed the papers before her
an hour or so before. The case on its face seemed clear enough. Browne
had apparently deliberately forged William R. Hubert's name, and it did
not even seem necessary that Mr. Hubert should be summoned as a witness,
since the property was recorded in his name, and Browne himself had
stated that Hubert was then actually in New York.

But Browne indignantly protested his innocence. It was clear, he
insisted, that Mrs. Braman was mistaken, for why, in the name of
common-sense, should he, a lawyer of standing, desire to forge Hubert's
name, particularly when he himself held an unrecorded deed of the same
property, and could have executed a good conveyance to Levitan had the
latter so desired. Such a performance would have been utterly without an
object. But the lawyer was nervous, and his description of Hubert as "a
wealthy mine owner from the West, who owned a great deal of property in
New York, and had an office in the Flatiron Building," did not ring
convincingly in Mr. Hart's ears. The Assistant District Attorney called
up the janitor of the building in question on the telephone. But no such
person had an office there. Browne, much flustered, said the janitor was
either a fool or a liar. He had been at Hubert's office that very
morning. He offered to go and find him in twenty minutes. But Mr. Hart
thought that the lawyer had better make his explanation before a
magistrate, and caused his arrest and commitment on a charge of forgery.
Little did he suspect what an ingenious fraud was about to be unearthed.

The days went by and Browne stayed in the Tombs, unable to raise the
heavy bail demanded, but no Hubert appeared. Meantime the writer, to
whom the case had been sent for trial, ordered a complete search of the
title to the property, and in a week or so became possessed, to his
amazement, of a most extraordinary and complicated collection of facts.

He discovered that the lot of land offered by Browne to Levitan, and
standing in Hubert's name, was originally part of the property owned by
Ebbe Petersen, the unfortunate Swede who, with his family, had perished
in the _Geiser_ off Cape Sable in 1888.

The title search showed that practically all of the Petersen property
had been conveyed by Mary A. Petersen to a person named Ignatius F. X.
O'Rourke, by a deed, which purported to have been executed on June 27,
1888, about two weeks before the Petersens sailed for Copenhagen, and
which was signed with Mrs. Petersen's mark, but that this deed had not
been recorded until July 3, 1899, _eleven years_ after the loss of the
_Geiser_.

The writer busied himself with finding some one who had known Mrs.
Petersen, and by an odd coincidence discovered a woman living in the
Bronx who had been an intimate friend and playmate of the little
Petersen girl. This witness, who was but a child when the incident had
occurred, clearly recalled the fact that Ebbe Petersen had not decided
to take his wife and daughter with him on the voyage until a few days
before they sailed. They had then invited her, the witness--now a Mrs.
Cantwell--to go with them, but her mother had declined to allow her to
do so. Mrs. Petersen, moreover, according to Mrs. Cantwell, was a woman
of education, who wrote a particularly fine hand. Other papers were
discovered executed at about the same time, signed by Mrs. Petersen with
her full name. It seemed inconceivable that she should have signed any
deed, much less one of so much importance, with her _mark_, and,
moreover, that she should have executed any such deed at all when her
husband was on the spot to convey his own property.

But the strangest fact of all was that the attesting witness to this
extraordinary instrument was H. Huffman Browne! It also appeared to have
been recorded _at his instance_ eleven years after its execution.

In the meantime, however, that is to say, between the sinking of the
_Geiser_ in '88 and the recording of Mary Petersen's supposed deed in
'99, another _equally mysterious_ deed to the same property had been
filed. This document, executed and recorded in 1896, purported to convey
part of the Petersen property to a man named John J. Keilly, and was
signed by a person calling himself Charles A. Clark. By a later deed,
executed and signed a few days later, John J. Keilly appeared to have
conveyed the same property to Ignatius F. X. O'Rourke, the very person
to whom Mrs. Petersen had apparently executed her deed in 1888. And H.
Huffman Browne was the attesting witness to both these deeds!

A glance at the following diagram will serve to clear up any confusion
which may exist in the mind of the reader:

[Sidenote: (Not Recorded until 1899)]

1888 MARY A. PETERSEN 1896 CHARLES A. CLARK
     by her (X) deed       conveys _same property_
     conveys to            to
     I.F.X. O'ROURKE       JOHN J. KEILLY.
     |
     |                1896 JOHN J. KEILLY
     |                     conveys to
     |                     I.F.X. O'ROURKE
     |_________________________|

O'ROURKE thus holds land through two sources.


Browne was the witness to both these parallel transactions! Of course it
was simple enough to see what had occurred. In 1896 a mysterious man,
named Clark, without vestige of right or title, so far as the records
showed, had conveyed Ebbe Petersen's property to a man named Keilly,
equally unsubstantial, who had passed it over to one O'Rourke. Then
Browne had suddenly recorded Mrs. Petersen's deed giving O'Rourke the
very same property. Thus this O'Rourke, whoever he may have been, held
all the Petersen property by two chains of title, one through Clark and
Keilly, and the other through Mrs. Petersen. Then he had gone ahead and
deeded it all away to various persons, through one of whom William R.
Hubert had secured his title. But every deed on record which purported
to pass any fraction of the Petersen property was witnessed by H.
Huffman Browne! And Browne was the attesting witness to the deed under
which Hubert purported to hold. Thus the chain of title, at the end of
which Levitan found himself, ran back to Mary Petersen, with H. Huffman
Browne peering behind the arras of every signature.


MARY PETERSEN            CLARK               BROWNE,
   to                      to             attesting witness.
O'ROURKE                 KEILLY
      |
      |
      |                  KEILLY              BROWNE,
      |                    to             attesting witness.
      |                  O'ROURKE
      |                    |
      |____________________|

        O'ROURKE                             BROWNE,
           to                             attesting witness.
        WILLIAM P. COLLITON


  WILLIAM P. COLLITON
    to                               BROWNE,
  JOHN GARRETSON                attesting witness.

  JOHN GARRETSON
    to                               BROWNE,
  HERMAN BOLTE                  attesting witness.

  HERMAN BOLTE
    to                               BROWNE,
  BENJ. FREEMAN                 attesting witness.

  BENJ. FREEMAN
    to                               BROWNE,
  WILLIAM R. HUBERT             attesting witness.


The Assistant District Attorney rubbed his forehead and wondered who in
thunder all these people were. Who, for example, to begin at the
beginning, was Charles A. Clark, and why should he be deeding away Ebbe
Petersen's property? And who were Keilly and O'Rourke, and all the
rest--Colliton, Garretson, Bolte and Freeman? And who, for that matter,
was Hubert?

A score of detectives were sent out to hunt up these elusive persons,
but, although the directories of twenty years were searched, no Charles
A. Clark, John J. Keilly or I. F. X. O'Rourke could be discovered. Nor
could any one named Colliton, Freeman or Hubert be found. The only
persons who did appear to exist were Garretson and Bolte.

Quite by chance the Assistant District Attorney located the former of
these, who proved to be one of Browne's clients, and who stated that he
had taken title to the property at the lawyer's request and as a favor
to him, did not remember from whom he had received it, had paid nothing
for it, received nothing for it, and had finally deeded it to Herman
Bolte at the direction of Browne. Herman Bolte, an ex-judge of the
Municipal Court, who had been removed for misconduct in office, admitted
grumblingly that, while at, one time he had considered purchasing the
property in question, he had never actually done so, that the deed from
Garretson to himself had been recorded without his knowledge or his
authority, that he had paid nothing for the property and had received
nothing for it, and had, at the instruction of Browne, conveyed it to
Benjamin Freeman. Garretson apparently had never seen Bolte, and Bolte
had never seen Freeman, while William R. Hubert, the person to whom the
record showed Freeman had transferred the property, remained an
invisible figure, impossible to reduce to tangibility.

Just what Browne had attempted to do--had done--was obvious. In some
way, being a real-estate lawyer, he had stumbled upon the fact that this
valuable tract of land lay unclaimed. Accordingly, he had set about the
easiest way to reduce it to possession. To make assurance doubly sure
he had forged two chains of title, one through an assumed heir and the
other through the owner herself. Then he had juggled the title through a
dozen or so grantees, and stood ready to dispose of the property to the
highest bidder.

There he stayed in the Tombs, demanding a trial and protesting his
innocence, and asserting that if the District Attorney would only look
long enough he would find William R. Hubert. But an interesting question
of law had cropped up to delay matters.

Of course, if there was anybody by the name of Hubert who actually owned
the property, and Browne had signed his name, conveying the same, to a
deed to Levitan, Browne was guilty of forgery in the first degree. But
the evidence in the case pointed toward the conclusion that Browne
himself _was_ Hubert. If this was so, how could Browne be said to have
forged the name of Hubert, when he had a perfect legal right to take the
property under any name he chose to assume? This was incontestable. If
your name be Richard Roe you may purchase land and receive title thereto
under the name of John Doe, and convey it under that name without
violating the law. This as a general proposition is true so long as the
taking of a fictitious name is for an honest purpose and not tainted
with fraud. The Assistant District Attorney felt that the very strength
of his case created, as it were, a sort of "legal weakness," for the
more evidence he should put in against Browne, the clearer it would
become that Hubert was merely Browne himself, and this would necessitate
additional proof that Browne had taken the property in the name of
Hubert for purposes of fraud, which could only be established by going
into the whole history of the property. Of course, if Browne were so
foolish as to put in the defence that Hubert really existed, the case
would be plain sailing. If, however, Browne was as astute as the
District Attorney believed him to be, he might boldly admit that there
was no Hubert except himself, and that in taking title to the property
and disposing thereof under that name, he was committing no violation of
law for which he could be prosecuted.

The case was moved for trial on the twelfth of March, 1906, before Judge
Warren W. Foster, in Part Three of the Court of General Sessions in New
York. The defendant was arraigned at the bar without counsel, owing to
the absence of his lawyer through sickness, and Mr. Lewis Stuyvesant
Chanler, the later Lieutenant-Governor of the State, was assigned to
defend him. At this juncture Browne arose and addressed the Court. In
the most deferential and conciliatory manner he urged that he was
entitled to an adjournment until such time as he could produce William
R. Hubert as a witness; stating that, although the latter had been in
town on December 14th, and had personally given him the deeds in
question, which he had handed to Levitan, Hubert's interests in the West
had immediately called him from the city, and that he was then in
Goldfields, Nevada; that since he had been in the Tombs he, Browne, had
been in correspondence with a gentleman by the name of Alfred Skeels, of
the Teller House, Central City, Colorado, from whom he had received a
letter within the week to the effect that Hubert had arranged to start
immediately for New York, for the purpose of testifying as a witness for
the defence. The prosecutor thereupon demanded the production of this
letter from the alleged Skeels, and Browne was compelled to state that
he had immediately destroyed it on its receipt. The prosecutor then
argued that under those circumstances, and in view of the fact that the
People's evidence showed conclusively that no such person as Hubert
existed, there was no reason why the trial should not proceed then and
there. The Court thereupon ruled that the case should go on.

A jury was procured after some difficulty, and the evidence of Mr.
Levitan received, showing that Browne had represented Hubert to be a man
of substance, and had produced an affidavit, purported to be sworn to
by Hubert, to the same effect, with deeds alleged to have been signed by
him. Mrs. Braman then swore that upon the same day Browne had himself
acknowledged these very deeds and had sworn to the affidavit before her
as a notary, under the name of William R. Hubert.

Taken with the fact that Browne had in open court stated that Hubert was
a living man, this made out a _prima facie_ case. But, of course, the
District Attorney was unable to determine whether or not Browne would
take the stand in his own behalf, or what his defence would be, and, in
order to make assurance doubly sure, offered in evidence all the deeds
to the property in question, thereby establishing the fact that it was
originally part of the Petersen estate, and disclosing the means whereby
it had eventually been recorded in the name of Hubert.

The prosecution then rested its case, and the burden shifted to the
defence to explain how all these deeds, attested by Browne, came to be
executed and recorded. It was indeed a difficult, if not impossible,
task which the accused lawyer undertook when he went upon the stand. He
again positively and vehemently denied that he had signed the name of
Hubert to the deed which he had offered to Levitan, and persisted in
the contention that Hubert was a real man, who sooner or later would
turn up. He admitted knowing the Petersen family in a casual way, and
said he had done some business for them, but stated that he had not
heard of their tragic death until some years after the sinking of the
_Geiser_. He had then ascertained that no one had appeared to lay claim
to Mrs. Petersen's estate, and he had accordingly taken it upon himself
to adveritse for heirs. In due course Charles A. Clark had appeared and
had deeded the property to Keilly, who in turn had conveyed it to
O'Rourke. Just who this mysterious O'Rourke was he could not explain,
nor could he account in any satisfactory manner for the recording in
1899 of the deed signed with Mary Petersen's mark. He said that it had
"turned up" in O'Rourke's hands after O'Rourke had become possessed of
the property through the action of the heirs, and that he had no
recollection of ever having seen it before or having witnessed it. In
the latter transactions, by which the property had been split up, he
claimed to have acted only as attorney for the different grantors. He
was unable to give the address or business of O'Rourke, Clark, Keilly or
Freeman, and admitted that he had never seen any of them save at his own
office. He was equally vague as to Hubert, whose New York residence he
gave as 111 Fifth Avenue. No such person, however, had ever been known
at that address.

[Illustration: With the exception of the upper left hand signature and
the four immediately below it of H. Huffman Browne, these are all the
signatures of imaginary persons invented by Browne to further his
schemes. The upper right-hand slip shows the signatures to the Wilson
bond, among which appears that of W.R. Hubert.]

Browne gave his testimony in the same dry, polite and careful manner in
which he had always been accustomed to discuss his cases and deliver his
arguments. It seemed wholly impossible to believe that this
respectable-looking person could be a dangerous character, yet the
nature of his offence and the consequences of it were apparent when the
State called to the stand an old broom-maker, who had bought from Browne
one of the lots belonging to the Petersen estate. Holding up three
stumps where fingers should have been, he cried out, choking with tears:

"My vriends, for vifteen years I vorked at making brooms--me und my
vife--from fife in the morning until six at night, und I loose mine
fingern trying to save enough money to puy a house that we could call
our own. Then when we saved eight hundred dollars this man come to us
und sold us a lot. We were very happy. Yesterday anoder man served me
mit a paper that we must leave our house, because we did not own the
land! We must go away! Where? We haf no place to go. Our home is being
taken from us, und that man [pointing his stumps at Browne]--that man
has stolen it from us!"

He stopped, unable to speak. The defendant's lawyer properly objected,
but, with this piece of testimony ringing in their ears, it is hardly
surprising that the jury took but five minutes to convict Browne of
forgery in the first degree.

A few days later the judge sentenced him to twenty years in State's
prison.

Then other people began to wake up. The Attorney-General guessed that
the Petersen property had all escheated to the State, the Swedish
Government sent a deputy to make inquiries, the Norwegian Government was
sure that he was a Norwegian, and the Danish that he was a Dane. No one
knows yet who is the real owner, and there are half a dozen heirs
squatting on every corner of it. Things are much worse than before
Browne tried to sell the ill-fated lot to Levitan, but a great many
people who were careless before are careful now.

It soon developed, however, that lawyer Browne's industry and ingenuity
had not been confined to the exploitation of the estate of Ebbe
Petersen. Before the trial was well under way the City Chamberlain of
New York notified the District Attorney that a peculiar incident had
occurred at his office, in which not only the defendant figured, but
William R. Hubert, his familiar, as well. In the year 1904 a judgment
had been entered in the Supreme Court, which adjudged that a certain
George Wilson was entitled to a one-sixth interest in the estate of
Jane Elizabeth Barker, recently deceased. George Wilson had last been
heard of, twenty years before, as a farmhand, in Illinois, and his
whereabouts were at this time unknown. Suddenly, however, he had
appeared. That is to say, H. Huffman Browne had appeared as his
attorney, and demanded his share of the property which had been
deposited to his credit with the City Chamberlain and amounted to
seventy-five hundred dollars. The lawyer had presented a petition signed
apparently by Wilson and a bond also subscribed by him, to which had
been appended the names of certain sureties. One of these was a William
R. Hubert--the same William R. Hubert who had mysteriously disappeared
when his presence was so vital to the happiness and liberty of his
creator. But the City Chamberlain had not been on his guard, and had
paid over the seventy-five hundred dollars to Browne without ever having
seen the claimant or suspecting for an instant that all was not right.

It was further discovered at the same time that Browne had made several
other attempts to secure legacies remaining uncalled for in the city's
treasury. In how many cases he had been successful will probably never
be known, but it is unlikely that his criminal career dated only from
the filing of the forged Petersen deed in 1896.

Browne made an heroic and picturesque fight to secure a reversal of his
conviction through all the State courts, and his briefs and arguments
are monuments to his ingenuity and knowledge of the law. He alleged that
his conviction was entirely due to a misguided enthusiasm on the part of
the prosecutor, the present writer, whom he characterized as a
"novelist" and dreamer. The whole case, he alleged, was constructed out
of the latter's fanciful imagination, a cobweb of suspicion, accusation
and falsehood. Some day his friend Hubert would come out of the West,
into which he had so unfortunately disappeared, and release an innocent
man, sentenced, practically to death, because the case had fallen into
the hands of one whose sense of the dramatic was greater than his logic.

Perchance he will. Mayhap, when H. Huffman Browne is the oldest inmate
of Sing Sing, or even sooner, some gray-haired figure will appear at the
State Capitol, and knock tremblingly at the door of the Executive,
asking for a pardon or a rehearing of the case, and claiming to be the
only original, genuine William R. Hubert--such a dénouement would not be
beyond the realms of possibility, but more likely the request will come
in the form of a petition, duly attested and authenticated before some
notary in the West, protesting against Browne's conviction and
incarceration, and bearing the flowing signature of William R.
Hubert--the same signature that appears on Browne's deeds to
Levitan--the same that is affixed to the bond of George Wilson, the
vanished farmhand, claimant to the estate of Jane Elizabeth Barker.




IX.

A Murder Conspiracy[4]


William M. Rice, eighty-four years of age, died at the Berkshire
Apartments at 500 Madison Avenue, New York City, at about half after
seven o'clock on the evening of Sunday, September 23, 1900. He had been
ill for some time, but it was expected that he would recover. On or
about the moment of his death, two elderly ladies, friends of the old
gentleman, had called at the house with cakes and wine, to see him. The
elevator man rang the bell of Mr. Rice's apartment again and again, but
could elicit no response, and the ladies, much disappointed, went away.
While the bell was ringing Charles F. Jones, the confidential valet of
the aged man, was waiting, he says, in an adjoining room until a cone
saturated with chloroform, which he had placed over the face of his
sleeping master, should effect his death.

_Did_ Jones murder Rice? If so, was it, as he claims, at the instigation
of Albert T. Patrick?

These two questions, now settled in the affirmative forever, so far as
criminal and civil litigation are concerned, have been the subject of
private study and public argument for more than seven years.

Mr. Rice was a childless widower, living the life of a recluse, attended
only by Jones, who was at once his secretary, valet and general servant.
No other person lived in the apartment, and few visitors ever called
there. Patrick was a New York lawyer with little practice who had never
met Mr. Rice, was employed as counsel in litigation hostile to him, yet
in whose favor a will purporting to be signed by Rice, June 30, 1900,
turned up after the latter's death, by the terms of which Patrick came
into the property, amounting to over seven million dollars, in place of
a charitable institution named in an earlier will of 1896. It is now
universally admitted that the alleged will of 1900 was a forgery, as
well as four checks drawn to Patrick's order (two for $25,000 each, one
for $65,000, and one for $135,000, which represented practically all of
Rice's bank accounts), an order giving him control of the contents of
Rice's safe deposit vaults (in which were more than $2,500,000 in
securities), and also a general assignment by which he became the owner
of Rice's entire estate. Thus upon Rice's death Patrick had every
possible variety of document necessary to possess himself of the
property. Jones took nothing under any of these fraudulent instruments.
Hence Patrick's motive in desiring the death of Rice is the foundation
stone of the case against him. But that Patrick desired and would profit
by Rice's death in no way tends to establish that Rice did not die a
natural death. Patrick would profit equally whether Rice died by foul
means or natural, and the question as to whether murder was done must be
determined from other evidence. This is only to be found in the
confession of the valet Jones and in the testimony of the medical
experts who performed the autopsy. Jones, a self-confessed murderer,
swears that upon the advice and under the direction of Patrick (though
in the latter's absence) he killed his master by administering
chloroform. There is no direct corroborative evidence save that of the
experts. Upon Jones's testimony depended the question of Patrick's
conviction or acquittal, and of itself this was not sufficient, for
being that of an accomplice it must, under the New York law, be
corroborated.

In the confession of Jones the State had sufficient _direct_ evidence
of the crime and of Patrick's connection with it, providing there was
_other evidence tending to connect Patrick with its commission_. This
corroborative evidence is largely supplied by the facts which show that
for a long time Patrick conspired with Jones to steal the bulk of Mr.
Rice's estate at his death. This evidence not only shows Patrick's
possible motive for planning Mr. Rice's _murder_, but also tends to
corroborate Jones's whole story of the conspiracy.

Rice did not know Patrick even by sight. He had heard of him only as a
person retained by another lawyer (Holt) to do "the dirty work" in an
action brought by Rice against Holt, as executor, to set aside Mrs.
Rice's will, in which she assumed, under the "Community Law" of Texas,
where Rice had formerly resided, to dispose of some $2,500,000 of Rice's
property. If Rice was a _resident of Texas_ she had the legal right to
do this,--otherwise not. Holt employed Patrick to get evidence that Rice
still was such a resident. Rice knew of this and hated Patrick.

Patrick's connection with the Rice litigation had begun four years
before the murder, which was not planned until August, 1900, His first
visit to Rice's apartment was made under the assumed name of Smith for
the purpose of discovering whether the valet could be corrupted into
furnishing fictitious proof of Rice's intent to reside in Texas. He
flattered Jones; told him he was underpaid and not appreciated, and,
after a second visit, at which he disclosed his right name, persuaded
him to typewrite a letter on Rice's stationery addressed to Baker,
Botts, Baker & Lovett (Rice's attorneys), in which he should be made to
say that he had lost hope of winning the suit against Holt, was really a
citizen of Texas, and wanted to settle the litigation. Patrick said that
he could arrange for the signing of such a letter and was willing to pay
Jones $250 for his help. Jones agreed.

Patrick now learned that Mr. Rice was living with no companion except
Jones; that he held little communication with the outside world; that
the valet was in his confidence and thoroughly familiar with his papers,
and that the will made in 1896 disinherited natural heirs in favor of an
educational institution which he had founded in Texas. He also learned
that while Mr. Rice was 84 years of age he was in possession of all his
faculties, conducted his own business, and might live for years.
Possessed of these facts Patrick's evil mind soon developed a conspiracy
with Jones to secure the whole estate.

Mr. Rice's pet charity was the William M. Rice Institute "for the
advance of science, art and literature," of Texas, which he had founded
in 1891. He had donated to it more than a million and a half dollars. By
the will of 1896 only small legacies were bequeathed to relatives, while
the bulk of his fortune was left to the Institute.

About a month after Patrick's first visit to the Berkshire Apartments,
that is, in December, 1899, while he and Jones were examining Rice's
private papers, they stumbled upon the will. Patrick saw his
opportunity. By the forgery of a new will which would increase the
legacies of those mentioned in the will of 1896 and leave legacies to
every person who might have any claim upon the estate, it would be for
the interest of those persons to sustain and carry into effect the
forgery. The whole scheme was based upon the belief that "every man has
his price." He told Jones that he thought the will unjust; that he did
not think it right to leave so little to relatives, and later he brought
to Jones a rough draft of a will which could be substituted for the
genuine one. Patrick was to get half the estate, the relatives were to
receive double or three times the amount provided in the 1896 will, and
what was left was to be given to the Rice Institute. He proposed that
Jones should typewrite this will, and guaranteed to arrange for the
witnessing and signing of it, and promised that Jones should get
whatever he wanted. Jones at first objected, but was finally won over.
Rewritten many times to include new ideas of the conspirators, the
document finally reached the form of the will of June 30, 1900, in which
Patrick substituted himself for the Rice Institute and made himself one
of the executors.

An ingenious part of the conspiracy was the decision to leave the 1896
will in existence. If Patrick had destroyed it and the relatives had
succeeded in overthrowing the will of 1900, the estate would have been
left without testamentary disposition and the relatives would have got
more than was provided by either will. With the will of 1896 in
existence, however, the relatives would get less if they overthrew the
forgery. By retaining it, therefore, Patrick figured that the relatives
would have selfish reasons for accepting the forgery as genuine.

The preparation of this bogus will occupied about a month, and the next
question was the procurement of witnesses. It was desirable to get the
same persons who witnessed the former will. These were Walter H.
Wetherbee and W. F. Harmon, clerks for many years at Swenson's banking
house. On the assumption that Wetherbee had been injured by Rice and was
therefore hostile to him, Jones practically unfolded the scheme. He
told Wetherbee that one of Mr. Rice's bonds had disappeared and that
Rice had accused Wetherbee of stealing it. He wound up with the
suggestion, "I will get one witness and you can get another, and the
thing is done." But Wetherbee indignantly declined to join in the
conspiracy.

Morris Meyers, who had been employed in Patrick's office, and David L.
Short, a friend of both, were the false witnesses finally selected.

They were clothed with the appearance of honesty and were brought into
contact with Rice by Jones at various times: Meyers as a notary public,
and Short as commissioner of deeds for the State of Texas, an
appointment procured for him by Patrick probably for this specific
purpose.

The date of the forged will, June 30, 1900, was selected to correspond
with the date of three genuine papers which Rice acknowledged before
Short on that date.

[Illustration: Last page of the forged will of 1900, showing the forgery
of Rice's signature, and the false attestation of Short and Meyers.]

The next step was to obviate the absurdity of Patrick's being selected
as the residuary legatee at a time when he was engaged in bitter
litigation against Rice. The best way out was for Patrick to pose as a
lawyer who had brought about a settlement of this expensive litigation
and thus won Rice's regard. Patrick first tried to accomplish this by
getting friends to visit Rice and urge a settlement. But Rice rebuffed
them all. Accordingly, Patrick again resorted to forgery, and in
August, 1900, manufactured an instrument of settlement, dated March 6,
1900.

But such an agreement would not explain the paradox of a man whom Rice
hated and despised and did not know by sight turning up as the principal
beneficiary under his will. It was necessary to manufacture evidence to
be used after Rice's death in support of his claim of close relations.
The idea of a personal meeting with Rice had been abandoned on Jones's
advice, and Patrick therefore caused the valet to prepare twenty-five or
thirty forged letters addressed to him and purporting to come from Rice.
These referred to current business matters and conveyed the impression
that it was Rice's custom to seek the lawyer's advice. One instructed
Patrick as to the terms of the will of 1900. Carbon copies were made for
filing in Rice's letter book after his death.

To make assurance doubly sure and to secure immediate possession of
Rice's securities a general assignment to Patrick of all Rice's estate
was forged, and an order giving him access to and possession of the
securities on deposit in Rice's safety vault.

But Patrick did not stop here. He procured from Jones three checks
signed by Mr. Rice in the regular course of business, one payable to
Jones for his July salary and the other two for the July and August
salary of an employee of Rice's in Texas named Cohn. These three checks
Patrick kept as models, forwarding to Cohn two forged checks filled out
by Jones upon which Rice's signature had been traced, and returning to
Jones a substitute check with Rice's signature traced upon it. All three
checks passed through the banks unsuspected. Traced signatures were also
substituted for genuine ones upon letters dictated by Rice to his Texas
correspondents. Thus Patrick secured the circulation of five copies of
Rice's signature which, if occasion demanded, he could produce as
standards of comparison to correspond with his other forgeries. The
principal preparations were complete. But title under the will might
long be delayed and perhaps even eventually fail. Patrick was poor and
in no condition to conduct adequately a serious litigation. The moment
Mr. Rice died a large amount of cash would be necessary. For the
procurement of this Patrick and Jones looked to the current balance of
Rice's bank account, which amounted to some two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars on deposit at Swenson's private bank and at the Fifth
Avenue Trust Company. With this they felt reasonably secure of success.
For even if the will should be set aside as fraudulent they had a second
line of defense in the general assignment of the estate and the orders
to Rice's two million five hundred thousand dollars of securities.

While the evidence affords a motive for Patrick to desire the death of
Mr. Rice, it does not of itself, up to this point, indicate the
slightest intention on the part of Patrick to do away with the old
gentleman. It was therefore conceded by the prosecution that, upon
Jones's own testimony, the conspiracy to murder was not formed until
about seven weeks before the event. The first evidence which points to
an intent to murder is the famous "cremation letter," dated August 3d.

The cremation letter from Mr. Rice, authorizing Patrick to cremate his
body, shows that Patrick intended to do away with Rice in such a way
that an autopsy must, if possible, be prevented and the evidence of
murder destroyed. That Patrick forged such a letter was evidence that
his connection with the murder was premeditated and deliberate. To
cremate the body before an autopsy it was necessary to procure a
physician's certificate that Rice had died from natural causes. He
therefore made preparation to secure such a certificate, and then upon
the strength of the cremation letter to give directions for the
immediate destruction of the body.

Patrick, with the view of having at hand a physician who would be
unsuspicious, and who would issue a certificate of death from natural
causes, induced Jones to send for Dr. Curry, his own friend and
physician, on an occasion when the valet was ill. This was in March,
1900. Dr. Curry came, and Jones, acting under Patrick's advice,
cautioned him not to mention the lawyer's name to Rice. In course of
time he saw Rice, gained his good opinion and became his attending
physician. But Rice did not die, and curiously enough it was he himself
who suggested to Jones the instrumentality of death which was finally
employed, for he read an article dealing with the dangers of chloroform
as an anaesthetic, and discussed it with the valet. This suggestion was
conveyed to Patrick, who asked Dr. Curry whether chloroform left any
traces discoverable upon an autopsy. Dr. Curry rather carelessly replied
that it left but slight traces if administered only in the quantities
which would be fatal to a man with a weak heart. Patrick told Jones, so
Jones alleges, to procure some chloroform and this he did, sending to
Texas for two bottles of two ounces each. From Dr. Curry's remarks it
was manifest that a weakened condition of the patient was an important
element, and as Jones was taking some mercury pills (prescribed for him
by Dr. Curry), the valet induced his master to take some of them. The
old gentleman was benefited, however, rather than weakened. This was
_before_ the forgery of the cremation letter. It was clear that larger
doses of mercury would be necessary, and accordingly Patrick furnished
Jones with pellets containing the drug in such quantities that Jones,
experimenting with one of them, became ill.

They had now the means to effect gradual death, but as mercury leaves
traces discernible at an autopsy, it was decided that the body must be
cremated promptly. Hence the cremation letter. It was hoped that Rice
might drop off at any moment, owing to his weakened condition, and in
anticipation of death Patrick discontinued his visits to the apartment
in order to establish a satisfactory alibi. Jones also frequently
absented himself from the apartment in the evenings after the old man
had fallen asleep.

[Illustration: The famous letter forged by Patrick, which requests the
cremation of the remains of the supposed writer, old Mr. Rice.]

On September 16th Rice had an attack of acute indigestion, which might
have resulted seriously had it not been for the mercurial pills which
promptly relieved him. The reader should observe that practically all of
this testimony comes from Jones. There is no extraneous evidence that
Patrick induced the giving of the mercury. Patrick, however, spread
false rumors as to Rice's general health and also as to his financial
condition and intentions, namely, that Rice was only worth seven
hundred and fifty thousand dollars, and that those who expected he was
going to leave his money to the Institute were doomed to disappointment.
But neither his statements about Rice's condition nor his remarks as to
the disposition and extent of his property are inconsistent with a mere
_hope_ that he would die and thus leave Patrick free to enjoy the fruits
of his forgeries.

There now occurred, however, an event which may well have played a part
in inducing Patrick to supplement forgery by murder. On Sunday,
September 16th, the plant of the Merchants' and Planters' Oil Company of
Houston, Texas, of which Rice owned seventy-five per cent. of the
capital stock, was destroyed by fire. The company being without funds to
rebuild, its directors telegraphed to Rice requesting him to advance the
money. The amount needed was two hundred and fifty thousand dollars--and
if Rice consented, all the available funds on deposit in the New York
banks, upon which the conspirators relied to accomplish their object,
would be exhausted. Jones endeavored to dissuade the old man from
advancing the money, but without effect, and Rice sent a letter to
Houston agreeing to supply one hundred and fifty thousand dollars and
more in instalments of twenty-five thousand dollars each. This was on
September 18th, after he had wired to the same effect on September
17th. Patrick and Jones suppressed a telegram that Rice would advance
two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, and on September 19th the old
man received word that the first draft in conformity with his telegram
of September 17th had been drawn and would arrive in New York on the
22d. Jones says that on showing this to Patrick the latter announced
that Rice must be put out of the way as soon as possible. Accordingly,
on September 20th and 21st, Jones administered larger doses of mercury
than usual, which, while weakening and depressing him, failed to cause
his end. Saturday, September 22d, the draft was presented at Rice's
apartment. The old man was not confined to his bed, but Jones told the
bank messenger, after pretending to consult him, that Rice was too ill
to attend to business that day and to return on Monday. That night Jones
and Patrick met, and it was agreed (according to Jones) that Rice must
not be allowed to survive until Monday. They still hoped that he might
die without any further act upon their part, but Jones was informed by
Dr. Curry that, although the old man seemed weak and under a great
mental strain, he nevertheless thought that he would recover. This Curry
also told to Patrick, the latter calling at the doctor's house about
five o'clock in the afternoon.

"You think Mr. Rice will be able to go down Monday morning?" Patrick
asked.

"You had better wait until Monday morning comes," replied Dr. Curry.

"Do you think he will be able to go down town next week?" persisted the
lawyer.

The doctor answered in the affirmative.

That night Mr. Rice slept quietly until eight o'clock Sunday morning.
Dr. Curry called and found him in excellent condition, having eaten a
hearty breakfast. His heart was a trifle weak, but it was sound. His
organs were all working normally; he felt no pain. The doctor left
without prescribing any medicine, stating that he would not return
unless called, and expressing his opinion that the patient would
recover. This was about eleven o'clock, and Jones immediately hastened
to Patrick's house and reported the conversation.

It was clear that Rice's death would not occur before Monday morning. He
might live to pay over the two hundred and fifty thousand dollars; long
enough to give further testimony in the Holt litigation, and thus expose
the whole fraudulent scheme of pretended settlement and of friendly
relations with the lawyer, and finally, perhaps, even to make a new
will. The success of the conspiracy demanded that Rice should die that
night. Did he die naturally? Was his death caused by any further act of
the conspirators? Did Jones kill him by means of chloroform?

Jones's story is that Patrick supplied him with some oxalic acid which
was to be mixed with powdered ammonia and diluted in water, on the
theory that it was preferable to chloroform since it would not require
Jones's presence in the room at the moment of death. Jones said that he
endeavored to administer the mixture to the old man, but that he refused
to take it. Jones had already procured the chloroform from Texas, as has
been stated, and had turned it over to Patrick. He says that that
afternoon he procured this from Patrick, who told him how to administer
it. This was a few moments after six o'clock. Rice was sleeping soundly.
The colored woman who did the housework was absent for the day and the
rooms were deserted. He saturated a sponge with chloroform, constructed
a cone out of a towel, placed the sponge in the cone, put the cone over
the sleeping man's face and ran out of the room and waited thirty
minutes for the chloroform to complete the work. Waiting in the next
room he heard the door bell ring, and ring again, but he paid no
attention to the summons. In point of fact he was never quite sure
himself whether the bell was not the creation of his own overwrought
brain. At the end of half an hour he returned to the bedroom, removed
the cone from Rice's face and saw that he was dead, then after burning
the sponge and the towel in the kitchen range he opened the windows,
straightened the rooms out, called the elevator man, asked him to send
for Dr. Curry, and telephoned to Patrick that Rice was dead.

Jones had no sooner telephoned Patrick that Rice was dead than the
lawyer hastened to Dr. Curry's, and within forty minutes appeared with
him in Rice's apartments, assuming complete charge. Summoning an
undertaker and having the cremation letter at hand, he gave orders for
speedy cremation. But he now discovered the principal mistake in his
calculations. He had omitted to investigate the length of time required
to heat the crematory. This he now discovered to his horror to be
twenty-four hours. But the body must be destroyed. The undertaker
suggested that the body might be embalmed while the crematory was being
heated, and Patrick at once seized upon the suggestion and gave orders
to that effect, although the cremation letter sets forth specifically
that one of the reasons why Rice desired cremation was his horror of
being embalmed. The body was embalmed at the apartments that night, Dr.
Curry innocently supplying the certificate of death from "old age and
weak heart," and "as immediate cause, indigestion followed by
collocratal diarrhoea with mental worry."

Having arranged for the cremation at the earliest possible moment, Jones
and Patrick rifled the trunk in which Rice kept his papers, and stuffed
them in a satchel which Patrick bore away with him.

The funeral was to be held early Tuesday morning and the ashes conveyed
by Jones to Milwaukee, to be interred near the body of Rice's wife,
while the relatives should not be notified until it should be too late
for them to reach New York.

The next step was to secure the two hundred and fifty thousand dollars
which Rice had on deposit. Patrick had already forged Rice's name to
blank checks on Swenson and the Fifth Avenue Trust Company. Early Monday
morning Jones, with Patrick looking over his shoulder and directing him,
filled out the body of the checks, which covered all but ten thousand
dollars of Rice's deposits. These consisted of one for twenty-five
thousand dollars and one for sixty-five thousand dollars on Swenson, one
for twenty-five thousand dollars and another for one hundred and
thirty-five thousand dollars on the Trust Company. They were all made
payable to the order of Patrick and dated September 22d, the day before
Rice's death. One of the drafts on the Fifth Avenue Trust Company was
cashed for him by a friend named Potts early Monday morning, and was
paid without suspicion.

But now came the second error, which resulted in the exposure of the
conspiracy and conviction for murder. Jones, in filling out the
twenty-five thousand dollar check on Swenson, had in his nervousness
omitted the "l" from Patrick's Christian name, so that the check read
"Abert T. Patrick," and Patrick in his excitement had failed to notice
the omission or attempt to obviate it by extra indorsement. This
twenty-five thousand dollar Swenson check was intrusted to David L.
Short for presentation to Swenson & Sons for certification. When he
presented it, Wallace, the clerk, recognized Jones's handwriting in the
body of it, and thought the signature looked unnatural. He took it to a
rear office, where he showed it to Wetherbee, who was the person whom
Jones had approached nine months before with a request that he join the
conspiracy to manufacture a bogus will. Wetherbee compared the signature
on the check with genuine signatures in the bank, and returned it to
Short without any intimation that he regarded it as irregular, but
assigning as the reason the defect in the indorsement. Short thereupon
returned the check to Patrick, who supplied the necessary supplementary
indorsement and telephoned to Jones what had occurred, instructing him
to say that the check was all right in case the Swensons should
inquire.

Half an hour later Short returned to Swenson's, where the check was
examined by one of the firm. Rice's apartments were then called up, and
Jones said that the checks were all right. But this did not satisfy Mr.
Swenson, so he instructed Wallace to call up the apartment again and
insist on talking to Mr. Rice. Jones delayed replying to Wallace and in
the afternoon called up Patrick on the telephone, inquiring what he
should say. Patrick replied that he would have to say that Rice was
dead. And in accordance with this Jones informed Swenson that Rice had
died at eight o'clock the previous evening. It was thus clear to Swenson
that although the maker of the check was dead, Patrick, a lawyer,
cognizant of that fact, was seeking to secure payment upon it. For Jones
had told Swenson that he had reported Rice's death to the doctor and to
Rice's lawyer, Patrick.

Patrick, accompanied by Potts, went immediately to the bank, where
Swenson informed him that the check could be paid only to the
administrator. Patrick replied that there would be no administrator;
that Rice had left no property in this State, and informed Swenson that
he had an assignment by Rice to himself of all Rice's securities with
Swenson. He also invited Swenson to the funeral.

Later in the day Patrick attempted to obtain possession of Rice's
securities in the Safety Deposit Company and in the Fifth Avenue Trust
Company, by presenting forged instruments of transfer and the orders
heretofore referred to; but after some delay the trust companies
declined him access. The conspiracy had begun to go to pieces. The two
mistakes and the failure to secure funds placed Patrick in a dangerous
position.

Two o'clock on Monday afternoon, eighteen hours after the death, Jones,
at Patrick's direction, began to notify the relatives that Rice had died
the evening before, and that the funeral would take place the following
morning. The telegrams to Baker and to Rice, Jr., in Texas, were in the
following extraordinary form:

    Mr. Rice died eight o'clock last night under care of physicians.
    Death certificate, "old age, weak heart, delirium." Left
    instructions to be interred in Milwaukee with wife. Funeral 10 A. M.
    to-morrow at 500 Madison Avenue.

It is significant that care was used to convey the information that the
death was a natural one with a physician in attendance; that the body
was to be interred in Milwaukee, without reference to the cremation.
This may well have been so that if any suspicions of foul play should
arise, the recipients, realizing that they could not reach New York in
time to arrest matters there, might hasten to Milwaukee to intercept the
body, where they could be met by Jones with the cremation letter in his
pocket and his urn of ashes under his arm.

But the telegram did arouse suspicion, and Baker and Rice immedately
wired Jones as follows:

    Please make no disposition of Rice's remains until we arrive. We
    leave to-night, arrive New York Thursday morning.

Baker also instructed N. A. Meldrum, a Texan then in New York, to
co-operate with Jones in preserving everything intact.

In the meantime, however, Swenson had notified his attorneys, who in
turn had informed the police and the District Attorney's office, and
that evening at about eleven o'clock James W. Gerard, accompanied by a
detective, who posed as the lawyer's clerk, interviewed Patrick at his
home. Patrick informed Gerard that he had an assignment of all Rice's
property and also a will of Rice's of which he was executor. This was
the first reference to the will of 1900. He also informed Gerard that he
would not receive a cent under its provision. To have explained the real
terms of the will would, under the circumstances, have excited too much
suspicion. Yet he was eager to let the Swensons know that as executor
he was in a position to control the profitable banking business that
would arise from the settlement of the estate. In the meantime four
Headquarters' detectives, representing themselves as lawyers, visited
the apartments.

Patrick hurried to 500 Madison Avenue, where he learned of Meldrum's
presence in town. Things were turning out far from the way in which he
had expected. He then hastened to his office down-town, which he reached
about half-past one in the morning, and, alone, destroyed great
quantities of paper, attempting to dispose of them through the toilet
bowl, which was so clogged that the water flowed out upon the floor,
necessitating an apology to the janitor. In the silence of the night
misgivings came upon him. He lost his nerve, and at two o'clock in the
morning called up the undertaker and revoked the signed order for
cremation which he had given. Leaving the office at about five in the
morning he first visited Meyers, thence proceeded to his own
boarding-house, and from there went to the apartments, which he reached
at eight o'clock. Here he found the detectives who had been on guard
since early morning to forestall any attempt to remove the body.

At the funeral itself he attempted to conciliate adverse interests and
to win witnesses for his purpose. He had begun to do this the very
night that Rice had died, when he told the elevator man that he was
remembered in Rice's will. He had also informed Wetherbee that he had a
five thousand dollars' legacy. At the funeral were Blynn, one of Rice's
nephews, who had come on from Massachusetts, and two ladies, to each of
whom he stated that they had legacies which would soon be available
provided there was no contest of the will.

[Illustration: Four forged signatures of W.M. Rice, which bisected and
rearranged haphazard fit exactly, thus showing that they were made from
the same model. This would be an utter impossibility in the case of four
genuine signatures.]

[Illustration: Forged assignment of vault at the New York Safe Deposit
Co. from Rice to Patrick.]

The detectives now informed Patrick that he was wanted at Headquarters,
and Patrick invited Potts to accompany him, informing the latter that
the police suspected that there was something unnatural in the cause of
death, but that he could explain satisfactorily. As a matter of fact no
such intimation had been made to him by the police or anyone else. At
Police Headquarters after an interview with Inspector McClusky he was
permitted to go his way.

Patrick returned to Rice's apartments, sent for Short and Meyers, and
conferred with them there. He took this occasion to tell Maria Scott,
the colored woman who worked in the apartment, that she was suspected of
having poisoned Rice, and that she had better say nothing about his
death. Jones told her that she was remembered in the will and that it
would be worth her while to stand by himself and Patrick, who would see
that she was taken care of. Meanwhile the coroner had sent the body to
the morgue for autopsy.

The autopsy was performed on Tuesday, forty-three hours after death
occurred, by Dr. Donlin, a coroner's physician, in the presence of Dr.
Williams, also a coroner's physician, and of Professor R. A. Witthaus,
an expert chemist. The two physicians testified at the trial that the
organs of the body, except the lungs, were normal in condition, save as
affected by the embalming fluid. They and Professor Witthaus agreed in
their testimony that the lungs were congested. Dr. Donlin spoke of their
being "congested all over"; while Dr. Williams characterized it as "an
intense congestion of the lungs--coextensive with them." Outside of the
lungs they found no evidence of disease to account for death, and beyond
the congestion these showed nothing except a small patch of consolidated
tissue about the size of a twenty-five cent piece. They testified, in
effect, that nothing save the inhalation of some gaseous irritant could
have produced such a general congestion, and that the patch of tissue
referred to was insufficient to account for the amount of congestion
present. Dr. Donlin could not testify what the proximate cause of death
was, but was firm in his opinion that no cause for it was observable in
the other vital organs. In this Dr. Williams concurred. He was of the
opinion that chloroform would act as an irritant upon the lungs and
cause precisely that general congestion observable in the case of the
deceased. Professor Witthaus testified that his analysis revealed the
presence of mercury, obtained as calomel, and while the amount was not
sufficient to cause death, its presence indicated that a larger quantity
had existed in life. The embalming fluid had contained no mercury, and
he and Dr. Donlin agreed that the embalming fluid would have no effect
upon the lungs beyond a tendency to bleach them. In other words, the
People's evidence was to the effect that no cause of death was
observable from a medical examination of the body save the congestion
stated to exist in the lungs, and that this might have been caused by
chloroform.

Thursday morning Mr. Baker and F. A. Rice, the brother of the deceased,
arrived in New York. Patrick showed them the cremation letter, and,
inasmuch as they took a neutral position in the matter, ordered the
cremation to proceed, and accordingly it took place that very day. He
also endeavored to win the confidence of Baker, but succeeded in
accomplishing little. He finally gave the latter a copy of the 1900 will
and the original will of 1896. He also informed Baker that he had taken
a large number of papers from Rice's apartments, and turned over to him
a considerable number of them. He also surrendered on Friday the two
Swenson checks.

After considerable discussion Baker told Patrick flatly that he would
never consent to the probate of the 1900 will; that he was satisfied
that the '96 will was the last will of Rice, and that he would insist
upon its being probated, to which Patrick replied, that so far as he was
concerned he did not know but that the probate of the '96 will would
suit him just as well as the probate of the 1900 will; that it was a
matter of indifference to him, and that so far as the Rice Institute was
concerned he was prepared to give Baker from three to five million
dollars for it, or any other sum Baker might name. These negotiations
and conferences continued until the fourth of October, Patrick yielding
step by step, until he had divested himself of all control of the
documents and securities.

Meantime sufficient evidence having been secured, Patrick and Jones were
arrested on a charge of forgery and held for the Grand Jury. Bail was
fixed at ten thousand dollars each, but was not forthcoming.

On October 21st, Mr. House, Patrick's lawyer, visited Patrick and Jones
in the Tombs. Jones says that after Patrick had talked to Mr. House the
former called Jones to one corner of the room and told him that House
insisted on knowing definitely whether a crime had been committed and
directed Jones to tell House that a murder had been committed, but that
he (Patrick) was not concerned in it. This Jones declined to do without
implicating Patrick. The two prisoners then returned to House and Jones
says that he informed House that he had killed Rice by chloroform, and
gave him the "same story which he told on the witness stand." After this
Jones apparently lost his nerve and told Patrick that he intended to
commit suicide. This idea Patrick encouraged, agreeing that they should
both do it at about the same time.

On the 26th of October Jones made a statement to Assistant District
Attorney Osborne which was in large part false, and in which he
endeavored to exonerate himself entirely from complicity in any of the
crimes, and in which he charged the actual administration of the
chloroform to Patrick. Four days later Osborne sent for him and told him
he had lied, upon which Jones became confused, continued to persist in
some of his statements, qualified others and withdrew still others. He
was completely unnerved and that night attempted, by means of a knife
which Patrick had supplied him, to cut his throat. The attempt was a
failure, and he was removed to Bellevue Hospital, where he remained
until November 12th. He then finally gave the statement which
corresponded with his testimony upon the trial and which jibed with all
the circumstances and evidence known to the District Attorney.

Did Patrick conspire with Jones to murder Rice? What corroboration is
there of Jones's story that he killed Rice under Patrick's direction?
First: What proof is there that murder was committed?

Roughly, that Jones so swore; that Rice died at the time alleged; that
he did not die from disease, but that he died from a congestion of the
lungs which could have occurred only in the case of a living organism by
the administration of some such irritant as chloroform; that some one,
therefore, must have killed him, and that Jones alone had the
opportunity.

Second: What proof is there that Patrick directed the murder?

Evidence of an elaborate conspiracy, as briefly heretofore set forth,
which contemplated the _death_ of Rice. Of course Patrick wanted Rice to
die. If Patrick was not implicated in the killing, what motive had Jones
to commit the deed? Why did Rice die at the precise psychological moment
which would enable Patrick to prevent two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars on deposit being diverted to Texas? And finally, why did Patrick
prepare a forged cremation letter for the destruction of the body? If
the conspiracy contemplated a _natural_ death, nothing could be of
greater value to the two parties concerned than the means of proving
that the death was _not_ unnatural.

This, in the most abbreviated form, is the case against Patrick. Space
forbids any reference to his elaborate and ingenious defense, which was
based entirely on an alleged complete failure of corroboration of
Jones's testimony. Starting with the premise that the word of a
self-confessed murderer and thrice-perjured scoundrel was valueless as
proof, he contended that there was no adequate evidence that Rice's
death was felonious, and that the congestion of the lungs could have
been and was caused by the embalming fluid and was only attributed to
the chloroform after Jones had given his final version of how the murder
was accomplished. Technically the case against Patrick was not a strong
one. Dramatically it was overwhelming. His own failure to testify and
his refusal to allow his lawyer, Mr. House, to relate what passed
between them in the Tombs, remain significant, although not evidence
proper for a jury to consider. Wherever lawyers shall get together,
there the Patrick case will be discussed with its strong points and its
weak ones, its technicalities and its tactics, and the ethics of the
liberation of Jones, the actual murderer, now long since vanished into
the obscurity from which he came. On the one hand stands a public
convinced of Patrick's guilt, and on the other the convicted "lifer"
pointing a lean finger at the valet Jones and stubbornly repeating, "I
am innocent."

[Footnote 4: In 1906 the Governor of New York commuted the death
sentence of Albert T. Patrick to life imprisonment, and the most
extraordinary struggle in the legal history of the State on the part of
a convicted murderer for his own life came to an end. The defendant in
the "Death House" at Sing Sing had invoked every expedient to escape
punishment, and by the use of his knowledge had even saved a fellow
prisoner, "Mike" Brush, from the electric chair.]




X

A Flight Into Texas


The flight and extradition of Charles F. Dodge unquestionably involved
one of the most extraordinary battles with justice in the history of the
criminal law. The funds at the disposal of those who were interested in
procuring the prisoner's escape were unlimited in extent and the arch
conspirator for whose safety Dodge was spirited away was so influential
in political and criminal circles that he was all but successful in
defying the prosecutor of New York County, even supported as the latter
was by the military and judicial arm of the United States Government.
For, at the time that Dodge made his escape, a whisper from Hummel was
enough to make the dry bones of many a powerful and ostensibly
respectable official rattle and the tongue cleave to the roof of his
mouth in terror.

Who could accomplish that in which the law was powerless?--Hummel. Who
could drive to the uttermost ends of the earth persons against whom not
a shadow of suspicion had previously rested?--Hummel. Who dictated to
the chiefs of police of foreign cities what they should or should not do
in certain cases; and who could, at the beckoning of his little finger,
summon to his dungeon-like offices in the New York Life Building,
whither his firm had removed from Centre Street, the most prominent of
lawyers, the most eminent of citizens?--Surely none but Hummel. And now
Hummel was fighting for his own life. The only man that stood between
him and the iron bars of Blackwell's Island was Charles F. Dodge--the
man whom he had patted on the knee in his office and called a "Mascot,"
when quite in the nature of business he needed a little perjury to
assist a wealthy client.

Hummel in terror called into play every resource upon which, during
forty years of practice, his tiny tentacles had fastened. Who shall say
that while he made a show of enjoying himself nightly with his
accustomed light-heartedness in the Tenderloin, he did not feel
confident that in the end this peril would disappear like the others
which had from time to time threatened him during his criminal career?
But Hummel was fully aware of the tenacity of the man who had resolved
to rid New York of his malign influence. His Nemesis was following him.
In his dreams, if he ever dreamed, it probably took the shape of the
square shouldered District Attorney in the shadow of whose office
building the little shyster practised his profession. Had he been told
that this Nemesis was in reality a jovial little man with a round, ruddy
face and twinkling blue eyes he would have laughed as heartily as it was
in his power to laugh. Yet such was the fact. A little man who looked
less like a detective than a commercial traveller selling St. Peter's
Oil or some other cheerful concoction, with manners as gentle and a
voice as soft as a spring zephyr, who always took off his hat when he
came into a business office, seemingly bashful to the point of
self-effacement, was the one who snatched Charles F. Dodge from the
borders of Mexico and held him in an iron grip when every influence upon
which Hummel could call for aid, from crooked police officials, corrupt
judges and a gang of cutthroats under the guise of a sheriff's posse,
were fighting for his release.

Jesse Blocher is not employed in New York County, and for business
reasons he does not wish his present address known. When he comes to New
York he occasionally drops into the writer's office for a cigar and a
friendly chat about old times. And as he sits there and talks so
modestly and with such quiet humor about his adventures with the Texas
Rangers among the cactus-studded plains of the Lone Star State, it is
hard even for one who knows the truth, to realize that this man is one
of the greatest of detectives, or rather one of the most capable,
resourceful, adroit and quick-witted knights of adventure who ever set
forth upon a seemingly impossible errand.

It is unnecessary to state just how the District Attorney discovered the
existence of "Jesse," as we knew him. It is enough to say that on
Saturday morning, July 23, 1904, he was furnished with the proper
credentials and given instructions to proceed at once to New Orleans,
Louisiana, and "locate," if it were humanly possible to do so, Charles
F. Dodge, under indictment for perjury, and potentially the chief
witness against Abraham H. Hummel, on a charge of conspiracy. He was
told briefly and to the point that, in spite of the official reports
from the police head-quarters of both New York City and New Orleans to
the contrary, there was reason to believe that Dodge was living,
although not registered, as a guest at the St. Charles Hotel in the
latter city. A partial and inaccurate description of Dodge was given him
and he was warned to use extreme caution to prevent any knowledge of his
mission from being made known. Once Dodge had been discovered he was to
keep him under surveillance and wire New York immediately.

Accordingly, Jesse left the city upon the same day at 4.45 P.M. and
arrived two days later, at 9.15 on Monday morning, at New Orleans, where
he went directly to the St. Charles Hotel, registered, and was assigned
to room Number 547 on the fifth floor. Somewhere in the hotel Dodge was
secreted. The question was how to find him. For an hour Jesse sat in the
hotel foyer and meditatively watched the visitors come and go, but saw
no sign of his quarry. Then he arose, put on his hat and hunted out a
stationery store where for two cents he bought a bright-red envelope. He
then visited a ticket-scalper's office, secured the owner's business
card and wrote a note on its back to Dodge offering him cheap
transportation to any point that he might desire. Armed with this he
returned to the hotel, walked to the desk, glanced casually over a
number of telegrams exposed in a rack and, when the clerk turned his
back, placed the note, addressed to Charles F. Dodge, unobserved, upon
the counter. The office was a busy one, guests were constantly
depositing their keys and receiving their mail, and, even as Jesse stood
there watching developments, the clerk turned round, found the note and
promptly placed it in box Number 420. The very simple scheme had worked,
and quite unconsciously the clerk had indicated the number of the room
occupied by Dodge.

Jesse lost no time in ascending to the fourth floor, viewed room Number
420, returned to the desk, told the clerk that he was dissatisfied with
the room assigned him, and requested that he be given either room Number
421, 423, or 425, one of which he stated that he had occupied on a
previous visit. After some discussion the clerk allotted him room Number
423, which was almost directly opposite that occupied by Dodge, and the
detective at once took up his task of watching for the fugitive to
appear.

Within the hour the door opened and Dodge and a companion, who
subsequently proved to be E. M. Bracken, alias "Bradley," an agent
employed by Howe and Hummel, left the room, went to the elevator and
descended to the dining-room upon the second floor. Jesse watched until
they were safely ensconced at breakfast and then returned to the fourth
floor where he tipped the chambermaid, told her that he had left his key
at the office and induced her to unlock the door of room Number 420,
which she did under the supposition that Jesse was the person who had
left the chamber in Dodge's company. The contents of the room convinced
Jesse that he had found Dodge, for he discovered there two grips bearing
Dodge's name as well as several letters on the table addressed to him.
The detective returned to the hall and had a little talk with the maid.

"The old gentleman with you has been quite sick," she said. "How is he
to-day?"

"He is some better," answered Jesse.

"Yes, he does look better to-day," she added, "but he sho'ly was
powerful sick yesterday. Why, he hasn't been out of his room befo' fo'
five or six days."

This statement was corroborated by Dodge's physical appearance, for he
looked haggard and worn.

Jesse was now confident that he had found Dodge, in spite of the reports
of the New Orleans police to the contrary, and he was also reasonably
sure that the fugitive was too sick to leave the hotel immediately. He
therefore telegraphed his superiors that he had discovered Dodge and
that the latter was ill at the St. Charles Hotel.

At three o'clock in the afternoon Jesse received a wire from New York as
follows:

     New Orleans police department claims party not there. Left for
     Mexico three weeks ago. Ascertain correct destination and wire at
     once.

Jesse at once replied:

     No question as to identity and presence here at this time.

He now took up the task of keeping his quarry under absolute
surveillance day and night, which duty from that moment he continued for
a period of nearly ten months.

During the remainder of the afternoon and throughout the night Dodge and
Bracken remained in room Number 420, and during the evening were visited
by several strangers, including a plain-clothes officer from the New
Orleans Police Head-quarters. Little Hummel, dining in Long Acre Square
in the glare of Broadway, was pressing some invisible button that
transmitted the power of his influence even to the police government of
a city two thousand miles away.

The following day, January 26th, at about 8.40 in the morning, Dodge and
Bracken descended to the lobby. Bracken departed from the hotel, leaving
Dodge to pay the bill at the cashier's window, and Jesse heard him order
a cab for the 11.30 a.m. Sunset Limited on the Southern Pacific Railroad
and direct that his baggage be removed from his room. Jesse did the
same.

In the meantime Bracken returned and promptly at 11 a.m. left for the
railroad station in a cab with Dodge. Jesse followed in another. As the
two passed through the gates the detective caught a glimpse of Dodge's
ticket and saw that it had been issued by the Mexican National Railway.
Retiring to the telegraph office in the station he wired New York as
follows:

     Bird flying.--Sunset Limited. Destination not known. I am with him.

He then hastily purchased a ticket to Houston, Texas, and boarded the
train. Dodge's companion had bidden him good-by as the engine started,
and Jesse's task now became that of ferreting out Dodge's destination.
After some difficulty he managed to get a glimpse of the whole of the
fugitive's ticket and thus discovered that he was on his way to the City
of Mexico, via Eagle Pass, Texas, while from the Pullman conductor he
learned that Dodge had secured sleeping-car accommodation as far as San
Antonio, Texas, only.

So far all was well. He knew Dodge but Dodge did not know him, and later
on in the afternoon he had the satisfaction of a long talk with his
quarry in the observation car where they amiably discussed together
current events and argued politics with the same vehemence as if they
had been commercial travellers thrown fortuitously into each other's
company. Dodge, however, cleverly evaded any reference to his
destination.

When the train reached Morgan City, Louisiana, at 3 P.M., which was the
first stop, Jesse wired New York as follows:

     On Sunset Limited with friend. He has transportation to the City of
     Mexico, via Eagle Pass, where I am now journeying with him. Answer
     to Beaumont, Texas.

Later in the afternoon he sent an additional message from Lafayette,
Louisiana:

     Have seen transportation of friend and am positive of destination.

Dodge was occupying Section 3 of the sleeping car "Capitola," and, as
became an invalid, retired early.

At Beaumont Jesse failed to receive any reply to his various messages,
and when the train arrived at Houston no word came from New York until
it was almost the time of departure. Waiting until practically the last
moment Jesse hurried through the gates of the Union Station at Houston
and bought a ticket to San Antonio. As he was leaving the ticket window
Night Chief of Police John Howard and two officers came hurrying up
inquiring anxiously for "Mr. Jesse." The reinforcements had arrived.

Outside on the track "The Sunset Limited" was just getting under way.
The first frantic puffs were being vomited from the funnel. Inside
Dodge was sleeping peacefully in his berth. Jesse, accompanied by Chief
Howard, hurried up to the conductor who was about to swing on to the
steps of the sleeper, and ordered him to hold the train till the
fugitive could be removed. After some argument the conductor grumblingly
complied and Dodge was aroused from pleasant dreams of the "Creole
Quarter" to the cold reality of being dragged out of bed by a policeman.
He was unceremoniously hustled out of the sleeping car into a carriage
and taken to Head-quarters where he admitted his identity and remarked:

"I know what I am wanted for, but I will never return to New York."

In his grip was found the sum of $1,563.15 as well as numerous letters
from the law firm of Howe and Hummel and a quantity of newspaper
clippings relative to his case.

Dodge pleaded with Chief Howard not to lock him up, urging that he was a
sick man and offering a goodly sum if he might be taken to a hotel and
guarded for the remainder of the night. But what "went" in New Orleans,
did not "go" in Houston, and the best that Dodge could get for himself
was a cot in the "Ladies Detention Room" on the second floor of the
jail.

Early the following morning Jesse visited Police Head-quarters and for
the first time met George Ellis, Chief of Police of Houston, for whom he
will always have a feeling of deep gratitude for his enthusiastic
cooperation and loyalty in the many stirring events that followed. Dodge
now received a telegram from New York, which was submitted to Jesse
before reaching the prisoner, to the effect that Howe and Hummel were
sending on an attorney to aid the fugitive in resisting extradition, and
informing him that they had employed Messrs. Hunt and Meyers as
attorneys to look out for his welfare. These last immediately jumped _in
medias res_ and on the afternoon of the same day secured a writ of
habeas corpus from Norman J. Kitrell, District Judge of Harris County,
Texas, returnable the following morning.

The next day, January 28th, Kitrell released Dodge from custody.

Jesse had anticipated this and immediately swore out another warrant
with the result that the prisoner was rearrested before he left the
court room.

Meantime the Dodge interests retained another firm of lawyers, Messrs.
Andrews and Ball, who, on the following day, secured a second writ of
habeas corpus from Judge Ashe.

The result of the first engagement thus being a draw, counsel on both
sides agreed that this writ should not be returnable for six days.
During this period District Attorney Jerome employed Messrs. Baker
Botts, Parker and Garwood to represent him and secured from Governor
Odell at Albany a requisition on Governor Lanham of Texas for the
extradition of the prisoner, which he entrusted to Detective Sergeant
Herlihy of the New York Police. Herlihy reached Houston with the papers
on the evening of January 30th, and on the same train with him came
Abraham Kaffenburgh, a member of the law firm of Howe and Hummel and a
nephew of the latter. Likewise also came Bracken, still styling himself
"E. M. Bradley," and from now on Bracken was the inseparable companion,
guide, philosopher and friend (?) of the unfortunate Dodge whose
continued existence upon this earth had become such a menace to the
little lawyer in New York.

Herlihy, accompanied by Judge Garwood, proceeded direct to Austin where
they found Dodge already represented by Messrs. Andrews and Ball who, at
the hearing before Governor Lanham, made a strong effort to induce that
executive to refuse to honor the requisition of the Governor of New
York. This effort failed and Governor Lanham issued his warrant, but
Herlihy had no sooner returned to Houston for the purpose of taking
possession of the prisoner than he was served with an injunction
enjoining him, together with Chief of Police Ellis, from taking Dodge
into custody, pending a hearing upon a new habeas corpus which had been
issued by Judge Waller T. Burns of the United States District Court for
the Southern District of Texas. This new writ was returnable February
9th.

After exhaustive but futile argument by the counsel for Dodge, Judge
Burns remanded the prisoner to Herlihy's custody to be returned to the
State of New York, but this decision had no sooner been rendered than an
appeal was taken therefrom by Dodge's lawyers, and the prisoner released
upon bail fixed at twenty thousand dollars.

During this period Dodge was quartered under guard at the Rice Hotel in
Houston, and the day following the argument the twenty-thousand-dollars
bail was put up in cash and Dodge released from custody.

In the meantime, however, Jesse, knowing that no sum, however large,
would deter Hummel from spiriting Dodge out of the country, had made his
arrangements to secure a new extradition warrant from the Governor of
Texas, so that if the prisoner did succeed in getting beyond the
Southern District of the Federal Court of Texas, he could be seized and
conveyed to New York.

Of course some one had to keep watch over Dodge while Jesse hurried to
Austin to see the Governor, and it was decided to leave Sergeant
Herlihy, reinforced by a number of local detectives for that purpose.
But while the watchful Jesse was away, Bracken proceeded to get busy in
the good old Howe and Hummel fashion. Lots of people that Herlihy had
never seen before turned up and protested that he was the finest fellow
they had ever met. And as Herlihy was, in fact, a good fellow, he made
them welcome and dined and wined at their expense until he woke up in
the Menger Hotel in San Antonio and inquired where he was.

Jesse meantime had returned from Austin to discover that Dodge with his
companions, Kaffenburgh and Bracken, had slipped out of Houston early in
the morning of February 11th, after disposing of Herlihy and eluding the
watchfulness of Herlihy's assistants. Hummel was leading and by ten
o'clock the next morning Dodge and his comrades were on board an English
merchantman lying in the harbor of Galveston. Later in the same day the
Hummel interests chartered from the Southern Pacific Railroad for the
sum of three thousand dollars the sea-going tug _Hughes_, to which Dodge
was now transferred for the purpose of being conveyed to the port of
Tampico in the Republic of Mexico.

But here Hummel's wires became crossed with Jerome's, and unfortunately
for the little lawyer, the persons from whom the tug had been leased
turned out to be closely allied with the prosecution's interests, with
the result that the captain of the tug was instructed by his superiors
under no consideration to put into any Mexican port, but on the
contrary, to delay his departure from the harbor of Galveston for a
period of two days and then to proceed only as far as Brownsville,
Texas, where he should compel the debarkation of the fugitive. The
captain, who was a good sport as well as a good officer, promptly threw
himself into the part and told Bracken and Kaffenburgh that it was
evident from the barometer that a severe storm was approaching (which
must have had a sinister implication to these two unfortunate
gentlemen), and that he could not think of putting to sea. Once the
"storm" had blown over, the tug started out across the blue waters of
the Gulf of Mexico. But now Bracken and Kaffenburgh were informed for
the first time that it was impossible to consider putting into any port
of the Republic of Mexico, since to do so would cause international
complications and compel the revocation of the captain's license. In
desperation the Hummel interests offered the captain five thousand
dollars in cash to disregard his instructions and put into Tampico, but
the worthy sea-dog was adamant. It was probably worth five thousand
dollars to him to see three gentry of this pattern so much put about.

While Dodge and his accomplices were dallying in the harbor of
Galveston, Jesse was taking advantage of his opportunity to proceed at
once by railroad to Alice, Texas, which at that time was the furthermost
southern point reached by any railway in the direction of Brownsville.
On his arrival, he at once applied to Captain John R. Hughes, commanding
Company D of the Texas Rangers, who received him with great joy and
ordered a detachment of the Rangers to meet the tug at Point Isabella at
the mouth of the Rio Grande River on the border of Mexico. In the
meantime, Jesse started on a toilsome stage journey to Brownsville,
across one hundred and seventy miles of desert, which occupied two days
and nights, and necessitated his going without sleep for that period.
During the trip Jesse heard no word of English and had as his associates
only Mexican cattlemen. Every fifteen miles a fresh relay of broncos was
hitched to the stage and after a few moments' rest the misery began
again.

Jesse had been hurrying toward Brownsville by stage while Dodge,
Kaffenburgh and Bracken were landing at Point Isabella, where they were
kept under close surveillance by Sergeant Tom Ross of the Rangers.
Thence they took the train to Brownsville, registering at the Miller
House under the assumed names of C. F. Dougherty, A. Koontzman and E. M.
Barker, all of Oklahoma. But, although they knew it not, Sergeant Tom
was at their elbow, and had Dodge attempted to cross the border into
Mexico he would instantly have been placed under arrest.

As Brownsville was within the Southern District of the Federal Court of
Texas, Jesse decided not to arrest Dodge until he should actually
attempt flight, and when Dodge and his companions, on the following
morning, February 15th, entered the stage (the same upon which Jesse had
arrived) and started for Alice, Jesse and Tom Ross procured the best
horses they could find and started after them, keeping just in sight of
the stage. Dodge's intention in making this move was to take the Mexican
International Railway at Alice and cross over to Mexico via Laredo.

Jesse and Ross covered the seventy-four miles from Brownsville to Santa
La Cruz Ranch by four in the afternoon, which was fairly strenuous work
for a New York detective, and here found themselves so sore and
exhausted from their ride that they were glad to hire a pair of horses
and buggy with which to complete the journey to Alice. Luckily they
were able to get into telephonic communication with various ranch owners
along the road and arrange to have fresh relays of horses supplied to
them every twenty miles, and here also Jesse called up Captain Hughes at
Alice, and suggested that he substitute for the regular night clerk at
the City Hotel one of the privates of the Rangers by the name of Harrod.

Dodge and his companions arrived in Alice on February 17th, and, as
Jesse had anticipated, repaired at once to the City Hotel, where,
inasmuch as they were dry from the dust of their trip and depressed by
lack of society, they entered at once into an enthusiastic and
confidential friendship with the man behind the counter in the hotel
office, sublimely ignorant that they were unfolding to a member of the
Texas Rangers all their most secret intentions. Harrod was just as glad
to see Dodge as Dodge apparently was to see Harrod, and kindly offered
to assist the fugitive to get into Mexico in any way that the latter
desired. Dodge, for his part, took advantage of his usefulness to the
extent of requesting him to purchase them railroad tickets, the plan
being to leave Alice the following morning for Monterey, Mexico. Three
hours after the stage bearing Dodge and his party pulled up at the City
Hotel, Tom Ross and Jesse drove in behind a pair of fagged-out broncos
at two in the morning. Jesse had had no sleep of any sort and no proper
nourishment for five days, and had just strength enough left to drag
himself up one flight of stairs and tumble into bed, from which he did
not emerge for many hours.

In the meantime day broke and Dodge, Kaffenburgh and Bracken, having
breakfasted, drove comfortably down to the International Railway Station
and settled themselves in the smoker, but they had no sooner given this
direct evidence of their intention before Captain Hughes entered and
placed Dodge under arrest. The latter's surprise may be appreciated when
it is stated that from the time the three had left Houston, they had no
idea that they were being followed and believed that they had completely
foiled Jesse and his assistants.

While Jesse had been chasing Dodge across the desert, his lawyers had
not been idle and had secured at Austin another extradition warrant from
Governor Lanham, who, on receiving news of the arrest, promptly
instructed Captain Hughes by wire to assume charge of the prisoner and
to deliver him into the hands of the New York officer to be conveyed to
New York.

There now began such a legal battle as the State of Texas had never
known. Hummel had been forced into his last ditch and was fighting
desperately for life. Through Kaffenburgh he at once applied for a new
writ of habeas corpus in Nueces County and engaged counsel at Corpus
Christie to assist in fighting for the release of the prisoner.
Precisely as Hummel had intended, Chief Wright of Nueces rode into Alice
and demanded the prisoner from Captain Hughes. As Hummel had _not_
intended, Captain Hughes refused to surrender the prisoner and told
Chief Wright to go to--well, he told him that he intended to obey his
commander-in-chief, the Governor of Texas.

On February 20th, Hummel, through Kaffenburgh, attempted to get another
writ of habeas corpus in Bee County, and promptly the Bee chief came
buzzing over and demanded Dodge, but to him Hughes replied even as he
had spoken to Wright.

Excitement in Alice had now reached such a pitch that Judge Burns, of
the Federal Court, in Houston, ordered United States Marshal John W.
Vann, of Alice, to assume charge of the prisoner. The indomitable
Hughes, however, paid no more attention to the United States Marshal
than he had to the local chiefs. But the situation was so delicate and
the clash of authority might so easily have resulted in bloodshed that
it was finally agreed by all parties that the best thing to do was to
have the prisoner returned to Houston in the _joint_ custody of Captain
Hughes of the Rangers and the United States Marshal.

Jesse, through his counsel, in proper course made application to
forfeit Dodge's bond and remand him to jail, but the Hummel attorneys
finally induced the Court, on the plea that to confine Dodge in jail
would be detrimental to his already badly impaired health, to permit the
prisoner to go free on a greatly increased bond, nevertheless
restricting his movements to Harris County, Texas.

While Jesse had fought a winning battle up to this point he was at the
end of his resources so far as the extradition of the prisoner was
concerned, for Dodge was now at liberty, pending the decisions upon the
habeas corpus proceedings of the United States Circuit Court of Appeals
at Fort Worth, and the United States Supreme Court at Washington. But
his orders were to _bring Dodge back to_ New York. Hence, with the aid
of some new men sent him from the North, he commenced an even closer
surveillance of the prisoner than ever before by both day and night.

Meantime Kaffenburgh departed for New York, fleeing from the wrath of
Judge Burns, who had issued a summons for him for contempt of the
Federal Court on the ground that he had induced Dodge to attempt to jump
his bond. In place of the blustering Kaffenburgh was sent another member
of the famous law firm of Howe and Hummel, David May, an entirely
different type of man. May was as mild as a day in June--as urbane as
Kaffenburgh had been insolent. He fluttered into Houston like a white
dove of peace with the proverbial olive branch in his mouth. From now on
the tactics employed by the representatives of Hummel were conciliatory
in the extreme. Mr. May, however, did not long remain in Houston, as it
was apparent that there was nothing to be done by either side pending
the action of the courts, and in any event Dodge was abundantly supplied
with local counsel. The time had now come when Hummel must have begun to
feel that the fates were against him and that a twenty-year term in
state prison was a concrete possibility even for him.

In the meantime, Dodge and Bracken had taken up their headquarters at
the Rice Hotel in the most expensive suite of rooms in the house, a new
scheme for getting the prisoner beyond the reach of the New York courts
apparently having been concocted. Dodge was now indulged in every
conceivable luxury and vice. He was plunged into every sort of excess,
there was no debauchery which Bracken could supply that was not his and
their rapid method of existence was soon the talk of the county and
continued to be so for ten long months. There is more than one way to
kill a cat and more than one method of wiping out the only existing
witness against a desperate man striving to escape the consequences of
crime.

Dodge's daily routine was somewhat as follows: He never slept at his own
hotel, but arose in the morning between ten and eleven o'clock, when he
was at once visited by Bracken and supplied with numerous drinks in lieu
of the breakfast for which he never had any desire. At noon the two
would have luncheon with more drinks. In the afternoon they would retire
to the pool rooms and play the races, and, when the races were over,
they would then visit the faro banks and gamble until midnight or later.
Later on they would proceed to another resort on Louisiana Street where
Dodge really lived. Here his day may be said to have begun and here he
spent most of his money, frequently paying out as much as fifty dollars
a night for wine and invariably ending in a beastly state of
intoxication. It is quite probable that never in the history of
debauchery has any one man ever been so indulged in excesses of every
sort for the same period of time as Dodge was during the summer and fall
of 1904. The fugitive never placed his foot on mother earth. If they
were going only a block, Bracken called for a cab, and the two seemed to
take a special delight in making Jesse, as Jerome's representative,
spend as much money in cab hire as possible. The Houston jehus never
again experienced so profitable a time as they did during Dodge's wet
season; and the life of dissipation was continued until, from time to
time, the prisoner became so weak from its effects that he was forced to
go under the care of a physician. A few days of abstinence always
restored his vitality and he would then start out upon another round of
pleasure.

During this period Jesse maintained a close and vigilant personal
espionage over the prisoner. For over ten months he slept less than four
hours each day, his fatigue being increased by the constant apprehension
of treachery among his own men, and the necessity of being ever on the
alert to prevent some move on the part of the defense to spirit the
prisoner away. During the summer attempts were repeatedly made to evade
the vigilance of Jesse and his men and several desperate dashes were
frustrated by them, including one occasion when Bracken succeeded in
rushing Dodge as far as Galveston, where they were forced to abandon
their design.

From time to time Bracken would disappear from Houston for a week or ten
days, stating on his return that he had been to New York, after which
there was invariably some new move to get the prisoner away. Time and
space prevent giving a detailed account of all the marches and
counter-marches that took place in this battle of wit against wit.

In August, 1904, Bracken made one of his periodical visits to New York,
and when he returned sought out Jesse and said: "Blocher, you might as
well be a good fellow and get yours while you can. I mean that Dodge is
not going back to New York, even if it cost a million dollars to prevent
it." A few days later Bracken sent a gambler named Warner to Jesse, who
offered the latter thirty-five hundred dollars to get "lost" long enough
for the prisoner to slip over to Mexico. Acting upon the advice of his
attorney, Jesse encouraged this attempt, under the belief that if he
could get the Hummel forces in the position of having attempted to bribe
him the prisoner's bail could then be forfeited and Dodge himself taken
into custody. Hummel became wary, however, and apparently abandoned for
the time the idea of bribery. Later on Bracken again disappeared. On his
return a marked change was noticeable in his demeanor and Jesse observed
that he was in constant consultation with Dodge, from which the
detective drew the inference that some last desperate move was to be
made towards the escape of the prisoner.

On one occasion Jesse saw Bracken showing Dodge a map and some drawings
on paper, which so excited his suspicions that he followed the two with
unremitting assiduity, and within a day or two was rewarded through
Bracken's carelessness with an opportunity for going through the
latter's coat pockets in the billiard room. Here he found a complete set
of plans worked out in every detail for spiriting the prisoner from San
Antonio into Mexico during the State Fair. These plans were very
elaborate, every item having been planned out from the purchase of
tickets, and passing of baggage through the customs, to hotel
accommodation in the City of Mexico and Tampico, and steamship tickets
from Tampico to Europe.

The plan had been to secure permission from the Court for Dodge to leave
Houston long enough ostensibly to attend the Fair at San Antonio and to
"lose" him during the excitement and crowded condition of the city at
that time.

It is, of course, needless to say that these plans were abandoned when
Bracken discovered that Jesse had been forewarned.

Almost immediately thereafter the Circuit Court of Appeals at Fort
Worth, Texas, decided one of the habeas corpus cases adversely to Dodge
but it still permitted him to retain his liberty pending the final
determination of the questions involved by the Supreme Court at
Washington.

The Hummel forces were apparently losing hope, however, for early in
October another attempt was made to bribe Jesse. Bracken entered his
room one evening and informed him that he could get his own price if he
would only be a good fellow, and even went so far as to exhibit a
quantity of money which he stated was twenty-five thousand dollars. The
only result of this offer was to lead Jesse to redouble his precautions,
for he argued that the situation must indeed be acute when such an offer
could be deemed worth while. Thereafter it was obvious that the revelry
of Dodge and his companions was on the increase. Accordingly Jesse added
to his force of assistants.

On December 2, 1904, Nathaniel Cohen, another member of the firm of Howe
and Hummel, arrived at Houston, and the next day the Supreme Court at
Washington decided the appeal in the habeas corpus against the prisoner,
who was at once ordered by Judge Burns into the custody of United States
Marshal William M. Hanson.

Things looked black indeed for Dodge and blacker still for Hummel. How
the little attorney, eating his midday lunch four thousand miles away,
at Pontin's restaurant on Franklin Street, must have trembled in his
patent leather boots! His last emissary, Cohen, at once procured an
assistant by the name of Brookman and with him proceeded to Wharton
County, Texas, where they secured a new writ of habeas corpus and
induced the local sheriff, one Rich, to swear in a _posse comitatus_ of
one hundred men for the purpose of coming to Houston to take the
prisoner by force of arms out of the hands of the United States Marshal.

This was one of the most daring and desperate attempts made in recent
years to frustrate the law. Jesse believes that the real object of this
_posse_ was to precipitate a fight between themselves and the Federal
authorities. It is not inconceivable that in such an event Dodge might
either have escaped or been killed. The men composing the _posse_ were
of the most desperate character, and consisted largely of the so-called
"feud factions" of Wharton County, known as "The Wood Peckers" and "The
Jay Birds." Jesse has been informed, on what he regards as reliable
authority, that this move cost the Hummel forces fifteen thousand
dollars and that each member of the _posse_ received one hundred dollars
for his contemplated services in the "rescue" of the prisoner. But civil
war, even on a small scale, cannot be indulged in without some inkling
of the facts becoming known to the authorities, and prior to the receipt
of the mandate of the Supreme Court, Judge Burns ordered the prisoner
removed to Galveston for safe keeping.

Thus the long, expensive and arduous struggle came finally to an end,
for Judge Burns in due course, ordered that Charles F. Dodge should be
conveyed to New York in the personal custody of the United States
Marshal and delivered by him to the New York authorities "within the
borders of that State." Such an order was, of course, exceedingly
unusual, if not almost unheard of, but it was rendered absolutely
necessary by the powerful influence and resources, as well as the
unscrupulous character, of those interested in securing Dodge's
disappearance.

In order to thwart any plans for releasing the prisoner by violence or
otherwise, and to prevent delay through the invoking of legal
technicalities, Hansen and Jesse decided to convey Dodge to New York by
water, and on the 16th of December, the Marshal and his five deputies
boarded a Mallory Line steamer at Galveston and arrived in New York with
their prisoner on the evening of December 23d.

Dodge reached New York a physical wreck. How he was induced to tell the
whole truth after he had pleaded guilty to the charge against him is a
story in itself. A complete reaction from his dissipation now occurred
and for days his life was despaired of. Jesse, too, was, as the
expression is, "all in," and the only persons who were still able to
appreciate the delights of New York were the stalwart Marshal and his
boys, who for some time were objects of interest as they strolled along
Broadway and drank "deep and hearty" in the cafés. To the assistants in
the District Attorney's office they were heroes and were treated as
such.

How Dodge finally testified against Hummel on the witness stand has
already been told. As they say down-town, if Jerome had never done
anything else, he would have "made good" by locking up Abe Hummel. No
one ever believed he would do it. But Jerome never would have locked up
Hummel without Jesse. And, as Jesse says with a laugh, leaning back in
his chair and taking a long pull on his cigar, "I guess I would not do
it again--no, I _would_ not do it again for all the money you could give
me. The wonder is that I came out of it alive." When the reader comes to
think about it he will probably agree with him.




XI

A Case of Circumstantial Evidence


In the town of Culiano, in the province of Salano, in Italy, there dwelt
a widow by the name of Torsielli, with her two sons, Vito and Antonio.
The boys loved their mother devotedly and were no less fond of each
other, the height of their ambition being to earn enough money to
support her in comfort without need of working in her old age. As it
was, she arose before light, made the fire, cooked their breakfast and
labored in and about the house all day until they returned from the
fields. But she was getting old and at last became bedridden and infirm.
She could no longer cook the meals, and the boys had to shift for
themselves. Moreover, instead of finding her standing at the door with a
smile on her wrinkled face, welcoming them to supper on their return,
the fire was always out and their mother lay on her couch, no less glad
to see them, to be sure, but no longer able to amuse them or minister to
their comfort. Then the taxes were increased and hard times came. By
twos and threes the men of the village packed their bundles, bade
good-by to their friends and families, and left the town, some to seek
work in other parts of Italy, but most of them to take the big iron
steamships for America, where work was easy and money plentiful. Sadly
the boys watched their comrades depart. They would have liked to go,
too, to seek their fortunes in this new land of promise, but they could
not leave their mother. The following year some of the men who had gone
away to America returned in fine clothes and with full purses to tell of
the wonderful country beyond the seas, where one could always earn his
ten _lire_ every day and do as he liked. "Viva la liberta!" they cried,
pounding the tables in the café. "Come, comrades! We have plenty of
money. Drink to the great country of America!"

Vito and Antonio listened with envy. One evening the elder brother asked
Antonio to come to walk with him. When they had gone a little way he
said suddenly:

"Toni, I think I shall go to this America. We need more money to make
our mother comfortable. If we wait until she is dead the money will be
of no use. You can stay here, and when I have made a place for you and
her, you shall bring her on the ship to the new country."

Vito was five years older than Antonio, and his word had always been
law to the younger brother, so although he was sick at heart at the
thought of being left behind, he said nothing against the project, but
tried to make it easy for Vito with their mother. The old woman could
not bear the thought of her firstborn leaving her, and declared, with
the tears running down her face, that she should never see him again,
but at last she yielded to their persuasions and gave Vito her blessing.
It would be only a little while before she and Toni would join him, and
they would be happy ever after.

Then Toni was left alone with his mother. Every day he arose at the
first streak of dawn, prepared breakfast, cleaned the house, saw that
his mother was comfortable and then started off for the fields. A month
went by, two months, three, a year, but no word came from Vito. Toni
assured the poor old woman that they would certainly hear from him the
next week or the next, but cruel fear had taken possession of him.
Something had happened to his brother! The years swept on. Their mother
became more and more helpless. Antonio was obliged to hire a woman to
care for her as nurse for a small sum, but it was just enough to leave
only a pittance for them to live on. Toni grew thin and haggard. Where
could Vito be? Was he alive or dead? Next to his love for Nicoletta
Lupero it became the great passion of his life to learn what had become
of Vito.

He had known Nicoletta from a child and their love had followed as
naturally as summer follows spring. It had always been "Toni" and
"Nicoletta" ever since he could remember. But she was growing up, and
from a boy he had become a man. Yet how could he marry when he could
hardly earn enough to support his mother and himself? They talked it
over time and time again. If Vito would only return or good times come
it might be possible. But meantime there was nothing to do but wait.
Nicoletta blossomed into womanhood. Had she not been betrothed she would
have been called an old maid. Neither she nor Toni took any part in the
village merrymakings. Why should they? He was thirty and she
twenty-five. They might have married ten years ago had not the elder
brother gone away. Toni secretly feared that the time would never come
when they would be man and wife, but he patiently labored on earning his
two _lire_, or at most two _lire_ and a half, a day.

Then a man returned from America just for the harvest to see his family.
He said that Vito was alive. He had not seen him himself, but others had
seen him and he was rich. He told of the plentifulness of gold in
America, where every one was comfortable and could lay up a fortune. He
himself had saved over five thousand _lire_ in four years and owned a
one-third interest in a fruit store. He was going to take his brother's
family back with him--all of them. They would be rich, too, in a little
while. A man was a fool to stay in Italy. Why did not Toni come back
with him? He would get him a place on the railroad where one of his
friends was padrone.

Toni discussed it all with Nicoletta, and she talked with the man
herself.

"Toni," she said at length, "why do you not go? Here you are earning
nothing. There you could save in a month enough to keep your mother in
comfort for a year. You have to pay the nurse, and that takes a great
deal. While you are here it would cause talk if I came to live in your
home to care for your mother but if you go away I can do so without
comment and it will cost nothing. Perhaps you will find Vito. If not you
will soon make enough to send for both your mother and me."

"You are a good girl," he answered, kissing her, "but I could not shift
the responsibility of my mother to your shoulders. Still, I will talk to
Father Giuseppi about it."

The priest thought well of the plan (he was a little excited over
America himself), and agreed to break the matter to the mother.

She begged Toni piteously not to go. He was her only surviving son. Vito
was dead. Let him but wait a little while and she would not be there to
stand in his way. Then the priest added his personal assurance that it
would be for the best, and the mother finally gave way. Toni was obliged
to tear himself away by force from the arms of the old woman lying upon
the bed, and her feeble sobs echoed in his ears as he trudged down the
road with the scarf Nicoletta had worked about his neck, and a small
bundle of his tools and most precious possessions on his shoulder. A
couple of miles farther on came another harrowing parting with his
betrothed, and from the top of the next rise beyond he could see
Nicoletta still standing at the crossroads gazing pitifully after him.
Thus many an Italian, for good or ill, has left the place of his birth
for the mysterious land of the Golden West.

The voyage was for Antonio an unalloyed agony of seasickness and
homesickness, and when at last the great vessel steamed slowly up the
North River, her band playing and the emigrants crowding eagerly to her
sides, he had hardly spirit enough left to raise his eyes to the
mountains of huge buildings from whose craters the white smoke rose
slowly and blew away in great wind-torn clouds. Yet he felt some of the
awakening enthusiasm of his comrades, and when once his feet touched
earth again it was not long before he almost forgot his sufferings upon
the ocean in his feverish anxiety to lose no time in beginning to save
the money which should reunite him to Nicoletta and his mother. As soon
as the vessel had docked a blustering Italian came among the emigrants
and tagged a few dozen of them, including Antonio, with large blue
labels, and then led them in a long, straggling line across the
gangplank and marched them through the muddy streets to the railroad
train. Here they huddled in a dirty car filled with smoke and were
whirled with frightful speed for hours through a flat and smiling
country. The noise, the smoke and the unaccustomed motion made Antonio
ill again, and when the train stopped at Lambertville, New Jersey, the
padrone had difficulty in rousing him from the animal-like stupor into
which he had fallen.

The Italians crowded together upon the platform, gazing helplessly at
one another and at the padrone, who was cursing them for a lot of stupid
fools, and bidding them get upon a flat car that stood upon a siding.
Antonio had to be pushed upon it by main force, but the journey this
time was short, and in half an hour he found himself upon an embankment
where hundreds of Italians were laboring with pick and shovel in the
broiling sun. Here he also was given a pick and told to go to work.

Toni soon became accustomed to his new surroundings. Every night he and
the rest were carried to Lambertville on flat cars and in the mornings
were brought back to the embankment. The work was no harder than that to
which he had been used, and he soon became himself again. Moreover, he
found many of his old friends from Culiano working there. In the
evenings they walked through the streets of the town or sat under the
trees playing _mora_ and _tocco_. His letters home were quite
enthusiastic regarding the pleasant character of the life. To be sure he
could not write himself, but his old friend Antonio Strollo, who had
lived at Valva, only a mile from Culiano, acted as his amanuensis. He
was very fond of Strollo, who was a dashing fellow, very merry and quite
the beau of the colony, in his wonderful red socks and neckties of many
colors. Strollo could read and write, and, besides, he knew Antonio's
mother and Nicoletta, and when Toni found himself unable to express his
thoughts Strollo helped him out. When the answers came he read them to
Toni and joined in the latter's pleasure. Toni himself soon became a
favorite in Lambertville, for he was simple and gentle, and full of
good-will for everybody. He was very good-looking, too, with his
handsome Roman profile, snapping black eyes and black curly locks. Yet
he was sad always, especially so as since his arrival in America he had
made no progress toward finding Vito. From time to time he met other
Italians who had been working elsewhere, who thought they had seen him
or some one that looked like him. But inquiry always elicited the fact
that their desire to give him encouragement was greater than the
accuracy of their memories. Of course Antonio Strollo, who had become
Toni's inseparable friend, shared all his eagerness to find Vito. In
fact, Toni had no thought that he did not confide to his friend, and it
was really the latter who composed the love letters to Nicoletta and the
affectionate epistles to the mother.

Every month Toni divided what he earned into three parts. One of them he
deposited in the savings-bank, another he invested in a money order
which was sent by Strollo to Nicoletta for the mother, and the last he
kept for himself. It was astounding how fast one really could make money
if one was industrious. Forty dollars a month, sometimes! That made
nearly seventy _lire_ to send to Nicoletta. His bank account grew
steadily, and he often saved something out of the money he allowed
himself to live upon.

Antonio Strollo, on the other hand, was lazy and spent all his wages on
_chianti_, neckties, waistcoats, and gambling. Sometimes he would do
nothing for a whole month but loiter around the streets smoking cigars
and ogling the village girls. These last were afraid of him and called
him "The Dare Devil."

Toni worked on the embankment for three years, sending his money with a
letter to Nicoletta every month. The mother still lived and Nicoletta
was giving up her own life to take care of her, but the old woman was
very feeble and no longer had any hope of seeing either of her sons
again. Moreover, she was now so bedridden that it was useless to think
of trying to move her, even if Toni had plenty of money. No, as soon as
he was satisfied that Vito could not be found and had saved enough money
he must return. How she begged him to return! As Strollo read him the
girl's letters Toni wept bitter tears and Strollo wept likewise in
sympathy. But no word came of Vito.

Toni, anxious about his mother, despairing of ever finding his brother,
pining for Nicoletta and with three hundred dollars lying in the
savings-bank, decided to return to Italy. But if only he could find Vito
first! Then Antonio Strollo had an idea. Why not advertise, he
suggested. He wondered that they had never thought of it before. They
would put a notice in _Il Progresso_, the Italian paper in New York, and
see what would come of it. Toni agreed that the idea was good, so
Strollo wrote the notice offering a reward for news of Vito.

Two months passed, once more Toni gave up hope, and then,
O-never-to-be-forgotten day! a letter came from the post-office from
Vito! Toni threw his arms about Strollo and kissed him for joy. Vito was
found at last! The letter, dated Yonkers, New York, told how Vito had by
chance heard of Toni's notice and learned that he was in America. He
himself, he said, had prospered and was a padrone, employing many
workmen on the water-works. He begged Toni for news of their mother. He
confessed himself an ungrateful son never to have written, but he had
married and had had children, and he had assumed that she was being
cared for by his brother. Toni must forgive him and come to him at once.

"O Dio!" cried Toni, the tears in his eyes. "Forgive him? Of course I
will forgive him! Come, Antonio, let us write my dear brother a letter
without delay and tell him that our mother is still alive. How should I
like to see his wife and babies!"

So they prepared a long letter which Strollo took to the post-office
himself and mailed. Toni went back to work with joy in his heart and
whistled and sang all day long, and, of course, he wrote all about it to
Nicoletta. He was only waiting for his month to be up before starting.
Then he would go to Yonkers, make Vito a little visit, and return home
to Italy. It would be easy enough, after that, for Vito would send them
money, if necessary, to live upon.

Several letters passed between the brothers, and at the end of the month
Toni drew out his money from the bank, received his wages in full, and
prepared to leave Lambertville. Meantime a letter had come from
Nicoletta telling of his mother's joy at learning that Vito was still
alive.

As Toni had doubts as to his ability to find his way to Yonkers, Strollo
kindly offered to accompany him. Toni had made many friends during his
three-years' stay in Lambertville, and he promised to write to them and
tell them about Vito and his family, so it was agreed that the letter
should be sent to Sabbatto Gizzi, in whose house he had lived, and that
Gizzi should read it to the others. The address was written carefully on
a piece of paper and given to Toni.

So early in the morning of August 16th, 1903, Toni and Strollo took the
train for New York. It was a hot day, and once again the motion and
speed made Toni feel ill, but the thought of seeing Vito buoyed him up,
and by the time they had crossed the ferry and had actually reached New
York he was very hungry. In his excitement he had forgotten to eat any
breakfast and was now beginning to feel faint. But Strollo said it was a
long way to Yonkers and that they must not stop. For many hours they
trudged the streets without getting anywhere and then Strollo said it
was time to take the cars. Toni was very tired, and he had to climb many
flights of stairs to the train. It carried them a long distance, past
miles of tenement houses and vacant lots, and at last into a sort of
country. Strollo said they should get out. It was very hot and Toni was
weak from weariness and lack of food, but his heart was light and he
followed Strollo steadily down the wilting road. After going about a
mile they crossed some fields near where people were playing a game at
hitting little balls with sticks. It was astonishing how far they could
strike the balls--entirely out of sight.

"Is this Yonkers?" asked Toni.

"It is near here," answered Strollo. "We are going by a short way."

They entered some thick woods and came out upon another field. Toni was
now so faint that he begged his friend to stop.

"Can we not get some food?" he inquired; "I can hardly walk."

"There is a man in that field," said Strollo. "Go and ask him."

So Toni plodded over to the man who was digging mushrooms and asked him
in broken English where they could get something to eat. The man told
him that it was a long way. They would have to take the trolley to
Yonkers. There was a restaurant there called the "Promised Land," where
one could get Italian dishes. He seemed to take a kindly interest in
Toni and in Strollo, who had remained some distance behind, and Toni
gave him a cigar--a "Cremo"--the last one he had. Then Strollo led the
way back into the woods.

It was almost sunset, and the long, low beams slanting through the tree
trunks made it hard to see. They went deeper and deeper into the woods.
Presently Strollo, who was leading the way, stopped and said:

"We are going in the wrong direction. We must turn around and go back."

Toni turned. As he did so Strollo drew a long knife and plunged it again
and again through Toni's body.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strollo spent that night, under an assumed name, at the Mills Hotel in
Bleecker Street. He had stabbed himself accidentally in the knee and
also in the left hand in the fury of his attack, and when he arose in
the morning the sheets were covered with blood. There was also blood on
his shoes, which had been new, but he took his knife and scraped it off.
He had experienced a strange sort of terrified exaltation the night
before, and in the early light as he crept downstairs and out of the
hotel he could not have told whether he were more glad or afraid. For he
had three hundred dollars in his pocket, more than he had ever seen at
any one time before--as much as a man could save in two whole years. He
would be a king now for a long time. He need not work. He could eat,
drink and play cards and read some books he had heard about. As for
finding him out--never! The police would not even know who Torsielli
was, to say nothing of who had killed him, for he had removed, as he
thought, everything in Toni's pockets. There would be a dead man in the
morgue, that was all. He could go back to Lambertville and say that he
had left Toni with his brother, at Yonkers, and that would be the end of
it. First, though, he would buy some new clothes.

It was very early and the shops were hardly open, but he found one place
where he could buy a suit, another some underclothes, and a third a pair
of shoes. The shoemaker, who was a thrifty man, asked Strollo what was
the matter with the shoes he had on, so Strollo craftily said they hurt
his feet. Then he ate a hearty breakfast, and bought a better cigar than
he had ever smoked before. There was a bookstore near by and he
purchased some books--"Alto Amore" and "Sua Maestá e Sua Moneta" ("The
Height of Love" and "His Majesty and His Money"). He would read them on
the train. He felt warm and comfortable now and not afraid at all. By
and by he went back on the train to Lambertville and smoked and read all
the way, contented as the tiger is contented which has tracked down and
slain a water-buffalo.

The same afternoon about sunset, in a lonely part of Van Cortlandt Park,
the mushroom digger stumbled over Torsielli's body lying face downward
among the leaves. He recognized it as that of the man who had asked the
way to something to eat and given him a cigar. He ran from the sight
and, pallid with fear, notified the nearest police officer. Then things
took the usual course. The body was removed to the morgue, an autopsy
was performed, and "Headquarters" took charge of the case. As the
deceased was an Italian, Detective Sergeant Petrosini was called in.
Torsielli's pockets were empty save for the band of a "Cremo" cigar in
one waistcoat pocket and a tiny slip of paper in another, on which was
penciled "Sabbatto Gizzi, P.O. Box 239, Lambertville, New Jersey."
Whether this last was the name of the deceased, the murderer, or some
one else, no one knew. Headquarters said it was a blind case, but
Petrosini shrugged his shoulders and bought a ticket to Lambertville.

Here he found Sabbatto Gizzi, who expressed genuine horror at learning
of Toni's death and readily accompanied Petrosini to New York, where he
identified the body as indeed that of Torsielli. He told Petrosini that
Toni had left Lambertville in the company of Strollo on Thursday, August
16th. This was Saturday, August 18th, and less than thirty-six hours
after the murder. Strollo, reading "Alto Amore," and drinking in the
saloon, suspected nothing. New York was seventy miles away--too far for
any harm to come. But Monday morning, walking lazily down the street
near the railroad station, Strollo found himself suddenly confronted by
a heavily-built man with a round, moon-shaped face thickly covered with
pockmarks. Strollo did not like the way the latter's gimlet-like eyes
looked him over. There was no time to turn and fly, and, besides,
Strollo had no fear. They might come and ask him questions, and he might
even admit almost all--_almost_ all, and they could do nothing, for no
one had seen what he had done to Toni in the wood. So Strollo returned
Petrosini's gaze unflinchingly.

"Are you Antonio Strollo?" asked the detective, coming close to the
murderer.

"Yes, certainly, I am Antonio Strollo," replied the latter.

"Do you know Antonio Torsielli?" continued Petrosini.

"To be sure," answered Strollo. "I knew him well," he added almost
insolently.

"Why did you accompany him to New York?" inquired Petrosini sharply.
Strollo paled. He had not known that the police were aware of the fact.

"I had errands in the city. I needed clothes," said Strollo.

"He has been murdered," said Petrosini quietly. "Will you come to New
York to identify the body?"

Strollo hesitated.

"Why--yes--certainly. I will go to New York." Then he added, thinking
that his words seemed insufficient, "I am sorry if Torsielli has been
murdered, for he was a friend of mine."

There was a wait of several hours before the train started for New York
and Strollo utilized it by giving Petrosini a detailed account of his
trip with Torsielli. He took his time about it and thought each
statement over very carefully before he made it, for he was a clever
fellow, this Strollo. He even went into the family history of Torsielli
and explained about the correspondence with the long-lost brother, in
which he acted as amanuensis, for he had come to the conclusion that in
the long run honesty (up to a certain point) would prove the best
policy. Thus he told the detective many things which the latter did not
know or even suspect. Strollo's account of what had happened was briefly
as follows:

He and Toni had reached New York about twelve o'clock and had spent an
hour or so in the neighborhood of Mott Street looking at the parade of
"San Rocco." Then they had started for Yonkers and gone as far as the
terminal of the Second Avenue El. It was about five o'clock in the
afternoon. They had got out and started to walk. As they proceeded they
suddenly had seen a man standing under a tree and Torsielli had said to
Strollo:

"That man standing under that tree looks like my brother."

Strollo had replied:

"You know I am not acquainted with your brother."

As they reached the tree the stranger had stepped forward and said to
Torsielli:

"Who are you?"

"Who? Me? My name is Antonio Torsielli," had been the reply. "Who are
you?"

"I am Vito Torsielli," had answered the stranger. Then the two had
rushed into each other's arms.

"And what did _you_ do?" inquired Petrosini, as Strollo naïvely
concluded this extraordinary story.

"Me?" answered Strollo innocently. "Why, there was nothing for me to do,
so I went back to New York."

Petrosini said nothing, but bided his time. He had now several important
bits of evidence. By Strollo's own account he had been with the deceased
in the general locality of the murder shortly before it occurred; he had
given no adequate explanation of why he was in New York at all; and he
was now fabricating a preposterous falsehood to show that he had left
his victim before the homicide was committed. On the train Petrosini
began to tie up some of the loose ends. He noticed the wound on
Strollo's hand and asked where it had been obtained. The suspect replied
that he had received it at the hands of a drunken man in Mott Street. He
even admitted having stayed at the Mills Hotel the same evening under an
assumed name, and gave as an excuse that his own name was difficult for
an American to pronounce and write. Later, this information led to the
finding of the bloody bedclothes. He denied, however, having changed his
clothes or purchased new ones, and this the detective was obliged to
ferret out for himself, which he did by visiting or causing to be
visited almost every Italian shop upon the East Side. Thus the incident
of the shoes was brought to light.

Strollo was at once taken to the morgue on reaching the city, and here
for the first time his nerve failed him, for he could not bring himself
to inspect the ghastly body of his victim.

"Look," cried Petrosini; "is that the man?"

"Yes, yes," answered the murderer, trembling like a leaf. "That is he."

"You are not looking at him," said the detective. "Why don't you look at
him. Look at the body."

"I _am_ looking at him," replied Strollo, averting his eyes. "That is
he--my friend--Antonio Torsielli."

The prisoner was now taken to Police Headquarters and searched. Here a
letter was found in his hip pocket in his own handwriting purporting to
be from Antonio Torsielli to his brother Vito at Yonkers, but enclosed
_in an envelope addressed to Antonio at Lambertville_.

This envelope bore a red two-cent stamp and was inscribed:

  ANTONIO TORSIELLI, BOX 470,
  Lambertville, New Jersey.

The letter as later translated in court by the interpreter read as
follows:

     LAMBERTVILLE, _July 30, 1905._

     _My dear Brother_:

     Upon receipt of your news I feel very happy to feel you are well,
     and the same I can assure you from me. Dear Brother, you cannot
     believe the joy I feel after such a long time to know where you
     are. I have been looking for you for two years, and never had any
     news from you. I could not, as you wrote to me to, come to you,
     because I had no money, and then I didn't know where to go because
     I have been always in the country. Know that what little money I
     have I sent it to mother, because if I don't help her nobody will,
     as you never write to her. I believe not to abandon her, because
     she is our mother, and we don't want her cursed. So then, if you
     like to see me, you come and take me. You spoke to me about work
     thither, but I don't understand about that work which you say, and
     then what will I do because here I have work, therefore, if you
     think I can come and work with you let me know because I have the
     address. But if you want to do better you come and take me. _Dear
     Brother_, I remind you about our mother, because I don't earn
     enough money, which she is your mother also. DEAR BROTHER, I hope
     you did not forget our mother. Dear Brother, let me know the names
     of your children, and I kiss them. Many regards to your wife and
     Aunt. I beg you to write to me. Dear regards, your brother, Antonio
     Torsielli. When you answer send the answer to the address below,
     Antonio Strollo.

Strollo made no attempt to explain the possession of this letter, which,
if sent at all would naturally have come into the possession of the
addressee.

"And what was Vito's address at Yonkers?" inquired Petrosini.

"1570 Yonkers," answered Strollo.

"Is that the street number of a house or a post-office number?" asked
the detective.

"Neither," said Strollo. "Just 1570 Yonkers."

Thus the infamy of this villain was made manifest. He had invented out
of his own brain the existence of Vito Torsielli in Yonkers, and had
himself written the letters to Antonio which purported to come from him.
He had used the simple fellow's love for his long-lost brother as the
means to lure him to his destruction, and brutally murdered him for the
sake of the few dollars which his innocent victim had worked so hard to
earn to reunite him to his mother and his betrothed.

The wounds in Strollo's hand and knee were found to correspond in shape
and character with the thirty-six wounds in Torsielli's body, and the
mushroom digger unhesitatingly identified him as the man in the company
of the deceased upon the afternoon of the murder.

It almost seemed like the finger of Providence indicating the assassin
when the last necessary piece of evidence in this extraordinary case was
discovered. Petrosini had hurried to Lambertville immediately upon the
discovery of the letter and visited the post-office.

A young lady named Miss Olive Phillips had been employed there as a
clerk for twelve years, and had lately had charge of what are known as
the "call boxes"--that is to say, of boxes to which no keys are issued,
but for the contents of which the lessees have to ask at the delivery
window. These are very inexpensive and in use generally by the Italian
population of Lambertville, who are accustomed to rent them in
common--one box to three or four families. She had noticed Strollo when
he had come for his mail on account of his flashy dress and debonair
demeanor. Strollo's box, she said, was No. 420. Petrosini showed her the
envelope of the letter found in Strollo's pocket. The stamp indicated
that it had been cancelled at _Lambertville_ on July 26. When she saw
the envelope she called Petrosini's attention to the fact that the stamp
was a two-cent red stamp, and said, to his surprise, that she was able
to identify the letter on that account as one _mailed_ by _Strollo_ on
July 26. As there is no local delivery in the town, she explained, "drop
letters," or letters mailed by residents to other residents, may be
franked for one cent. Now, in the first place, no Italian in
Lambertville, except Strollo, so far as Miss Phillips could remember,
had ever mailed a letter to another Italian in the same town. A frugal
Italian, moreover, if he had done so, would have put on only the
required amount of postage. On the 26th of July, Strollo had come to the
post-office and pushed this identical letter through the window, at the
same time handing her two cents and asking her to put on a red stamp for
him. She had been surprised at this, and had at first thought of calling
his attention to the fact that only a one-cent stamp was necessary, but
she had refrained and put on the stamp. At the same time she had noticed
that it was addressed to "Antonio Torsielli, Lambertville, New Jersey."
Strollo had then taken the letter and slipped it into the "drop" and she
had cancelled the stamp, taking the opportunity to examine the letter a
second time. A stranger coincidence could hardly be imagined, and this
observing young lady from the country was thus able to supply the most
important link in the chain against the murderer, and to demonstrate
conclusively that the wretch had himself been mailing in Lambertville
the letters purporting to come from the fictitious brother in Yonkers.

Strollo was now placed in the House of Detention as a "witness," a
course frequently pursued when it is desirable to prevent a suspect from
knowing that he is accused.

The case against him was practically complete, for it did not seem
humanly possible, that any jury would hesitate to convict him upon the
evidence, but juries are loath to find any one guilty of murder in the
first degree upon purely circumstantial evidence, and this was the first
purely circumstantial case in a long time. Inspector Price, therefore,
conceived the idea of trapping Strollo into a confession by placing a
detective in confinement with him under the guise of being a
fellow-prisoner. It was, of course, patent that Strollo was but a child
mentally, but he was shrewd and sly, and if he denied his guilt, there
was still a chance of his escape. Accordingly, a detective named Repetto
was assigned to the disagreeable task of taking the part of an accused
criminal. He was detailed to the House of Detention and remained there
for five days, from September 8 to September 13. Here Repetto became
acquainted with Strollo and the other prisoners, giving his name as
Silvio del Sordo and his address as 272 Bowery. He played cards with
them, read the papers aloud and made himself generally agreeable. During
this period he frequently saw the defendant write and familiarized
himself with his chirography.

The scheme worked and Repetto afterward received five letters from
Strollo, sent after the latter had been removed from the House of
Detention to the Tombs and indicted for the murder of Torsielli. The
first, dated September 22d, was merely to inform his supposed friend
Silvio of the change in his residence and to inquire the whereabouts of
another prisoner named Philip. The second would be pathetic were it not
written by the defendant in the case. It carries with it the flavor of
the Calabrian hills.

     NEW YORK, _October 17, 1905._

     SIR SILVIO:

     I write and believe not to sicken you with my words, but it is
     enough that you are well in health. I take the liberty again not
     having any one else but you, and I believe to find a brother in
     you, not a friend. I ask you nothing, only if you have time to come
     and see me as soon as possible. I ask you this as a favor because I
     know and believe to find a true friend, as I want to ask you a
     certain thing at the cost of my life. I will not say any more.
     Bring me five cents of paper and envelopes to write letters and
     when you come I will give you the money. Nothing else. I am yours
     ever. Servant and

     Perfect friend,

     A STROLLO.

The third letter from the perfect friend to his equally perfect friend
is an extraordinary combination of ingenuity and ignorance. It contains
the only suggestion of a defence--that of an alibi.

     NEW YORK, _October 30, 1905._

     ESTEEMED FRIEND:

     With retard I answer in receiving yours. I was very, very glad. I
     believe all you told me and I am grateful, and hope you will not
     betray me, because you know it will cost the life of a poor
     unfortunate, so do as you told me, keep things to ourselves, if you
     wish to help me you will do me a great service, and if God helps
     me, you can dispose of my life.

     So I will have you called unexpected, saying that I did not know if
     you remembered. So if you are called the first thing you must do is
     to make believe to look at me, and then you say you remember of
     having seen me looking at the pictures in front of place where you
     work, and you asked me if I wanted my pictures taken and I said no.
     If they ask at what time say 5:20 or 5:30 P.M., and that you spoke
     with me for quite awhile. If they ask how was he dressed? The coat
     was black, the shoes russet the Trousers with white stripes which
     is the one I am now wearing; what tie, I don't remember, I only
     know he was well dressed, the hat was brown, if they ask did he
     have a mark on his hand? Say no, he had a ring with a black stone,
     how many times did you see him, say that after your work you were
     going around Mott Street and you saw me again and how it was eight
     o'clock or past eight and you saw me with a handkerchief around my
     hand, and you said to me, why I had my hand so. And he answered
     that some one struck him, I asked if it hurt much, he said he did
     not feel it, did both of you go to drink. No. Where else did
     Strollo go, Strollo said he was going at the Bleecker Street Hotel
     to sleep, did you see him again. No. Nothing else, if you want to
     help me reflect well, but you don't need any more words from me say
     just what I have said and I hope, with faith of a brother not a
     friend, I am ever your Friend,

     A. STROLLO.

It may, and probably will, appear to the reader that a clearer case of
guilt could hardly be established, but the action of juries is always
problematical, and this was a case composed entirely of circumstantial
evidence. The jury would be obliged to find that no reasonable
hypothesis consistent with the innocence of the accused could be
formulated upon the evidence. Thus, even in the face of the facts proven
against him, some "freak" juryman might still have said, "But, after
all, how do you _know_ that Strollo killed him? Some _other_ fellow
might have done it." Even the "faking" of a defence does not prove the
defendant guilty, but merely that he fears conviction, and is ready to
resort to feigned testimony to secure his freedom. Many innocent men
convict themselves in precisely this way.

Accordingly it was by no means with confidence that the People went to
trial, but throughout this remarkable case it seemed as if it must have
been preordained that Strollo should not escape punishment for his
treacherous crime. No defence was possible, not even the partially
prepared alibi was attempted, and the only thing that savored of a
defence was the introduction of a letter alleged to have been received
by the defendant while in the House of Detention, and which, if genuine,
would have apparently established that the crime had been perpetrated by
the "Black Hand."

The offering of this letter was a curious and fatal blunder, for it was
later proven by the People to be in Strollo's own handwriting. It was
his last despairing effort to escape the consequences of his crime.
Headed with a cross drawn in blood it ran as follows:

     I swear upon this cross, which is the blood of my veins, Strollo is
     innocent. I swear upon the cross the revengeful Black Hand could
     save me. New York, Oct. 12, 1905. Sir Strollo, knowing you only by
     name, eight days after that I leave this letter will be sent to
     you. I leave at seven o'clock with the Steamer Britain the Harbor.
     Therefore I leave betraying my oath that I have held for the last
     three years belonging to the Black Hand. I will leave three
     letters, one to you, one to the Police Officer Capri, and the other
     to the law, 300 Mulberry Street. All what I am saying I have sworn
     to before God. Therefore your innocence will be given you, first by
     God and then by the law, capturing the true murders. I am sure that
     they already captured the murderer of Torsielli. Who lured you to
     come to New York was Giuseppi Rosa, who knew you for nearly two
     years, and who comes from Lambertville, came among us and played
     you a trick. He is a Calabrise and has a mighty grudge. He and four
     others are averse to them. Announce the name of the man who stabbed
     you with the knife was Antonio Villa. He had to kill _you_, but
     _you_ was fortunate. He is in jail for the present time and I don't
     know for how long, but I know that he was arrested. Nothing else to
     say. I have done my duty in giving you all the information. 407 2nd
     St., Jersey.

[Illustration: First page of the "Black Hand" letter written by Strollo,
and put in evidence at his trial, placing the murder of Torsielli upon
members of that imaginary secret organization. This letter convicted
him.]

It is clear from the letter that Strollo had formed a vague plan for his
defence, which should, in part, consist of the claim that he, as well
as Torsielli, had been marked for death by the Black Hand, and that
while both had been induced to come to New York, the plans of the
assassins had in his case miscarried.

The reader has already observed that purely for the purpose of securing
his continued interest in the present narrative the writer has, as it
were, told his story backward, reserving as long as possible the fact
that the finding of the beloved Vito was a pure fiction invented by the
murderer. At the trial, however, the jury listened breathlessly while
bit by bit the whole pathetic story was painted before them, like a
mosaic picture. They heard first the story of the mushroom digger, there
of the expedition of Petrosini to Lambertville, of the identification of
Torsielli's body, of the elaborate fabrications of Strollo, and in due
course, of the tell-tale letter in the murderer's pocket. Gradually the
true character of the defendant's crime came over them and they turned
from him in aversion. The natural climax in the evidence was Miss
Phillip's extraordinary identification of the defendant sitting at the
bar as the man who had mailed upon the 26th of July, at the Lambertville
post-office, the envelope purporting to come from Yonkers and containing
the forged letter from the imaginary Vito.

Strollo remained almost to the last confident that he could never be
convicted, but when his own letters in prison were introduced in
evidence he turned ashen pale and stared fixedly at the judge. The jury
deliberated but fifteen minutes, their functions consisting of but a
single ballot, followed by a prayer for the wretched murderer's soul.
Then they filed slowly back and, in the waning light of the summer
afternoon just one year after the murder, and at the precise hour at
which Strollo had killed his victim, pronounced him guilty of murder in
the first degree. In due course his conviction was sustained by the
Court of Appeals, and on March 11th, 1908, he paid the penalty for his
crime in the electric
chair.






Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net.






[Transcriber's Note: This pamphlet was first published in 1892 but was
subsequently reprinted. It's not apparent if the curiosities in spelling
date back to the original or were introduced later; they have been
retained as found, and the reader is left to decide. Please verify with
another source before quoting this material.]




Southern Horrors: Lynch Law in All Its Phases

1892, 1893, 1894

By Ida B. Wells-Barnett




PREFACE


The greater part of what is contained in these pages was published in the
_New York Age_ June 25, 1892, in explanation of the editorial which the
Memphis whites considered sufficiently infamous to justify the destruction
of my paper, the _Free Speech_.

Since the appearance of that statement, requests have come from all parts
of the country that "Exiled" (the name under which it then appeared) be
issued in pamphlet form. Some donations were made, but not enough for that
purpose. The noble effort of the ladies of New York and Brooklyn Oct. 5
have enabled me to comply with this request and give the world a true,
unvarnished account of the causes of lynch law in the South.

This statement is not a shield for the despoiler of virtue, nor altogether
a defense for the poor blind Afro-American Sampsons who suffer themselves
to be betrayed by white Delilahs. It is a contribution to truth, an array
of facts, the perusal of which it is hoped will stimulate this great
American Republic to demand that justice be done though the heavens fall.

It is with no pleasure I have dipped my hands in the corruption here
exposed. Somebody must show that the Afro-American race is more sinned
against than sinning, and it seems to have fallen upon me to do so. The
awful death-roll that Judge Lynch is calling every week is appalling, not
only because of the lives it takes, the rank cruelty and outrage to the
victims, but because of the prejudice it fosters and the stain it places
against the good name of a weak race.

The Afro-American is not a bestial race. If this work can contribute in
any way toward proving this, and at the same time arouse the conscience of
the American people to a demand for justice to every citizen, and
punishment by law for the lawless, I shall feel I have done my race a
service. Other considerations are of minor importance.

IDA B. WELLS
_New York City_, Oct. 26, 1892




To the Afro-American women of New York and Brooklyn, whose race love,
earnest zeal and unselfish effort at Lyric Hall, in the City of New York,
on the night of October 5, 1892--made possible its publication, this
pamphlet is gratefully dedicated by the author.




HON. FRED. DOUGLASS'S LETTER


_Dear Miss Wells:_

Let me give you thanks for your faithful paper on the lynch abomination
now generally practiced against colored people in the South. There has
been no word equal to it in convincing power. I have spoken, but my word
is feeble in comparison. You give us what you know and testify from actual
knowledge. You have dealt with the facts with cool, painstaking fidelity
and left those naked and uncontradicted facts to speak for themselves.

Brave woman! you have done your people and mine a service which can
neither be weighed nor measured. If American conscience were only half
alive, if the American church and clergy were only half christianized, if
American moral sensibility were not hardened by persistent infliction of
outrage and crime against colored people, a scream of horror, shame and
indignation would rise to Heaven wherever your pamphlet shall be read.

But alas! even crime has power to reproduce itself and create conditions
favorable to its own existence. It sometimes seems we are deserted by
earth and Heaven yet we must still think, speak and work, and trust in the
power of a merciful God for final deliverance.

Very truly and gratefully yours,
FREDERICK DOUGLASS
_Cedar Hill, Anacostia, D.C._, Oct. 25, 1892




1 _The_ OFFENSE


Wednesday evening May 24, 1892, the city of Memphis was filled with
excitement. Editorials in the daily papers of that date caused a meeting
to be held in the Cotton Exchange Building; a committee was sent for the
editors of the _Free Speech_ an Afro-American journal published in that
city, and the only reason the open threats of lynching that were made were
not carried out was because they could not be found. The cause of all this
commotion was the following editorial published in the _Free Speech_ May
21, 1892, the Saturday previous.

  Eight negroes lynched since last issue of the _Free Speech_ one at
  Little Rock, Ark., last Saturday morning where the citizens broke(?)
  into the penitentiary and got their man; three near Anniston, Ala., one
  near New Orleans; and three at Clarksville, Ga., the last three for
  killing a white man, and five on the same old racket--the new alarm
  about raping white women. The same programme of hanging, then shooting
  bullets into the lifeless bodies was carried out to the letter.

  Nobody in this section of the country believes the old thread-bare lie
  that Negro men rape white women. If Southern white men are not careful,
  they will overreach themselves and public sentiment will have a
  reaction; a conclusion will then be reached which will be very damaging
  to the moral reputation of their women.

The _Daily Commercial_ of Wednesday following, May 25, contained the
following leader:

  Those negroes who are attempting to make the lynching of individuals of
  their race a means for arousing the worst passions of their kind are
  playing with a dangerous sentiment. The negroes may as well understand
  that there is no mercy for the negro rapist and little patience with his
  defenders. A negro organ printed in this city, in a recent issue
  publishes the following atrocious paragraph: "Nobody in this section of
  the country believes the old thread-bare lie that negro men rape white
  women. If Southern white men are not careful they will overreach
  themselves, and public sentiment will have a reaction; and a conclusion
  will be reached which will be very damaging to the moral reputation of
  their women."

  The fact that a black scoundrel is allowed to live and utter such
  loathsome and repulsive calumnies is a volume of evidence as to the
  wonderful patience of Southern whites. But we have had enough of it.

  There are some things that the Southern white man will not tolerate, and
  the obscene intimations of the foregoing have brought the writer to the
  very outermost limit of public patience. We hope we have said enough.

The _Evening Scimitar_ of same date, copied the _Commercial_'s editorial
with these words of comment:

  Patience under such circumstances is not a virtue. If the negroes
  themselves do not apply the remedy without delay it will be the duty of
  those whom he has attacked to tie the wretch who utters these calumnies
  to a stake at the intersection of Main and Madison Sts., brand him in
  the forehead with a hot iron and perform upon him a surgical operation
  with a pair of tailor's shears.

Acting upon this advice, the leading citizens met in the Cotton Exchange
Building the same evening, and threats of lynching were freely indulged,
not by the lawless element upon which the deviltry of the South is usually
saddled--but by the leading business men, in their leading business
centre. Mr. Fleming, the business manager and owning a half interest the
_Free Speech_, had to leave town to escape the mob, and was afterwards
ordered not to return; letters and telegrams sent me in New York where I
was spending my vacation advised me that bodily harm awaited my return.
Creditors took possession of the office and sold the outfit, and the _Free
Speech_ was as if it had never been.

The editorial in question was prompted by the many inhuman and fiendish
lynchings of Afro-Americans which have recently taken place and was meant
as a warning. Eight lynched in one week and five of them charged with
rape! The thinking public will not easily believe freedom and education
more brutalizing than slavery, and the world knows that the crime of rape
was unknown during four years of civil war, when the white women of the
South were at the mercy of the race which is all at once charged with
being a bestial one.

Since my business has been destroyed and I am an exile from home because
of that editorial, the issue has been forced, and as the writer of it I
feel that the race and the public generally should have a statement of the
facts as they exist. They will serve at the same time as a defense for the
Afro-Americans Sampsons who suffer themselves to be betrayed by white
Delilahs.

The whites of Montgomery, Ala., knew J.C. Duke sounded the keynote of the
situation--which they would gladly hide from the world, when he said in
his paper, the _Herald_, five years ago: "Why is it that white women
attract negro men now more than in former days? There was a time when such
a thing was unheard of. There is a secret to this thing, and we greatly
suspect it is the growing appreciation of white Juliets for colored
Romeos." Mr. Duke, like the _Free Speech_ proprietors, was forced to leave
the city for reflecting on the "honah" of white women and his paper
suppressed; but the truth remains that Afro-American men do not always
rape(?) white women without their consent.

Mr. Duke, before leaving Montgomery, signed a card disclaiming any
intention of slandering Southern white women. The editor of the _Free
Speech_ has no disclaimer to enter, but asserts instead that there are
many white women in the South who would marry colored men if such an act
would not place them at once beyond the pale of society and within the
clutches of the law. The miscegnation laws of the South only operate
against the legitimate union of the races; they leave the white man free
to seduce all the colored girls he can, but it is death to the colored man
who yields to the force and advances of a similar attraction in white
women. White men lynch the offending Afro-American, not because he is a
despoiler of virtue, but because he succumbs to the smiles of white women.




2

_The_ BLACK _and_ WHITE _of_ IT


The _Cleveland Gazette_ of January 16, 1892, publishes a case in point.
Mrs. J.S. Underwood, the wife of a minister of Elyria, Ohio, accused an
Afro-American of rape. She told her husband that during his absence in
1888, stumping the State for the Prohibition Party, the man came to the
kitchen door, forced his way in the house and insulted her. She tried to
drive him out with a heavy poker, but he overpowered and chloroformed her,
and when she revived her clothing was torn and she was in a horrible
condition. She did not know the man but could identify him. She pointed
out William Offett, a married man, who was arrested and, being in Ohio,
was granted a trial.

The prisoner vehemently denied the charge of rape, but confessed he went
to Mrs. Underwood's residence at her invitation and was criminally
intimate with her at her request. This availed him nothing against the
sworn testimony of a ministers wife, a lady of the highest respectability.
He was found guilty, and entered the penitentiary, December 14, 1888, for
fifteen years. Some time afterwards the woman's remorse led her to confess
to her husband that the man was innocent.

These are her words:

  I met Offett at the Post Office. It was raining. He was polite to me,
  and as I had several bundles in my arms he offered to carry them home
  for me, which he did. He had a strange fascination for me, and I invited
  him to call on me. He called, bringing chestnuts and candy for the
  children. By this means we got them to leave us alone in the room. Then
  I sat on his lap. He made a proposal to me and I readily consented. Why
  I did so, I do not know, but that I did is true. He visited me several
  times after that and each time I was indiscreet. I did not care after
  the first time. In fact I could not have resisted, and had no desire to
  resist.

When asked by her husband why she told him she had been outraged, she
said: "I had several reasons for telling you. One was the neighbors saw
the fellows here, another was, I was afraid I had contracted a loathsome
disease, and still another was that I feared I might give birth to a Negro
baby. I hoped to save my reputation by telling you a deliberate lie." Her
husband horrified by the confession had Offett, who had already served
four years, released and secured a divorce.

There are thousands of such cases throughout the South, with the
difference that the Southern white men in insatiate fury wreak their
vengeance without intervention of law upon the Afro-Americans who consort
with their women. A few instances to substantiate the assertion that some
white women love the company of the Afro-American will not be out of
place. Most of these cases were reported by the daily papers of the South.

In the winter of 1885-86 the wife of a practicing physician in Memphis, in
good social standing whose name has escaped me, left home, husband and
children, and ran away with her black coachman. She was with him a month
before her husband found and brought her home. The coachman could not be
found. The doctor moved his family away from Memphis, and is living in
another city under an assumed name.

In the same city last year a white girl in the dusk of evening screamed at
the approach of some parties that a Negro had assaulted her on the street.
He was captured, tried by a white judge and jury, that acquitted him of
the charge. It is needless to add if there had been a scrap of evidence on
which to convict him of so grave a charge he would have been convicted.

Sarah Clark of Memphis loved a black man and lived openly with him. When
she was indicted last spring for miscegenation, she swore in court that
she was _not_ a white woman. This she did to escape the penitentiary and
continued her illicit relation undisturbed. That she is of the lower class
of whites, does not disturb the fact that she is a white woman. "The
leading citizens" of Memphis are defending the "honor" of _all_ white
women, _demi-monde_ included.

Since the manager of the _Free Speech_ has been run away from Memphis by
the guardians of the honor of Southern white women, a young girl living on
Poplar St., who was discovered in intimate relations with a handsome
mulatto young colored man, Will Morgan by name, stole her father's money
to send the young fellow away from that father's wrath. She has since
joined him in Chicago.

The _Memphis Ledger_ for June 8 has the following:

  If Lillie Bailey, a rather pretty white girl seventeen years of age, who
  is now at the City Hospital, would be somewhat less reserved about her
  disgrace there would be some very nauseating details in the story of her
  life. She is the mother of a little coon. The truth might reveal fearful
  depravity or it might reveal the evidence of a rank outrage. She will
  not divulge the name of the man who has left such black evidence of her
  disgrace, and, in fact, says it is a matter in which there can be no
  interest to the outside world. She came to Memphis nearly three months
  ago and was taken in at the Woman's Refuge in the southern part of the
  city. She remained there until a few weeks ago, when the child was born.
  The ladies in charge of the Refuge were horified. The girl was at once
  sent to the City Hospital, where she has been since May 30. She is a
  country girl. She came to Memphis from her fathers farm, a short
  distance from Hernando, Miss. Just when she left there she would not
  say. In fact she says she came to Memphis from Arkansas, and says her
  home is in that State. She is rather good looking, has blue eyes, a low
  forehead and dark red hair. The ladies at the Woman's Refuge do not know
  anything about the girl further than what they learned when she was an
  inmate of the institution; and she would not tell much. When the child
  was born an attempt was made to get the girl to reveal the name of the
  Negro who had disgraced her, she obstinately refused and it was
  impossible to elicit any information from her on the subject.

Note the wording. "The truth might reveal fearful depravity or rank
outrage." If it had been a white child or Lillie Bailey had told a pitiful
story of Negro outrage, it would have been a case of woman's weakness or
assault and she could have remained at the Woman's Refuge. But a Negro
child and to withhold its father's name and thus prevent the killing of
another Negro "rapist." A case of "fearful depravity."

The very week the "leading citizens" of Memphis were making a spectacle of
themselves in defense of all white women of every kind, an Afro-American,
M. Stricklin, was found in a white woman's room in that city. Although
she made no outcry of rape, he was jailed and would have been lynched, but
the woman stated she bought curtains of him (he was a furniture dealer)
and his business in her room that night was to put them up. A white
woman's word was taken as absolutely in this case as when the cry of rape
is made, and he was freed.

What is true of Memphis is true of the entire South. The daily papers last
year reported a farmer's wife in Alabama had given birth to a Negro child.
When the Negro farm hand who was plowing in the field heard it he took the
mule from the plow and fled. The dispatches also told of a woman in South
Carolina who gave birth to a Negro child and charged three men with being
its father, _every one of whom has since disappeared_. In Tuscumbia, Ala.,
the colored boy who was lynched there last year for assaulting a white
girl told her before his accusers that he had met her there in the woods
often before.

Frank Weems of Chattanooga who was not lynched in May only because the
prominent citizens became his body guard until the doors of the
penitentiary closed on him, had letters in his pocket from the white woman
in the case, making the appointment with him. Edward Coy who was burned
alive in Texarkana, January 1, 1892, died protesting his innocence.
Investigation since as given by the Bystander in the _Chicago Inter
Ocean_, October 1, proves:

  1. The woman who was paraded as a victim of violence was of bad
  character; her husband was a drunkard and a gambler.

  2. She was publicly reported and generally known to have been criminally
  intimate with Coy for more than a year previous.

  3. She was compelled by threats, if not by violence, to make the charge
  against the victim.

  4. When she came to apply the match Coy asked her if she would burn him
  after they had "been sweethearting" so long.

  5. A large majority of the "superior" white men prominent in the affair
  are the reputed fathers of mulatto children.

  These are not pleasant facts, but they are illustrative of the vital
  phase of the so-called race question, which should properly be
  designated an earnest inquiry as to the best methods by which religion,
  science, law and political power may be employed to excuse injustice,
  barbarity and crime done to a people because of race and color. There
  can be no possible belief that these people were inspired by any
  consuming zeal to vindicate God's law against miscegnationists of the
  most practical sort. The woman was a willing partner in the victim's
  guilt, and being of the "superior" race must naturally have been more
  guilty.

In Natchez, Miss., Mrs. Marshall, one of the _creme de la creme_ of the
city, created a tremendous sensation several years ago. She has a black
coachman who was married, and had been in her employ several years. During
this time she gave birth to a child whose color was remarked, but traced
to some brunette ancestor, and one of the fashionable dames of the city
was its godmother. Mrs. Marshall's social position was unquestioned, and
wealth showered every dainty on this child which was idolized with its
brothers and sisters by its white papa. In course of time another child
appeared on the scene, but it was unmistakably dark. All were alarmed, and
"rush of blood, strangulation" were the conjectures, but the doctor, when
asked the cause, grimly told them it was a Negro child. There was a family
conclave, the coachman heard of it and leaving his own family went West,
and has never returned. As soon as Mrs. Marshall was able to travel she
was sent away in deep disgrace. Her husband died within the year of a
broken heart.

Ebenzer Fowler, the wealthiest colored man in Issaquena County, Miss., was
shot down on the street in Mayersville, January 30, 1885, just before dark
by an armed body of white men who filled his body with bullets. They
charged him with writing a note to a white woman of the place, which they
intercepted and which proved there was an intimacy existing between them.

Hundreds of such cases might be cited, but enough have been given to prove
the assertion that there are white women in the South who love the
Afro-American's company even as there are white men notorious for their
preference for Afro-American women.

There is hardly a town in the South which has not an instance of the kind
which is well known, and hence the assertion is reiterated that "nobody in
the South believes the old thread bare lie that negro men rape white
women." Hence there is a growing demand among Afro-Americans that the
guilt or innocence of parties accused of rape be fully established. They
know the men of the section of the country who refuse this are not so
desirous of punishing rapists as they pretend. The utterances of the
leading white men show that with them it is not the crime but the _class_.
Bishop Fitzgerald has become apologist for lynchers of the rapists of
_white_ women only. Governor Tillman, of South Carolina, in the month of
June, standing under the tree in Barnwell, S.C., on which eight
Afro-Americans were hung last year, declared that he would lead a mob to
lynch a _negro_ who raped a _white_ woman. So say the pulpits, officials
and newspapers of the South. But when the victim is a colored woman it is
different.

Last winter in Baltimore, Md., three white ruffians assaulted a Miss
Camphor, a young Afro-American girl, while out walking with a young man of
her own race. They held her escort and outraged the girl. It was a deed
dastardly enough to arouse Southern blood, which gives its horror of rape
as excuse for lawlessness, but she was an Afro-American. The case went to
the courts, an Afro-American lawyer defended the men and they were
acquitted.

In Nashville, Tenn., there is a white man, Pat Hanifan, who outraged a
little Afro-American girl, and, from the physical injuries received, she
has been ruined for life. He was jailed for six months, discharged, and is
now a detective in that city. In the same city, last May, a white man
outraged an Afro-American girl in a drug store. He was arrested, and
released on bail at the trial. It was rumored that five hundred
Afro-Americans had organized to lynch him. Two hundred and fifty white
citizens armed themselves with Winchesters and guarded him. A cannon was
placed in front of his home, and the Buchanan Rifles (State Militia)
ordered to the scene for his protection. The Afro-American mob did not
materialize. Only two weeks before Eph. Grizzard, who had only been
_charged_ with rape upon a white woman, had been taken from the jail, with
Governor Buchanan and the police and militia standing by, dragged through
the streets in broad daylight, knives plunged into him at every step, and
with every fiendish cruelty a frenzied mob could devise, he was at last
swung out on the bridge with hands cut to pieces as he tried to climb up
the stanchions. A naked, bloody example of the blood-thirstiness of the
nineteenth-century civilization of the Athens of the South! No cannon or
military was called out in his defense. He dared to visit a white woman.

At the very moment these civilized whites were announcing their
determination "to protect their wives and daughters," by murdering
Grizzard, a white man was in the same jail for raping eight-year-old
Maggie Reese, an Afro-American girl. He was not harmed. The "honor" of
grown women who were glad enough to be supported by the Grizzard boys and
Ed Coy, as long as the liaison was not known, needed protection; they were
white. The outrage upon helpless childhood needed no avenging in this
case; she was black.

A white man in Guthrie, Oklahoma Territory, two months ago inflicted such
injuries upon another Afro-American child that she died. He was not
punished, but an attempt was made in the same town in the month of June to
lynch an Afro-American who visited a white woman.

In Memphis, Tenn., in the month of June, Ellerton L. Dorr, who is the
husband of Russell Hancock's widow, was arrested for attempted rape on
Mattie Cole, a neighbors cook; he was only prevented from accomplishing
his purpose, by the appearance of Mattie's employer. Dorr's friends say he
was drunk and not responsible for his actions. The grand jury refused to
indict him and he was discharged.




3 _The_ NEW CRY


The appeal of Southern whites to Northern sympathy and sanction, the
adroit, insiduous plea made by Bishop Fitzgerald for suspension of
judgment because those "who condemn lynching express no sympathy for the
_white_ woman in the case," falls to the ground in the light of the
foregoing.

From this exposition of the race issue in lynch law, the whole matter is
explained by the well-known opposition growing out of slavery to the
progress of the race. This is crystalized in the oft-repeated slogan:
"This is a white man's country and the white man must rule." The South
resented giving the Afro-American his freedom, the ballot box and the
Civil Rights Law. The raids of the Ku-Klux and White Liners to subvert
reconstruction government, the Hamburg and Ellerton, S.C., the Copiah
County, Miss., and the Layfayette Parish, La., massacres were excused as
the natural resentment of intelligence against government by ignorance.

Honest white men practically conceded the necessity of intelligence
murdering ignorance to correct the mistake of the general government, and
the race was left to the tender mercies of the solid South. Thoughtful
Afro-Americans with the strong arm of the government withdrawn and with
the hope to stop such wholesale massacres urged the race to sacrifice its
political rights for sake of peace. They honestly believed the race should
fit itself for government, and when that should be done, the objection to
race participation in politics would be removed.

But the sacrifice did not remove the trouble, nor move the South to
justice. One by one the Southern States have legally(?) disfranchised the
Afro-American, and since the repeal of the Civil Rights Bill nearly every
Southern State has passed separate car laws with a penalty against their
infringement. The race regardless of advancement is penned into filthy,
stifling partitions cut off from smoking cars. All this while, although
the political cause has been removed, the butcheries of black men at
Barnwell, S.C., Carrolton, Miss., Waycross, Ga., and Memphis, Tenn., have
gone on; also the flaying alive of a man in Kentucky, the burning of one
in Arkansas, the hanging of a fifteen-year-old girl in Louisiana, a woman
in Jackson, Tenn., and one in Hollendale, Miss., until the dark and bloody
record of the South shows 728 Afro-Americans lynched during the past eight
years. Not fifty of these were for political causes; the rest were for all
manner of accusations from that of rape of white women, to the case of the
boy Will Lewis who was hanged at Tullahoma, Tenn., last year for being
drunk and "sassy" to white folks.

These statistics compiled by the _Chicago Tribune_ were given the first of
this year (1892). Since then, not less than one hundred and fifty have
been known to have met violent death at the hands of cruel bloodthirsty
mobs during the past nine months.

To palliate this record (which grows worse as the Afro-American becomes
intelligent) and excuse some of the most heinous crimes that ever stained
the history of a country, the South is shielding itself behind the
plausible screen of defending the honor of its women. This, too, in the
face of the fact that only _one-third_ of the 728 victims to mobs have
been _charged_ with rape, to say nothing of those of that one-third who
were innocent of the charge. A white correspondent of the _Baltimore Sun_
declares that the Afro-American who was lynched in Chestertown, Md., in
May for assault on a white girl was innocent; that the deed was done by a
white man who had since disappeared. The girl herself maintained that her
assailant was a white man. When that poor Afro-American was murdered, the
whites excused their refusal of a trial on the ground that they wished to
spare the white girl the mortification of having to testify in court.

This cry has had its effect. It has closed the heart, stifled the
conscience, warped the judgment and hushed the voice of press and pulpit
on the subject of lynch law throughout this "land of liberty." Men who
stand high in the esteem of the public for Christian character, for moral
and physical courage, for devotion to the principles of equal and exact
justice to all, and for great sagacity, stand as cowards who fear to open
their mouths before this great outrage. They do not see that by their
tacit encouragement, their silent acquiescence, the black shadow of
lawlessness in the form of lynch law is spreading its wings over the whole
country.

Men who, like Governor Tillman, start the ball of lynch law rolling for a
certain crime, are powerless to stop it when drunken or criminal white
toughs feel like hanging an Afro-American on any pretext.

Even to the better class of Afro-Americans the crime of rape is so
revolting they have too often taken the white man's word and given lynch
law neither the investigation nor condemnation it deserved.

They forget that a concession of the right to lynch a man for a certain
crime, not only concedes the right to lynch any person for any crime, but
(so frequently is the cry of rape now raised) it is in a fair way to stamp
us a race of rapists and desperadoes. They have gone on hoping and
believing that general education and financial strength would solve the
difficulty, and are devoting their energies to the accumulation of both.

The mob spirit has grown with the increasing intelligence of the
Afro-American. It has left the out-of-the-way places where ignorance
prevails, has thrown off the mask and with this new cry stalks in broad
daylight in large cities, the centers of civilization, and is encouraged
by the "leading citizens" and the press.




4 _The_ MALICIOUS _and_ UNTRUTHFUL WHITE PRESS


The _Daily Commercial_ and _Evening Scimitar_ of Memphis, Tenn., are owned
by leading business men of that city, and yet, in spite of the fact that
there had been no white woman in Memphis outraged by an Afro-American, and
that Memphis possessed a thrifty law-abiding, property-owning class of
Afro-Americans the _Commercial_ of May 17, under the head of "More Rapes,
More Lynchings" gave utterance to the following:

  The lynching of three Negro scoundrels reported in our dispatches from
  Anniston, Ala., for a brutal outrage committed upon a white woman will
  be a text for much comment on "Southern barbarism" by Northern
  newspapers; but we fancy it will hardly prove effective for campaign
  purposes among intelligent people. The frequency of these lynchings
  calls attention to the frequency of the crimes which causes lynching.
  The "Southern barbarism" which deserves the serious attention of all
  people North and South, is the barbarism which preys upon weak and
  defenseless women. Nothing but the most prompt, speedy and extreme
  punishment can hold in check the horrible and beastial propensities of
  the Negro race. There is a strange similarity about a number of cases of
  this character which have lately occurred.

  In each case the crime was deliberately planned and perpetrated by
  several Negroes. They watched for an opportunity when the women were
  left without a protector. It was not a sudden yielding to a fit of
  passion, but the consummation of a devilish purpose which has been
  seeking and waiting for the opportunity. This feature of the crime not
  only makes it the most fiendishly brutal, but it adds to the terror of
  the situation in the thinly settled country communities. No man can
  leave his family at night without the dread that some roving Negro
  ruffian is watching and waiting for this opportunity. The swift
  punishment which invariably follows these horrible crimes doubtless acts
  as a deterring effect upon the Negroes in that immediate neighborhood
  for a short time. But the lesson is not widely learned nor long
  remembered. Then such crimes, equally atrocious, have happened in quick
  succession, one in Tennessee, one in Arkansas, and one in Alabama. The
  facts of the crime appear to appeal more to the Negro's lustful
  imagination than the facts of the punishment do to his fears. He sets
  aside all fear of death in any form when opportunity is found for the
  gratification of his bestial desires.

  There is small reason to hope for any change for the better. The
  commission of this crime grows more frequent every year. The generation
  of Negroes which have grown up since the war have lost in large measure
  the traditional and wholesome awe of the white race which kept the
  Negroes in subjection, even when their masters were in the army, and
  their families left unprotected except by the slaves themselves. There
  is no longer a restraint upon the brute passion of the Negro.

  What is to be done? The crime of rape is always horrible, but the
  Southern man there is nothing which so fills the soul with horror,
  loathing and fury as the outraging of a white woman by a Negro. It is
  the race question in the ugliest, vilest, most dangerous aspect. The
  Negro as a political factor can be controlled. But neither laws nor
  lynchings can subdue his lusts. Sooner or later it will force a crisis.
  We do not know in what form it will come.

In its issue of June 4, the _Memphis Evening Scimitar_ gives the following
excuse for lynch law:

  Aside from the violation of white women by Negroes, which is the
  outcropping of a bestial perversion of instinct, the chief cause of
  trouble between the races in the South is the Negro's lack of manners.
  In the state of slavery he learned politeness from association with
  white people, who took pains to teach him. Since the emancipation came
  and the tie of mutual interest and regard between master and servant was
  broken, the Negro has drifted away into a state which is neither freedom
  nor bondage. Lacking the proper inspiration of the one and the
  restraining force of the other he has taken up the idea that boorish
  insolence is independence, and the exercise of a decent degree of
  breeding toward white people is identical with servile submission. In
  consequence of the prevalence of this notion there are many Negroes who
  use every opportunity to make themselves offensive, particularly when
  they think it can be done with impunity.

  We have had too many instances right here in Memphis to doubt this, and
  our experience is not exceptional. _The white people won't stand this
  sort of thing, and whether they be insulted as individuals are as a
  race, the response will be prompt and effectual._ The bloody riot of
  1866, in which so many Negroes perished, was brought on principally by
  the outrageous conduct of the blacks toward the whites on the streets.
  It is also a remarkable and discouraging fact that the majority of such
  scoundrels are Negroes who have received educational advantages at the
  hands of the white taxpayers. They have got just enough of learning to
  make them realize how hopelessly their race is behind the other in
  everything that makes a great people, and they attempt to "get even" by
  insolence, which is ever the resentment of inferiors. There are
  well-bred Negroes among us, and it is truly unfortunate that they should
  have to pay, even in part, the penalty of the offenses committed by the
  baser sort, but this is the way of the world. The innocent must suffer
  for the guilty. If the Negroes as a people possessed a hundredth part of
  the self-respect which is evidenced by the courteous bearing of some
  that the _Scimitar_ could name, the friction between the races would be
  reduced to a minimum. It will not do to beg the question by pleading
  that many white men are also stirring up strife. The Caucasian
  blackguard simply obeys the promptings of a depraved disposition, and he
  is seldom deliberately rough or offensive toward strangers or
  unprotected women.

  The Negro tough, on the contrary, is given to just that kind of
  offending, and he almost invariably singles out white people as his
  victims.

On March 9, 1892, there were lynched in this same city three of the best
specimens of young since-the-war Afro-American manhood. They were
peaceful, law-abiding citizens and energetic business men.

They believed the problem was to be solved by eschewing politics and
putting money in the purse. They owned a flourishing grocery business in a
thickly populated suburb of Memphis, and a white man named Barrett had one
on the opposite corner. After a personal difficulty which Barrett sought
by going into the "People's Grocery" drawing a pistol and was thrashed by
Calvin McDowell, he (Barrett) threatened to "clean them out." These men
were a mile beyond the city limits and police protection; hearing that
Barrett's crowd was coming to attack them Saturday night, they mustered
forces, and prepared to defend themselves against the attack.

When Barrett came he led a _posse_ of officers, twelve in number, who
afterward claimed to be hunting a man for whom they had a warrant. That
twelve men in citizen's clothes should think it necessary to go in the
night to hunt one man who had never before been arrested, or made any
record as a criminal has never been explained. When they entered the back
door the young men thought the threatened attack was on, and fired into
them. Three of the officers were wounded, and when the _defending_ party
found it was officers of the law upon whom they had fired, they ceased and
got away.

Thirty-one men were arrested and thrown in jail as "conspirators,"
although they all declared more than once they did not know they were
firing on officers. Excitement was at fever beat until the morning papers,
two days after, announced that the wounded deputy sheriffs were out of
danger. This hindered rather than helped the plans of the whites. There
was no law on the statute books which would execute an Afro-American for
wounding a white man, but the "unwritten law" did. Three of these men, the
president, the manager and clerk of the grocery--"the leaders of the
conspiracy"--were secretly taken from jail and lynched in a shockingly
brutal manner. "The Negroes are getting too independent," they say, "we
must teach them a lesson."

What lesson? The lesson of subordination. "Kill the leaders and it will
cow the Negro who dares to shoot a white man, even in self-defense."

Although the race was wild over the outrage, the mockery of law and
justice which disarmed men and locked them up in jails where they could be
easily and safely reached by the mob--- the Afro-American ministers,
newspapers and leaders counselled obedience to the law which did not
protect them.

Their counsel was heeded and not a hand was uplifted to resent the
outrage; following the advice of the _Free Speech_, people left the city
in great numbers.

The dailies and associated press reports heralded these men to the country
as "toughs," and "Negro desperadoes who kept a low dive." This same press
service printed that the Negro who was lynched at Indianola, Miss., in
May, had outraged the sheriff's eight-year-old daughter. The girl was more
than eighteen years old, and was found by her father in this man's room,
who was a servant on the place.

Not content with misrepresenting the race, the mob-spirit was not to be
satisfied until the paper which was doing all it could to counteract this
impression was silenced. The colored people were resenting their bad
treatment in a way to make itself felt, yet gave the mob no excuse for
further murder, until the appearance of the editorial which is construed
as a reflection on the "honor" of the Southern white women. It is not half
so libelous as that of the _Commercial_ which appeared four days before,
and which has been given in these pages. They would have lynched the
manager of the _Free Speech_ for exercising the right of free speech if
they had found him as quickly as they would have hung a rapist, and glad
of the excuse to do so. The owners were ordered not to return, the _Free
Speech_ was suspended with as little compunction as the business of the
"People's Grocery" broken up and the proprietors murdered.




5 _The_ SOUTH'S POSITION


Henry W. Grady in his well-remembered speeches in New England and New York
pictured the Afro-American as incapable of self-government. Through him
and other leading men the cry of the South to the country has been "Hands
off! Leave us to solve our problem." To the Afro-American the South says,
"the white man must and will rule." There is little difference between the
Antebellum South and the New South.

Her white citizens are wedded to any method however revolting, any measure
however extreme, for the subjugation of the young manhood of the race.
They have cheated him out of his ballot, deprived him of civil rights or
redress therefor in the civil courts, robbed him of the fruits of his
labor, and are still murdering, burning and lynching him.

The result is a growing disregard of human life. Lynch law has spread its
insiduous influence till men in New York State, Pennsylvania and on the
free Western plains feel they can take the law in their own hands with
impunity, especially where an Afro-American is concerned. The South is
brutalized to a degree not realized by its own inhabitants, and the very
foundation of government, law and order, are imperilled.

Public sentiment has had a slight "reaction" though not sufficient to stop
the crusade of lawlessness and lynching. The spirit of christianity of the
great M.E. Church was aroused to the frequent and revolting crimes against
a weak people, enough to pass strong condemnatory resolutions at its
General Conference in Omaha last May. The spirit of justice of the grand
old party asserted itself sufficiently to secure a denunciation of the
wrongs, and a feeble declaration of the belief in human rights in the
Republican platform at Minneapolis, June 7. Some of the great dailies and
weeklies have swung into line declaring that lynch law must go. The
President of the United States issued a proclamation that it be not
tolerated in the territories over which he has jurisdiction. Governor
Northern and Chief Justice Bleckley of Georgia have proclaimed against it.
The citizens of Chattanooga, Tenn., have set a worthy example in that they
not only condemn lynch law, but her public men demanded a trial for Weems,
the accused rapist, and guarded him while the trial was in progress. The
trial only lasted ten minutes, and Weems chose to plead guilty and accept
twenty-one years sentence, than invite the certain death which awaited him
outside that cordon of police if he had told the truth and shown the
letters he had from the white woman in the case.

Col. A.S. Colyar, of Nashville, Tenn., is so overcome with the horrible
state of affairs that he addressed the following earnest letter to the
_Nashville American_.

  Nothing since I have been a reading man has so impressed me with the
  decay of manhood among the people of Tennessee as the dastardly
  submission to the mob reign. We have reached the unprecedented low
  level; the awful criminal depravity of substituting the mob for the
  court and jury, of giving up the jail keys to the mob whenever they are
  demanded. We do it in the largest cities and in the country towns; we do
  it in midday; we do it after full, not to say formal, notice, and so
  thoroughly and generally is it acquiesced in that the murderers have
  discarded the formula of masks. They go into the town where everybody
  knows them, sometimes under the gaze of the governor, in the presence of
  the courts, in the presence of the sheriff and his deputies, in the
  presence of the entire police force, take out the prisoner, take his
  life, often with fiendish glee, and often with acts of cruelty and
  barbarism which impress the reader with a degeneracy rapidly approaching
  savage life. That the State is disgraced but faintly expresses the
  humiliation which has settled upon the once proud people of Tennessee.
  The State, in its majesty, through its organized life, for which the
  people pay liberally, makes but one record, but one note, and that a
  criminal falsehood, "was hung by persons to the jury unknown." The
  murder at Shelbyville is only a verification of what every intelligent
  man knew would come, because with a mob a rumor is as good as a proof.

These efforts brought forth apologies and a short halt, but the lynching
mania was raged again through the past three months with unabated fury.

The strong arm of the law must be brought to bear upon lynchers in severe
punishment, but this cannot and will not be done unless a healthy public
sentiment demands and sustains such action.

The men and women in the South who disapprove of lynching and remain
silent on the perpetration of such outrages, are particeps criminis,
accomplices, accessories before and after the fact, equally guilty with
the actual lawbreakers who would not persist if they did not know that
neither the law nor militia would be employed against them.




6 SELF-HELP


In the creation of this healthier public sentiment, the Afro-American can
do for himself what no one else can do for him. The world looks on with
wonder that we have conceded so much and remain law-abiding under such
great outrage and provocation.

To Northern capital and Afro-American labor the South owes its
rehabilitation. If labor is withdrawn capital will not remain. The
Afro-American is thus the backbone of the South. A thorough knowledge and
judicious exercise of this power in lynching localities could many times
effect a bloodless revolution. The white man's dollar is his god, and to
stop this will be to stop outrages in many localities.

The Afro-Americans of Memphis denounced the lynching of three of their
best citizens, and urged and waited for the authorities to act in the
matter and bring the lynchers to justice. No attempt was made to do so,
and the black men left the city by thousands, bringing about great
stagnation in every branch of business. Those who remained so injured the
business of the street car company by staying off the cars, that the
superintendent, manager and treasurer called personally on the editor of
the _Free Speech_, asked them to urge our people to give them their
patronage again. Other business men became alarmed over the situation and
the _Free Speech_ was run away that the colored people might be more
easily controlled. A meeting of white citizens in June, three months after
the lynching, passed resolutions for the first time, condemning it. _But
they did not punish the lynchers._ Every one of them was known by name,
because they had been selected to do the dirty work, by some of the very
citizens who passed these resolutions. Memphis is fast losing her black
population, who proclaim as they go that there is no protection for the
life and property of any Afro-American citizen in Memphis who is not a
slave.

The Afro-American citizens of Kentucky, whose intellectual and financial
improvement has been phenomenal, have never had a separate car law until
now. Delegations and petitions poured into the Legislature against it, yet
the bill passed and the Jim Crow Car of Kentucky is a legalized
institution. Will the great mass of Negroes continue to patronize the
railroad? A special from Covington, Ky., says:

Covington, June 13.--The railroads of the State are beginning to feel very
markedly, the effects of the separate coach bill recently passed by the
Legislature. No class of people in the State have so many and so largely
attended excursions as the blacks. All these have been abandoned, and
regular travel is reduced to a minimum. A competent authority says the
loss to the various roads will reach $1,000,000 this year.

A call to a State Conference in Lexington, Ky., last June had delegates
from every county in the State. Those delegates, the ministers, teachers,
heads of secret and others orders, and the head of every family should
pass the word around for every member of the race in Kentucky to stay oil
railroads unless obliged to ride. If they did so, and their advice was
followed persistently the convention would not need to petition the
Legislature to repeal the law or raise money to file a suit. The railroad
corporations would be so effected they would in self-defense lobby to have
the separate car law repealed. On the other hand, as long as the railroads
can get Afro-American excursions they will always have plenty of money to
fight all the suits brought against them. They will be aided in so doing
by the same partisan public sentiment which passed the law. White men
passed the law, and white judges and juries would pass upon the suits
against the law, and render judgment in line with their prejudices and in
deference to the greater financial power.

The appeal to the white man's pocket has ever been more effectual than all
the appeals ever made to his conscience. Nothing, absolutely nothing, is
to be gained by a further sacrifice of manhood and self-respect. By the
right exercise of his power as the industrial factor of the South, the
Afro-American can demand and secure his rights, the punishment of
lynchers, and a fair trial for accused rapists.

Of the many inhuman outrages of this present year, the only case where the
proposed lynching did _not_ occur, was where the men armed themselves in
Jacksonville, Fla., and Paducah, Ky, and prevented it. The only times an
Afro-American who was assaulted got away has been when he had a gun and
used it in self-defense.

The lesson this teaches and which every Afro-American should ponder well,
is that a Winchester rifle should have a place of honor in every black
home, and it should be used for that protection which the law refuses to
give. When the white man who is always the aggressor knows he runs as
great risk of biting the dust every time his Afro-American victim does, he
will have greater respect for Afro-American life. The more the
Afro-American yields and cringes and begs, the more he has to do so, the
more he is insulted, outraged and lynched.

The assertion has been substantiated throughout these pages that the press
contains unreliable and doctored reports of lynchings, and one of the most
necessary things for the race to do is to get these facts before the
public. The people must know before they can act, and there is no educator
to compare with the press.

The Afro-American papers are the only ones which will print the truth, and
they lack means to employ agents and detectives to get at the facts. The
race must rally a mighty host to the support of their journals, and thus
enable them to do much in the way of investigation.

A lynching occurred at Port Jarvis, N.Y., the first week in June. A white
and colored man were implicated in the assault upon a white girl. It was
charged that the white man paid the colored boy to make the assault, which
he did on the public highway in broad day time, and was lynched. This, too
was done by "parties unknown." The white man in the case still lives. He
was imprisoned and promises to fight the case on trial. At the preliminary
examination, it developed that he had been a suitor of the girl's. She had
repulsed and refused him, yet had given him money, and he had sent
threatening letters demanding more.

The day before this examination she was so wrought up, she left home and
wandered miles away. When found she said she did so because she was afraid
of the man's testimony. Why should she be afraid of the prisoner! Why
should she yield to his demands for money if not to prevent him exposing
something he knew! It seems explainable only on the hypothesis that a
_liaison_ existed between the colored boy and the girl, and the white man
knew of it. The press is singularly silent. Has it a motive? We owe it to
ourselves to find out.

The story comes from Larned, Kansas, Oct. 1, that a young white lady held
at bay until daylight, without alarming any one in the house, "a burly
Negro" who entered her room and bed. The "burly Negro" was promptly
lynched without investigation or examination of inconsistant stories.

A house was found burned down near Montgomery, Ala., in Monroe County,
Oct. 13, a few weeks ago; also the burned bodies of the owners and melted
piles of gold and silver.

These discoveries led to the conclusion that the awful crime was not
prompted by motives of robbery. The suggestion of the whites was that
"brutal lust was the incentive, and as there are nearly 200 Negroes living
within a radius of five miles of the place the conclusion was inevitable
that some of them were the perpetrators."

Upon this "suggestion" probably made by the real criminal, the mob acted
upon the "conclusion" and arrested ten Afro-Americans, four of whom, they
tell the world, confessed to the deed of murdering Richard L. Johnson and
outraging his daughter, Jeanette. These four men, Berrell Jones, Moses
Johnson, Jim and John Packer, none of them twenty-five years of age, upon
this conclusion, were taken from jail, hanged, shot, and burned while yet
alive the night of Oct. 12. The same report says Mr. Johnson was on the
best of terms with his Negro tenants.

The race thus outraged must find out the facts of this awful hurling of
men into eternity on supposition, and give them to the indifferent and
apathetic country. We feel this to be a garbled report, but how can we
prove it?

Near Vicksburg, Miss., a murder was committed by a gang of burglars. Of
course it must have been done by Negroes, and Negroes were arrested for
it. It is believed that two men, Smith Tooley and John Adams belonged to a
gang controlled by white men and, fearing exposure, on the night of July
4, they were hanged in the Court House yard by those interested in
silencing them. Robberies since committed in the same vicinity have been
known to be by white men who had their faces blackened. We strongly
believe in the innocence of these murdered men, but we have no proof. No
other news goes out to the world save that which stamps us as a race of
cutthroats, robbers and lustful wild beasts. So great is Southern hate and
prejudice, they legally(?) hung poor little thirteen-year-old Mildrey
Brown at Columbia, S.C., Oct. 7, on the circumstantial evidence that she
poisoned a white infant. If her guilt had been proven unmistakably, had
she been white, Mildrey Brown would never have been hung.

The country would have been aroused and South Carolina disgraced forever
for such a crime. The Afro-American himself did not know as he should have
known as his journals should be in a position to have him know and act.

Nothing is more definitely settled than he must act for himself. I have
shown how he may employ the boycott, emigration and the press, and I feel
that by a combination of all these agencies can be effectually stamped out
lynch law, that last relic of barbarism and slavery. "The gods help those
who help themselves."



Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgpd.net.








MOB RULE IN NEW ORLEANS:
ROBERT CHARLES AND HIS FIGHT TO DEATH,
THE STORY OF HIS LIFE,
BURNING HUMAN BEINGS ALIVE,
OTHER LYNCHING STATISTICS

BY

IDA B. WELLS-BARNETT

1900




[Transcriber's Note: This pamphlet was first published in 1900 but was
subsequently reprinted. It's not apparent if the curiosities in spelling
date back to the original or were introduced later; they have been
retained as found, and the reader is left to decide. Please verify with
another source before quoting this material. Of special note are the names
Cantrell/Cantrelle, Porteous/Porteus, and Ziegel/Zeigel.]




+INTRODUCTION+

Immediately after the awful barbarism which disgraced the State of Georgia
in April of last year, during which time more than a dozen colored people
were put to death with unspeakable barbarity, I published a full report
showing that Sam Hose, who was burned to death during that time, never
committed a criminal assault, and that he killed his employer in
self-defense.

Since that time I have been engaged on a work not yet finished, which I
interrupt now to tell the story of the mob in New Orleans, which,
despising all law, roamed the streets day and night, searching for colored
men and women, whom they beat, shot and killed at will.

In the account of the New Orleans mob I have used freely the graphic
reports of the _New Orleans Times-Democrat_ and the _New Orleans
Picayune_. Both papers gave the most minute details of the week's
disorder. In their editorial comment they were at all times most urgent in
their defense of law and in the strongest terms they condemned the
infamous work of the mob.

It is no doubt owing to the determined stand for law and order taken by
these great dailies and the courageous action taken by the best citizens
of New Orleans, who rallied to the support of the civic authorities, that
prevented a massacre of colored people awful to contemplate.

For the accounts and illustrations taken from the above-named journals,
sincere thanks are hereby expressed.

[Illustration]

The publisher hereof does not attempt to moralize over the deplorable
condition of affairs shown in this publication, but simply presents the
facts in a plain, unvarnished, connected way, so that he who runs may
read. We do not believe that the American people who have encouraged such
scenes by their indifference will read unmoved these accounts of
brutality, injustice and oppression. We do not believe that the moral
conscience of the nation--that which is highest and best among us--will
always remain silent in face of such outrages, for God is not dead, and
His Spirit is not entirely driven from men's hearts.

When this conscience wakes and speaks out in thunder tones, as it must, it
will need facts to use as a weapon against injustice, barbarism and wrong.
It is for this reason that I carefully compile, print and send forth these
facts. If the reader can do no more, he can pass this pamphlet on to
another, or send to the bureau addresses of those to whom he can order
copies mailed.

Besides the New Orleans case, a history of burnings in this country is
given, together with a table of lynchings for the past eighteen years.
Those who would like to assist in the work of disseminating these facts,
can do so by ordering copies, which are furnished at greatly reduced
rates for gratuitous distribution. The bureau has no funds and is entirely
dependent upon contributions from friends and members in carrying on the
work.

Ida B. Wells-Barnett
Chicago, Sept. 1, 1900




MOB RULE IN NEW ORLEANS





+SHOT AN OFFICER+

The bloodiest week which New Orleans has known since the massacre of the
Italians in 1892 was ushered in Monday, July 24, by the inexcusable and
unprovoked assault upon two colored men by police officers of New Orleans.
Fortified by the assurance born of long experience in the New Orleans
service, three policemen, Sergeant Aucoin, Officer Mora and Officer
Cantrelle, observing two colored men sitting on doorsteps on Dryades
street, between Washington Avenue and 6th Streets, determined, without a
shadow of authority, to arrest them. One of the colored men was named
Robert Charles, the other was a lad of nineteen named Leonard Pierce. The
colored men had left their homes, a few blocks distant, about an hour
prior, and had been sitting upon the doorsteps for a short time talking
together. They had not broken the peace in any way whatever, no warrant
was in the policemen's hands justifying their arrest, and no crime had
been committed of which they were the suspects. The policemen, however,
secure in the firm belief that they could do anything to a Negro that they
wished, approached the two men, and in less than three minutes from the
time they accosted them attempted to put both colored men under arrest.
The younger of the two men, Pierce, submitted to arrest, for the officer,
Cantrelle, who accosted him, put his gun in the young man's face ready to
blow his brains out if he moved. The other colored man, Charles, was made
the victim of a savage attack by Officer Mora, who used a billet and then
drew a gun and tried to kill Charles. Charles drew his gun nearly as
quickly as the policeman, and began a duel in the street, in which both
participants were shot. The policeman got the worst of the duel, and fell
helpless to the sidewalk. Charles made his escape. Cantrelle took Pierce,
his captive, to the police station, to which place Mora, the wounded
officer, was also taken, and a man hunt at once instituted for Charles,
the wounded fugitive.

In any law-abiding community Charles would have been justified in
delivering himself up immediately to the properly constituted authorities
and asking a trial by a jury of his peers. He could have been certain that
in resisting an unwarranted arrest he had a right to defend his life, even
to the point of taking one in that defense, but Charles knew that his
arrest in New Orleans, even for defending his life, meant nothing short of
a long term in the penitentiary, and still more probable death by lynching
at the hands of a cowardly mob. He very bravely determined to protect his
life as long as he had breath in his body and strength to draw a hair
trigger on his would-be murderers. How well he was justified in that
belief is well shown by the newspaper accounts which were given of this
transaction. Without a single line of evidence to justify the assertion,
the New Orleans daily papers at once declared that both Pierce and Charles
were desperadoes, that they were contemplating a burglary and that they
began the assault upon the policemen. It is interesting to note how the
two leading papers of New Orleans, the _Picayune_ and the
_Times-Democrat_, exert themselves to justify the policemen in the
absolutely unprovoked attack upon the two colored men. As these two papers
did all in their power to give an excuse for the action of the policemen,
it is interesting to note their versions. The _Times-Democrat_ of Tuesday
morning, the twenty-fifth, says:

  Two blacks, who are desperate men, and no doubt will be proven burglars,
  made it interesting and dangerous for three bluecoats on Dryades street,
  between Washington Avenue and Sixth Street, the Negroes using pistols
  first and dropping Patrolman Mora. But the desperate darkies did not go
  free, for the taller of the two, Robinson, is badly wounded and under
  cover, while Leonard Pierce is in jail.

  For a long time that particular neighborhood has been troubled with bad
  Negroes, and the neighbors were complaining to the Sixth Precinct police
  about them. But of late Pierce and Robinson had been camping on a door
  step on the street, and the people regarded their actions as suspicious.
  It got to such a point that some of the residents were afraid to go to
  bed, and last night this was told Sergeant Aucoin, who was rounding up
  his men. He had just picked up Officers Mora and Cantrell, on Washington
  Avenue and Dryades Street, and catching a glimpse of the blacks on the
  steps, he said he would go over and warn the men to get away from the
  street. So the patrolmen followed, and Sergeant Aucoin asked the smaller
  fellow, Pierce, if he lived there. The answer was short and impertinent,
  the black saying he did not, and with that both Pierce and Robinson drew
  up to their full height.

  For the moment the sergeant did not think that the Negroes meant fight,
  and he was on the point of ordering them away when Robinson slipped his
  pistol from his pocket. Pierce had his revolver out, too, and he fired
  twice, point blank at the sergeant, and just then Robinson began
  shooting at the patrolmen. In a second or so the policemen and blacks
  were fighting with their revolvers, the sergeant having a duel with
  Pierce, while Cantrell and Mora drew their line of fire on Robinson, who
  was working his revolver for all he was worth. One of his shots took
  Mora in the right hip, another caught his index finger on the right
  hand, and a third struck the small finger of the left hand. Poor Mora
  was done for; he could not fight any more, but Cantrell kept up his
  fire, being answered by the big black. Pierce's revolver broke down, the
  cartridges snapping, and he threw up his hands, begging for quarter.

  The sergeant lowered his pistol and some citizens ran over to where the
  shooting was going on. One of the bullets that went at Robinson caught
  him in the breast and he began running, turning out Sixth Street, with
  Cantrell behind him, shooting every few steps. He was loading his
  revolver again, but did not use it after the start he took, and in a
  little while Officer Cantrell lost the man in the darkness.

  Pierce was made a prisoner and hurried to the Sixth Precinct police
  station, where he was charged with shooting and wounding. The sergeant
  sent for an ambulance, and Mora was taken to the hospital, the wound in
  the hip being serious.

  A search was made for Robinson, but he could not be found, and even at 2
  o'clock this morning Captain Day, with Sergeant Aucoin and Corporals
  Perrier and Trenchard, with a good squad of men, were beating the weeds
  for the black.

The _New Orleans Picayune_ of the same date described the occurrence, and
from its account one would think it was an entirely different affair. Both
of the two accounts cannot be true, and the unquestioned fact is that
neither of them sets out the facts as they occurred. Both accounts attempt
to fix the beginning of hostilities upon the colored men, but both were
compelled to admit that the colored men were sitting on the doorsteps
quietly conversing with one another when the three policemen went up and
accosted them. The _Times-Democrat_ unguardedly states that one of the two
colored men tried to run away; that Mora seized him and then drew his
billy and struck him on the head; that Charles broke away from him and
started to run, after which the shooting began. The _Picayune_, however,
declares that Pierce began the firing and that his two shots point blank
at Aucoin were the first shots of the fight. As a matter of fact, Pierce
never fired a single shot before he was covered by Aucoin's revolver.
Charles and the officers did all the shooting. The _Picayune_'s account is
as follows:

  Patrolman Mora was shot in the right hip and dangerously wounded last
  night at 11:30 o'clock in Dryades Street, between Washington and Sixth,
  by two Negroes, who were sitting on a door step in the neighborhood.

  The shooting of Patrolman Mora brings to memory the fact that he was one
  of the partners of Patrolman Trimp, who was shot by a Negro soldier of
  the United States government during the progress of the Spanish-American
  war. The shooting of Mora by the Negro last night is a very simple
  story. At the hour mentioned, three Negro women noticed two suspicious
  men sitting on a door step in the above locality. The women saw the two
  men making an apparent inspection of the building. As they told the
  story, they saw the men look over the fence and examine the window
  blinds, and they paid particular attention to the make-up of the
  building, which was a two-story affair. About that time Sergeant J.C.
  Aucoin and Officers Mora and J.D. Cantrell hove in sight. The women
  hailed them and described to them the suspicious actions of the two
  Negroes, who were still sitting on the step. The trio of bluecoats, on
  hearing the facts, at once crossed the street and accosted the men. The
  latter answered that they were waiting for a friend whom they were
  expecting. Not satisfied with this answer, the sergeant asked them where
  they lived, and they replied "down town," but could not designate the
  locality. To other questions put by the officers the larger of the two
  Negroes replied that they had been in town just three days.

  As this reply was made, the larger man sprang to his feet, and Patrolman
  Mora, seeing that he was about to run away, seized him. The Negro took a
  firm hold on the officer, and a scuffle ensued. Mora, noting that he was
  not being assisted by his brother officers, drew his billy and struck
  the Negro on the head. The blow had but little effect upon the man, for
  he broke away and started down the street. When about ten feet away, the
  Negro drew his revolver and opened fire on the officer, firing three or
  four shots. The third shot struck Mora in the right hip, and was
  subsequently found to have taken an upward course. Although badly
  wounded, Mora drew his pistol and returned the fire. At his third shot
  the Negro was noticed to stagger, but he did not fall. He continued his
  flight. At this moment Sergeant Aucoin seized the other Negro, who
  proved to be a youth, Leon Pierce. As soon as Officer Mora was shot he
  sank to the sidewalk, and the other officer ran to the nearest
  telephone, and sent in a call for the ambulance. Upon its arrival the
  wounded officer was placed in it and conveyed to the hospital. An
  examination by the house surgeon revealed the fact that the bullet had
  taken an upward course. In the opinion of the surgeon the wound was a
  dangerous one.

But the best proof of the fact that the officers accosted the two colored
men and without any warrant or other justification attempted to arrest
them, and did actually seize and begin to club one of them, is shown by
Officer Mora's own statement. The officer was wounded and had every reason
in the world to make his side of the story as good as possible. His
statement was made to a _Picayune_ reporter and the same was published on
the twenty-fifth inst., and is as follows:

  I was in the neighborhood of Dryades and Washington Streets, with
  Sergeant Aucoin and Officer Cantrell, when three Negro women came up and
  told us that there were two suspicious-looking Negroes sitting on a step
  on Dryades Street, between Washington and Sixth. We went to the place
  indicated and found two Negroes. We interrogated them as to who they
  were, what they were doing and how long they had been here. They replied
  that they were working for some one and had been in town three days. At
  about this stage the larger of the two Negroes got up and I grabbed him.
  The Negro pulled, but I held fast, and he finally pulled me into the
  street. Here I began using my billet, and the Negro jerked from my grasp
  and ran. He then pulled a gun and fired. I pulled my gun and returned
  the fire, each of us firing about three shots. I saw the Negro stumble
  several times, and I thought I had shot him, but he ran away and I don't
  know whether any of my shots took effect. Sergeant Aucoin in the
  meantime held the other man fast. The man was about ten feet from me
  when he fired, and the three Negresses who told us about the men stood
  away about twenty-five feet from the shooting.

Thus far in the proceeding the Monday night episode results in Officer
Mora lying in the station wounded in the hip; Leonard Pierce, one of the
colored men, locked up in the station, and Robert Charles, the other
colored man, a fugitive, wounded in the leg and sought for by the entire
police force of New Orleans. Not sought for, however, to be placed under
arrest and given a fair trial and punished if found guilty according to
the law of the land, but sought for by a host of enraged, vindictive and
fearless officers, who were coolly ordered to kill him on sight. This
order is shown by the _Picayune_ of the twenty-sixth inst., in which the
following statement appears:

  In talking to the sergeant about the case, the captain asked about the
  Negro's fighting ability, and the sergeant answered that Charles, though
  he called him Robinson then, was a desperate man, and it would be best
  to shoot him before he was given a chance to draw his pistol upon any of
  the officers.

This instruction was given before anybody had been killed, and the only
evidence that Charles was a desperate man lay in the fact that he had
refused to be beaten over the head by Officer Mora for sitting on a step
quietly conversing with a friend. Charles resisted an absolutely unlawful
attack, and a gun fight followed. Both Mora and Charles were shot, but
because Mora was white and Charles was black, Charles was at once declared
to be a desperado, made an outlaw, and subsequently a price put upon his
head and the mob authorized to shoot him like a dog, on sight.

The New Orleans _Picayune_ of Wednesday morning said:

  But he has gone, perhaps to the swamps, and the disappointment of the
  bluecoats in not getting the murderer is expressed in their curses, each
  man swearing that the signal to halt that will be offered Charles will
  be a shot.

In that same column of the _Picayune_ it was said:

  Hundreds of policemen were about; each corner was guarded by a squad,
  commanded either by a sergeant or a corporal, and every man had the word
  to shoot the Negro as soon as he was sighted. He was a desperate black
  and would be given no chance to take more life.

Legal sanction was given to the mob or any man of the mob to kill Charles
at sight by the Mayor of New Orleans, who publicly proclaimed a reward of
two hundred and fifty dollars, not for the arrest of Charles, not at all,
but the reward was offered for Charles's body, "dead or alive." The
advertisement was as follows:

  +$250 REWARD+

  Under the authority vested in me by law, I hereby offer, in the name of
  the city of New Orleans, $250 reward for the capture and delivery, dead
  or alive, to the authorities of the city, the body of the Negro
  murderer,

  +ROBERT CHARLES+,

  who, on Tuesday morning, July 24, shot and killed

  Police Captain John T. Day and Patrolman Peter J. Lamb, and wounded

  Patrolman August T. Mora.

  PAUL CAPDEVIELLE, Mayor

This authority, given by the sergeant to kill Charles on sight, would have
been no news to Charles, nor to any colored man in New Orleans, who, for
any purpose whatever, even to save his life, raised his hand against a
white man. It is now, even as it was in the days of slavery, an
unpardonable sin for a Negro to resist a white man, no matter how unjust
or unprovoked the white man's attack may be. Charles knew this, and
knowing to be captured meant to be killed, he resolved to sell his life as
dearly as possible.

The next step in the terrible tragedy occurred between 2:30 and 5 o'clock
Tuesday morning, about four hours after the affair on Dryades Street. The
man hunt, which had been inaugurated soon after Officer Mora had been
carried to the station, succeeded in running down Robert Charles, the
wounded fugitive, and located him at 2023 4th Street. It was nearly 2
o'clock in the morning when a large detail of police surrounded the block
with the intent to kill Charles on sight. Capt. Day had charge of the
squad of police. Charles, the wounded man, was in his house when the
police arrived, fully prepared, as results afterward showed, to die in his
own home. Capt. Day started for Charles's room. As soon as Charles got
sight of him there was a flash, a report, and Day fell dead in his tracks.
In another instant Charles was standing in the door, and seeing Patrolman
Peter J. Lamb, he drew his gun, and Lamb fell dead. Two other officers,
Sergeant Aucoin and Officer Trenchard, who were in the squad, seeing their
comrades, Day and Lamb, fall dead, concluded to raise the siege, and both
disappeared into an adjoining house, where they blew out their lights so
that their cowardly carcasses could be safe from Charles's deadly aim. The
calibre of their courage is well shown by the fact that they concluded to
save themselves from any harm by remaining prisoners in that dark room
until daybreak, out of reach of Charles's deadly rifle. Sergeant Aucoin,
who had been so brave a few hours before when seeing the two colored men
sitting on the steps, talking together on Dryades Street, and supposing
that neither was armed, now showed his true calibre. Now he knew that
Charles had a gun and was brave enough to use it, so he hid himself in a
room two hours while Charles deliberately walked out of his room and into
the street after killing both Lamb and Day. It is also shown, as further
evidence of the bravery of some of New Orleans' "finest," that one of
them, seeing Capt. Day fall, ran seven blocks before he stopped,
afterwards giving the excuse that he was hunting for a patrol box.

At daybreak the officers felt safe to renew the attack upon Charles, so
they broke into his room, only to find that--what they probably very well
knew--he had gone. It appears that he made his escape by crawling through
a hole in the ceiling to a little attic in his house. Here he found that
he could not escape except by a window which led into an alley, which had
no opening on 4th Street. He scaled the fence and was soon out of reach.

It was now 5 o'clock Tuesday morning, and a general alarm was given.
Sergeant Aucoin and Corporal Trenchard, having received a new supply of
courage by returning daylight, renewed their effort to capture the man
that they had allowed to escape in the darkness. Citizens were called upon
to participate in the man hunt and New Orleans was soon the scene of
terrible excitement. Officers were present everywhere, and colored men
were arrested on all sides upon the pretext that they were impertinent and
"game niggers." An instance is mentioned in the _Times-Democrat_ of the
twenty-fifth and shows the treatment which unoffending colored men
received at the hands of some of the officers. This instance shows
Corporal Trenchard, who displayed such remarkable bravery on Monday night
in dodging Charles's revolver, in his true light. It shows how brave a
white man is when he has a gun attacking a Negro who is a helpless
prisoner. The account is as follows:

  The police made some arrests in the neighborhood of the killing of the
  two officers. Mobs of young darkies gathered everywhere. These Negroes
  talked and joked about the affair, and many of them were for starting a
  race war on the spot. It was not until several of these little gangs
  amalgamated and started demonstrations that the police commenced to
  act. Nearly a dozen arrests were made within an hour, and everybody in
  the vicinity was in a tremor of excitement.

  It was about 1 o'clock that the Negroes on Fourth Street became very
  noisy, and George Meyers, who lives on Sixth Street, near Rampart,
  appeared to be one of the prime movers in a little riot that was rapidly
  developing. Policeman Exnicios and Sheridan placed him under arrest, and
  owing to the fact that the patrol wagon had just left with a number of
  prisoners, they walked him toward St. Charles Avenue in order to get a
  conveyance to take him to the Sixth Precinct station.

  A huge crowd of Negroes followed the officers and their prisoners.
  Between Dryades and Baronne, on Sixth, Corporal Trenchard met the trio.
  He had his pistol in his hand and he came on them running. The Negroes
  in the wake of the officers, and prisoner took to flight immediately.
  Some disappeared through gates and some over fences and into yards, for
  Trenchard, visibly excited, was waving his revolver in the air and was
  threatening to shoot. He joined the officers in their walk toward St.
  Charles Street, and the way he acted led the white people who were
  witnessing the affair to believe that his prisoner was the wanted Negro.
  At every step he would punch him or hit him with the barrel of his
  pistol, and the onlookers cried, "Lynch him!" "Kill him!" and other
  expressions until the spectators were thoroughly wrought up. At St.
  Charles Street Trenchard desisted, and, calling an empty ice wagon,
  threw the Negro into the body of the vehicle and ordered Officer
  Exnicios to take him to the Sixth Precinct station.

  The ride to the station was a wild one. Exnicios had all he could do to
  watch his prisoner. A gang climbed into the wagon and administered a
  terrible thrashing to the black en route. It took a half hour to reach
  the police station, for the mule that was drawing the wagon was not
  overly fast. When the station was reached a mob of nearly 200 howling
  white youths was awaiting it. The noise they made was something
  terrible. Meyers was howling for mercy before he reached the ground. The
  mob dragged him from the wagon, the officer with him. Then began a
  torrent of abuse for the unfortunate prisoner.

  The station door was but thirty feet away, but it took Exnicios nearly
  five minutes to fight his way through the mob to the door. There were no
  other officers present, and the station seemed to be deserted. Neither
  the doorman nor the clerk paid any attention to the noise on the
  outside. As the result, the maddened crowd wrought their vengeance on
  the Negro. He was punched, kicked, bruised and torn. The clothes were
  ripped from his back, while his face after that few minutes was
  unrecognizable.

This was the treatment accorded and permitted to a helpless prisoner
because he was black. All day Wednesday the man hunt continued. The
excitement caused by the deaths of Day and Lamb became intense. The
officers of the law knew they were trailing a man whose aim was deadly and
whose courage they had never seen surpassed. Commenting upon the
marksmanship of the man which the paper styled a fiend, the
_Times-Democrat_ of Wednesday said:

  One of the extraordinary features of the tragedy was the marksmanship
  displayed by the Negro desperado. His aim was deadly and his coolness
  must have been something phenomenal. The two shots that killed Captain
  Day and Patrolman Lamb struck their victims in the head, a circumstance
  remarkable enough in itself, considering the suddenness and fury of the
  onslaught and the darkness that reigned in the alley way.

  Later on Charles fired at Corporal Perrier, who was standing at least
  seventy-five yards away. The murderer appeared at the gate, took
  lightning aim along the side of the house, and sent a bullet whizzing
  past the officer's ear. It was a close shave, and a few inches'
  deflection would no doubt have added a fourth victim to the list.

  At the time of the affray there is good reason to believe that Charles
  was seriously wounded, and at any event he had lost quantities of blood.
  His situation was as critical as it is possible to imagine, yet he shot
  like an expert in a target range. The circumstance shows the desperate
  character of the fiend, and his terrible dexterity with weapons makes
  him one of the most formidable monsters that has ever been loose upon
  the community.

Wednesday New Orleans was in the hands of a mob. Charles, still sought for
and still defending himself, had killed four policemen, and everybody knew
that he intended to die fighting. Unable to vent its vindictiveness and
bloodthirsty vengeance upon Charles, the mob turned its attention to other
colored men who happened to get in the path of its fury. Even colored
women, as has happened many times before, were assaulted and beaten and
killed by the brutal hoodlums who thronged the streets. The reign of
absolute lawlessness began about 8 o'clock Wednesday night. The mob
gathered near the Lee statue and was soon making its way to the place
where the officers had been shot by Charles. Describing the mob, the
_Times-Democrat_ of Thursday morning says:

  The gathering in the square, which numbered about 700, eventually became
  in a measure quiet, and a large, lean individual, in poor attire and
  with unshaven face, leaped upon a box that had been brought for the
  purpose, and in a voice that under no circumstances could be heard at a
  very great distance, shouted: "Gentlemen, I am the Mayor of Kenner." He
  did not get a chance for some minutes to further declare himself, for
  the voice of the rabble swung over his like a huge wave over a sinking
  craft. He stood there, however, wildly waving his arms and demanded a
  hearing, which was given him when the uneasiness of the mob was quieted
  for a moment or so.

  "I am from Kenner, gentlemen, and I have come down to New Orleans
  tonight to assist you in teaching the blacks a lesson. I have killed a
  Negro before, and in revenge of the wrong wrought upon you and yours, I
  am willing to kill again. The only way that you can teach these Niggers
  a lesson and put them in their place is to go out and lynch a few of
  them as an object lesson. String up a few of them, and the others will
  trouble you no more. That is the only thing to do--kill them, string
  them up, lynch them! I will lead you, if you will but follow. On to the
  Parish Prison and lynch Pierce!"

  They bore down on the Parish Prison like an avalanche, but the avalanche
  split harmlessly on the blank walls of the jail, and Remy Klock sent out
  a brief message: "You can't have Pierce, and you can't get in." Up to
  that time the mob had had no opposition, but Klock's answer chilled them
  considerably. There was no deep-seated desperation in the crowd after
  all, only, that wild lawlessness which leads to deeds of cruelty, but
  not to stubborn battle. Around the corner from the prison is a row of
  pawn and second-hand shops, and to these the mob took like the ducks to
  the proverbial mill-pond, and the devastation they wrought upon Mr.
  Fink's establishment was beautiful in its line.

  Everything from breast pins to horse pistols went into the pockets of
  the crowd, and in the melee a man was shot down, while just around the
  corner somebody planted a long knife in the body of a little newsboy for
  no reason as yet shown. Every now and then a Negro would be flushed
  somewhere in the outskirts of the crowd and left beaten to a pulp. Just
  how many were roughly handled will never be known, but the unlucky
  thirteen had been severely beaten and maltreated up to a late hour, a
  number of those being in the Charity Hospital under the bandages and
  courtplaster of the doctors.

The first colored man to meet death at the hands of the mob was a
passenger on a street car. The mob had broken itself into fragments after
its disappointment at the jail, each fragment looking for a Negro to
kill. The bloodthirsty cruelty of one crowd is thus described by the
_Times-Democrat_:

  "We will get a Nigger down here, you bet!" was the yelling boast that
  went up from a thousand throats, and for the first time the march of the
  mob was directed toward the downtown sections. The words of the rioters
  were prophetic, for just as Canal Street was reached a car on the
  Villere line came along.

  "Stop that car!" cried half a hundred men. The advance guard, heeding
  the injunction, rushed up to the slowly moving car, and several, seizing
  the trolley, jerked it down.

  "Here's a Nigro!" said half a dozen men who sprang upon the car.

  The car was full of passengers at the time, among them several women.
  When the trolley was pulled down and the car thrown in total darkness,
  the latter began to scream, and for a moment or so it looked as if the
  life of every person in the car was in peril, for some of the crowd with
  demoniacal yells of "There he goes!" began to fire their weapons
  indiscriminately. The passengers in the car hastily jumped to the ground
  and joined the crowd, as it was evidently the safest place to be.

  "Where's that Nigger?" was the query passed along the line, and with
  that the search began in earnest. The Negro, after jumping off the car,
  lost himself for a few moments in the crowd, but after a brief search he
  was again located. The slight delay seemed, if possible, only to whet
  the desire of the bloodthirsty crowd, for the reappearance of the Negro
  was the signal for a chorus of screams and pistol shots directed at the
  fugitive. With the speed of a deer, the man ran straight from the corner
  of Canal and Villere to Customhouse Street. The pursuers, closely
  following, kept up a running fire, but notwithstanding the fact that
  they were right at the Negro's heels their aim was poor and their
  bullets went wide of the mark.

  The Negro, on reaching Customhouse Street, darted from the sidewalk out
  into the middle of the street. This was the worst maneuver that he could
  have made, as it brought him directly under the light from an arc lamp,
  located on a nearby corner. When the Negro came plainly in view of the
  foremost of the closely following mob they directed a volley at him.
  Half a dozen pistols flashed simultaneously, and one of the bullets
  evidently found its mark, for the Negro stopped short, threw up his
  hands, wavered for a moment, and then started to run again. This stop,
  slight as it was, proved fatal to the Negro's chances, for he had not
  gotten twenty steps farther when several of the men in advance of the
  others reached his side. A burly fellow, grabbing him with one hand,
  dealt him a terrible blow on the head with the other. The wounded man
  sank to the ground. The crowd pressed around him and began to beat him
  and stamp him. The men in the rear pressed forward and those beating the
  man were shoved forward. The half-dead Negro, when he was freed from his
  assailants, crawled over to the gutter. The men behind, however, stopped
  pushing when those in front yelled, "We've got him," and then it was
  that the attack on the bleeding Negro was resumed. A vicious kick
  directed at the Negro's head sent him into the gutter, and for a moment
  the body sank from view beneath the muddy, slimy water. "Pull him out;
  don't let him drown," was the cry, and instantly several of the men
  around the half-drowned Negro bent down and drew the body out. Twisting
  the body around they drew the head and shoulders up on the street, while
  from the waist down the Negro's body remained under the water. As soon
  as the crowd saw that the Negro was still alive they again began to beat
  and kick him. Every few moments they would stop and striking matches
  look into the man's face to see if he still lived. To better see if he
  was dead they would stick lighted matches to his eyes. Finally,
  believing he was dead they left him and started out to look for other
  Negroes. Just about this time some one yelled, "He ain't dead," and the
  men came back and renewed the attack. While the men were beating and
  pounding the prostrate form with stones and sticks a man in the crowd
  ran up, and crying, "I'll fix the d--- Negro," poked the muzzle of a
  pistol almost against the body and fired. This shot must have ended the
  man's life, for he lay like a stone, and realizing that they were
  wasting energy in further attacks, the men left their victim lying in
  the street.

The same paper, on the same day, July 26, describes the brutal butchery of
an aged colored man early in the morning:

  Baptiste Philo, a Negro, seventy-five years of age, was a victim of mob
  violence at Kerlerec and North Peters Streets about 2:30 o'clock this
  morning. The old man is employed about the French Market, and was on his
  way there when he was met by a crowd and desperately shot. The old man
  found his way to the Third Precinct police station, where it was found
  that he had received a ghastly wound in the abdomen. The ambulance was
  summoned and he was conveyed to the Charity Hospital. The students
  pronounced the wound fatal after a superficial examination.

Mob rule continued Thursday, its violence increasing every hour, until 2
p.m., when the climax seemed to be reached. The fact that colored men and
women had been made the victims of brutal mobs, chased through the
streets, killed upon the highways and butchered in their homes, did not
call the best element in New Orleans to active exertion in behalf of law
and order. The killing of a few Negroes more or less by irresponsible mobs
does not cut much figure in Louisiana. But when the reign of mob law
exerts a depressing influence upon the stock market and city securities
begin to show unsteady standing in money centers, then the strong arm of
the good white people of the South asserts itself and order is quickly
brought out of chaos.

It was so with New Orleans on that Thursday. The better element of the
white citizens began to realize that New Orleans in the hands of a mob
would not prove a promising investment for Eastern capital, so the better
element began to stir itself, not for the purpose of punishing the
brutality against the Negroes who had been beaten, or bringing to justice
the murderers of those who had been killed, but for the purpose of saving
the city's credit. The _Times-Democrat_, upon this phase of the situation
on Friday morning says:

  When it became known later in the day that State bonds had depreciated
  from a point to a point and a half on the New York market a new phase of
  seriousness was manifest to the business community. Thinking men
  realized that a continuance of unchecked disorder would strike a body
  blow to the credit of the city and in all probability would complicate
  the negotiation of the forthcoming improvement bonds. The bare thought
  that such a disaster might be brought about by a few irresponsible boys,
  tramps and ruffians, inflamed popular indignation to fever pitch. It was
  all that was needed to bring to the aid of the authorities the active
  personal cooperation of the entire better element.

With the financial credit of the city at stake, the good citizens rushed
to the rescue, and soon the Mayor was able to mobilize a posse of 1,000
willing men to assist the police in maintaining order, but rioting still
continued in different sections of the city. Colored men and women were
beaten, chased and shot whenever they made their appearance upon the
street. Late in the night a most despicable piece of villainy occurred on
Rousseau Street, where an aged colored woman was killed by the mob. The
_Times-Democrat_ thus describes, the murder:

  Hannah Mabry, an old Negress, was shot and desperately wounded shortly
  after midnight this morning while sleeping in her home at No. 1929
  Rousseau Street. It was the work of a mob, and was evidently well
  planned so far as escape was concerned, for the place was reached by
  police officers, and a squad of the volunteer police within a very short
  time after the reports of the shots, but not a prisoner was secured. The
  square was surrounded, but the mob had scattered in several directions,
  and, the darkness of the neighborhood aiding them, not one was taken.

  At the time the mob made the attack on the little house there were also
  in it David Mabry, the sixty-two-year-old husband of the wounded woman;
  her son, Harry Mabry; his wife, Fannie, and an infant child. The young
  couple with their babe could not be found after the whole affair was
  over, and they either escaped or were hustled off by the mob. A careful
  search of the whole neighborhood was made, but no trace of them could be
  found.

  The little place occupied by the Mabry family is an old cottage on the
  swamp side of Rousseau Street. It is furnished with slat shutters to
  both doors and windows. These shutters had been pulled off by the mob
  and the volleys fired through the glass doors. The younger Mabrys,
  father, mother and child, were asleep in the first room at the time.
  Hannah Mabry and her old husband were sleeping in the next room. The old
  couple occupied the same bed, and it is miraculous that the old man did
  not share the fate of his spouse.

  Officer Bitterwolf, who was one of the first on the scene, said that he
  was about a block and a half away with Officers Fordyce and Sweeney.
  There were about twenty shots fired, and the trio raced to the cottage.
  They saw twenty or thirty men running down Rousseau Street. Chase was
  given and the crowd turned toward the river and scattered into several
  vacant lots in the neighborhood.

  The volunteer police stationed at the Sixth Precinct had about five
  blocks to run before they arrived. They also moved on the reports of the
  firing, and in a remarkably short time the square was surrounded, but no
  one could be taken. As they ran to the scene they were assailed on every
  hand with vile epithets and the accusation of "Nigger lovers."

  Rousseau Street, where the cottage is situated, is a particularly dark
  spot, and no doubt the members of the mob were well acquainted with the
  neighborhood, for the officers said that they seemed to sink into the
  earth, so completely and quickly did they disappear after they had
  completed their work, which was complete with the firing of the volley.

  Hannah Mabry was taken to the Charity Hospital in the ambulance, where
  it was found on examination that she had been shot through the right
  lung, and that the wound was a particularly serious one.

  Her old husband was found in the little wrecked home well nigh
  distracted with fear and grief. It was he who informed the police that
  at the time of the assault the younger Mabrys occupied the front room.
  As he ran about the little home as well as his feeble condition would
  permit he severely lacerated his feet on the glass broken from the
  windows and door. He was escorted to the Sixth Precinct station, where
  he was properly cared for. He could not realize why his little family
  had been so murderously attacked, and was inconsolable when his wife was
  driven off in the ambulance piteously moaning in her pain.

  The search for the perpetrators of the outrage was thorough, but both
  police and armed force of citizens had only their own efforts to rely
  on. The residents of the neighborhood were aroused by the firing, but
  they would give no help in the search and did not appear in the least
  concerned over the affair. Groups were on almost every doorstep, and
  some of them even jeered in a quiet way at the men who were voluntarily
  attempting to capture the members of the mob. Absolutely no information
  could be had from any of them, and the whole affair had the appearance
  of being the work of roughs who either lived in the vicinity, or their
  friends.


+DEATH OF CHARLES+

Friday witnessed the final act in the bloody drama begun by the three
police officers, Aucoin, Mora and Cantrelle. Betrayed into the hands of
the police, Charles, who had already sent two of his would-be murderers to
their death, made a last stand in a small building, 1210 Saratoga Street,
and, still defying his pursuers, fought a mob of twenty thousand people,
single-handed and alone, killing three more men, mortally wounding two
more and seriously wounding nine others. Unable to get to him in his
stronghold, the besiegers set fire to his house of refuge. While the
building was burning Charles was shooting, and every crack of his
death-dealing rifle added another victim to the price which he had placed
upon his own life. Finally, when fire and smoke became too much for flesh
and blood to stand, the long sought for fugitive appeared in the door,
rifle in hand, to charge the countless guns that were drawn upon him.
With a courage which was indescribable, he raised his gun to fire again,
but this time it failed, for a hundred shots riddled his body, and he fell
dead face fronting to the mob. This last scene in the terrible drama is
thus described in the _Times-Democrat_ of July 26:

  Early yesterday afternoon, at 3 o'clock or thereabouts, Police Sergeant
  Gabriel Porteus was instructed by Chief Gaster to go to a house at No.
  1210 Saratoga Street, and search it for the fugitive murderer, Robert
  Charles. A private "tip" had been received at the headquarters that the
  fiend was hiding somewhere on the premises.

  Sergeant Porteus took with him Corporal John R. Lally and Officers
  Zeigel and Essey. The house to which they were directed is a small,
  double frame cottage, standing flush with Saratoga Street, near the
  corner of Clio. It has two street entrances and two rooms on each side,
  one in front and one in the rear. It belongs to the type of cheap little
  dwellings commonly tenanted by Negroes.

  Sergeant Porteus left Ziegel and Essey to guard the outside and went
  with Corporal Lally to the rear house, where he found Jackson and his
  wife in the large room on the left. What immediately ensued is only
  known by the Negroes. They say the sergeant began to question them about
  their lodgers and finally asked them whether they knew anything about
  Robert Charles. They strenuously denied all knowledge of his
  whereabouts.

  The Negroes lied. At that very moment the hunted and desperate murderer
  lay concealed not a dozen feet away. Near the rear, left-hand corner of
  the room is a closet or pantry, about three feet deep, and perhaps eight
  feet long. The door was open and Charles was crouching, Winchester in
  hand, in the dark further end.

  Near the closet door was a bucket of water, and Jackson says that
  Sergeant Porteous walked toward it to get a drink. At the next moment a
  shot rang out and the brave officer fell dead. Lally was shot directly
  afterward. Exactly how and where will never be known, but the
  probabilities are that the black fiend sent a bullet into him before he
  recovered from his surprise at the sudden onslaught. Then the murderer
  dashed out of the back door and disappeared.

  The neighborhood was already agog with the tragic events of the two
  preceding days, and the sound of the shots was a signal for wild and
  instant excitement. In a few moments a crowd had gathered and people
  were pouring in by the hundred from every point of the compass. Jackson
  and his wife had fled and at first nobody knew what had happened, but
  the surmise that Charles had recommenced his bloody work was on every
  tongue and soon some of the bolder found their way to the house in the
  rear. There the bleeding forms of the two policemen told the story.

  Lally was still breathing, and a priest was sent for to administer the
  last rites. Father Fitzgerald responded, and while he was bending over
  the dying man the outside throng was rushing wildly through the
  surrounding yards and passageways searching for the murderer. "Where is
  he?" "What has become of him?" were the questions on every lip.

  Suddenly the answer came in a shot from the room directly overhead. It
  was fired through a window facing Saratoga Street, and the bullet struck
  down a young man named Alfred J. Bloomfield, who was standing in the
  narrow passage-way between the two houses. He fell on his knees and a
  second bullet stretched him dead.

  When he fled from the closet Charles took refuge in the upper story of
  the house. There are four windows on that floor, two facing toward
  Saratoga Street and two toward Rampart. The murderer kicked several
  breaches in the frail central partition, so he could rush from side to
  side, and like a trapped beast, prepared to make his last stand.

  Nobody had dreamed that he was still in the house, and when Bloomfield
  was shot there was a headlong stampede. It was some minutes before the
  exact situation was understood. Then rifles and pistols began to speak,
  and a hail of bullets poured against the blind frontage of the old
  house. Every one hunted some coign of vantage, and many climbed to
  adjacent roofs. Soon the glass of the four upper windows was shattered
  by flying lead. The fusillade sounded like a battle, and the excitement
  upon the streets was indescribable.

  Throughout all this hideous uproar Charles seems to have retained a
  certain diabolical coolness. He kept himself mostly out of sight, but
  now and then he thrust the gleaming barrel of his rifle through one of
  the shattered window panes and fired at his besiegers. He worked the
  weapon with incredible rapidity, discharging from three to five
  cartridges each time before leaping back to a place of safety. These
  replies came from all four windows indiscriminately, and showed that he
  was keeping a close watch in every direction. His wonderful marksmanship
  never failed him for a moment, and when he missed it was always by the
  narrowest margin only.

  On the Rampart Street side of the house there are several sheds,
  commanding an excellent range of the upper story. Detective Littleton,
  Andrew Van Kuren of the Workhouse force and several others climbed upon
  one of these and opened fire on the upper windows, shooting whenever
  they could catch a glimpse of the assassin. Charles responded with his
  rifle, and presently Van Kuren climbed down to find a better position.
  He was crossing the end of the shed when he was killed.

  Another of Charles's bullets found its billet in the body of Frank
  Evans, an ex-member of the police force. He was on the Rampart Street
  side firing whenever he had an opportunity. Officer J.W. Bofill and A.S.
  Leclerc were also wounded in the fusillade.

  While the events thus briefly outlined were transpiring time was a-wing,
  and the cooler headed in the crowd began to realize that some quick and
  desperate expedient must be adopted to insure the capture of the fiend
  and to avert what might be a still greater tragedy than any yet enacted.
  For nearly two hours the desperate monster had held his besiegers at
  bay, darkness would soon be at hand and no one could predict what might
  occur if he made a dash for liberty in the dark.

  At this critical juncture it was suggested that the house be fired. The
  plan came as an inspiration, and was adopted as the only solution of the
  situation. The wretched old rookery counted for nothing against the
  possible continued sacrifice of human life, and steps were immediately
  taken to apply the torch. The fire department had been summoned to the
  scene soon after the shooting began; its officers were warned to be
  ready to prevent a spread of the conflagration, and several men rushed
  into the lower right-hand room and started a blaze in one corner.

  They first fired an old mattress, and soon smoke was pouring out in
  dense volumes. It filled the interior of the ramshackle structure, and
  it was evident that the upper story would soon become untenable. An
  interval of tense excitement followed, and all eyes were strained for a
  glimpse of the murderer when he emerged.

  Then came the thrilling climax. Smoked out of his den, the desperate
  fiend descended the stairs and entered the lower room. Some say he
  dashed into the yard, glaring around vainly for some avenue of escape;
  but, however that may be, he was soon a few moments later moving about
  behind the lower windows. A dozen shots were sent through the wall in
  the hope of reaching him, but he escaped unscathed. Then suddenly the
  door on the right was flung open and he dashed out. With head lowered
  and rifle raised ready to fire on the instant, Charles dashed straight
  for the rear door of the front cottage. To reach it he had to traverse a
  little walk shaded by a vineclad arbor. In the back room, with a cocked
  revolver in his hand, was Dr. C.A. Noiret, a young medical student, who
  was aiding the citizens' posse. As he sprang through the door Charles
  fired a shot, and the bullet whizzed past the doctor's head. Before it
  could be repeated Noiret's pistol cracked and the murderer reeled,
  turned half around and fell on his back. The doctor sent another ball
  into his body as he struck the floor, and half a dozen men, swarming
  into the room from the front, riddled the corpse with bullets.

  Private Adolph Anderson of the Connell Rifles was the first man to
  announce the death of the wretch. He rushed to the street door, shouted
  the news to the crowd, and a moment later the bleeding body was dragged
  to the pavement and made the target of a score of pistols. It was shot,
  kicked and beaten almost out of semblance to humanity....

  The limp dead body was dropped at the edge of the sidewalk and from
  there dragged to the muddy roadway by half a hundred hands. There in the
  road more shots were fired into the body. Corporal Trenchard, a
  brother-in-law of Porteus, led the shooting into the inanimate clay.
  With each shot there was a cheer for the work that had been done and
  curses and imprecations on the inanimate mass of riddled flesh that was
  once Robert Charles.

  Cries of "Burn him! Burn him!" were heard from Clio Street all the way
  to Erato Street, and it was with difficulty that the crowd was
  restrained from totally destroying the wretched dead body. Some of those
  who agitated burning even secured a large vessel of kerosene, which had
  previously been brought to the scene for the purpose of firing Charles's
  refuge, and for a time it looked as though this vengeance might be
  wreaked on the body. The officers, however, restrained this move,
  although they were powerless to prevent the stamping and kicking of the
  body by the enraged crowd.

  After the infuriated citizens had vented their spleen on the body of the
  dead Negro it was loaded into the patrol wagon. The police raised the
  body of the heavy black from the ground and literally chucked it into
  the space on the floor of the wagon between the seats. They threw it
  with a curse hissed more than uttered and born of the bitterness which
  was rankling in their breasts at the thought of Charles having taken so
  wantonly the lives of four of the best of their fellow-officers.

  When the murderer's body landed in the wagon it fell in such a position
  that the hideously mutilated head, kicked, stamped and crushed, hung
  over the end.

  As the wagon moved off, the followers, who were protesting against its
  being carried off, declaring that it should be burned, poked and struck
  it with sticks, beating it into such a condition that it was utterly
  impossible to tell what the man ever looked like.

  As the patrol wagon rushed through the rough street, jerking and
  swaying from one side of the thoroughfare to the other, the gory,
  mud-smeared head swayed and swung and jerked about in a sickening
  manner, the dark blood dripping on the steps and spattering the body of
  the wagon and the trousers of the policemen standing on the step.


+MOB BRUTALITY+

The brutality of the mob was further shown by the unspeakable cruelty with
which it beat, shot and stabbed to death an unoffending colored man, name
unknown, who happened to be walking on the street with no thought that he
would be set upon and killed simply because he was a colored man. The
_Times-Democrat_'s description of the outrage is as follows:

  While the fight between the Negro desperado and the citizens was in
  progress yesterday afternoon at Clio and Saratoga Streets another
  tragedy was being enacted downtown in the French quarter, but it was a
  very one-sided affair. The object of the white man's wrath was, of
  course, a Negro, but, unlike Charles, he showed no fight, but tried to
  escape from the furious mob which was pursuing him, and which finally
  put an end to his existence in a most cruel manner.

  The Negro, whom no one seemed to know--at any rate no one could be found
  in the vicinity of the killing who could tell who he was--was walking
  along the levee, as near as could be learned, when he was attacked by a
  number of white longshoremen or screwmen. For what reason, if there was
  any reason other than the fact that he was a Negro, could not be
  learned, and immediately they pounced upon him he broke ground and
  started on a desperate run for his life.

  The hunted Negro started off the levee toward the French Vegetable
  Market, changed his course out the sidewalk toward Gallatin Street. The
  angry, yelling mob was close at his heels, and increasing steadily as
  each block was traversed. At Gallatin Street he turned up that
  thoroughfare, doubled back into North Peters Street and ran into the
  rear of No. 1216 of that street, which is occupied by Chris Reuter as a
  commission store and residence.

  He rushed frantically through the place and out on to the gallery on the
  Gallatin Street side. From this gallery he jumped to the street and fell
  flat on his back on the sidewalk. Springing to his feet as soon as
  possible, with a leaden, hail fired by the angry mob whistling about
  him, he turned to his merciless pursuers in an appealing way, and,
  throwing up one hand, told them not to shoot any more, that they could
  take him as he was.

  But the hail of lead continued, and the unfortunate Negro finally
  dropped to the sidewalk, mortally wounded. The mob then rushed upon him,
  still continuing the fusillade, and upon reaching his body a number of
  Italians, who had joined the howling mob, reached down and stabbed him
  in the back and buttock with big knives. Others fired shots into his
  head until his teeth were shot out, three shots having been fired into
  his mouth. There were bullet wounds all over his body.

  Others who witnessed the affair declared that the man was fired at as he
  was running up the stairs leading to the living apartments above the
  store, and that after jumping to the sidewalk and being knocked down by
  a bullet he jumped up and ran across the street, then ran back and tried
  to get back into the commission store. The Italians, it is said, were
  all drunk, and had been shooting firecrackers. Tiring of this, they
  began shooting at Negroes, and when the unfortunate man who was killed
  ran by they joined in the chase.

  No one was arrested for the shooting, the neighborhood having been
  deserted by the police, who were sent up to the place where Charles was
  fighting so desperately. No one could or would give the names of any of
  those who had participated in the chase and the killing, nor could any
  one be found who knew who the Negro was. The patrol wagon was called and
  the terribly mutilated body sent to the morgue and the coroner notified.

  The murdered Negro was copper colored, about 5 feet 11 inches in height,
  about 35 years of age, and was dressed in blue overalls and a brown
  slouch hat. At 10:30 o'clock the vicinity of the French Market was very
  quiet. Squads of special officers were patrolling the neighborhood, and
  there did not seem to be any prospects of disorder.

During the entire time the mob held the city in its hands and went about
holding up street cars and searching them, taking from them colored men to
assault, shoot and kill, chasing colored men upon the public square,
through alleys and into houses of anybody who would take them in, breaking
into the homes of defenseless colored men and women and beating aged and
decrepit men and women to death, the police and the legally constituted
authorities showed plainly where their sympathies were, for in no case
reported through the daily papers does there appear the arrest, trial and
conviction of one of the mob for any of the brutalities which occurred.
The ringleaders of the mob were at no time disguised. Men were chased,
beaten and killed by white brutes, who boasted of their crimes, and the
murderers still walk the streets of New Orleans, well known and absolutely
exempt from prosecution. Not only were they exempt from prosecution by the
police while the town was in the hands of the mob, but even now that law
and order is supposed to resume control, these men, well known, are not
now, nor ever will be, called to account for the unspeakable brutalities
of that terrible week. On the other hand, the colored men who were beaten
by the police and dragged into the station for purposes of intimidation,
were quickly called up before the courts and fined or sent to jail upon
the statement of the police. Instances of Louisiana justice as it is
dispensed in New Orleans are here quoted from the _Times-Democrat_ of July
26:

  +Justice Dealt Out to Folk Who Talked Too Much+

  All the Negroes and whites who were arrested in the vicinity of
  Tuesday's tragedy had a hard time before Recorder Hughes yesterday. Lee
  Jackson was the first prisoner, and the evidence established that he
  made his way to the vicinity of the crime and told his Negro friends
  that he thought a good many more policemen ought to be killed. Jackson
  said he was drunk when he made the remark. He was fined $25 or thirty
  days.

  John Kennedy was found wandering about the street Tuesday night with an
  open razor in his hand, and he was given $25 or thirty days.

  Edward McCarthy, a white man, who arrived only four days since from New
  York, went to the scene of the excitement at the corner of Third and
  Rampart Streets, and told the Negroes that they were as good as any
  white man. This remark was made by McCarthy, as another white man said
  the Negroes should be lynched. McCarthy told the recorder that he
  considered a Negro as good as a white in body and soul. He was fined $25
  or thirty days.

  James Martin, Simon Montegut, Eddie McCall, Alex Washington and Henry
  Turner were up for failing to move on. Martin proved that he was at the
  scene to assist the police and was discharged. Montegut, being a
  cripple, was also released, but the others were fined $25 or thirty days
  each.

  Eddie Williams for refusing to move on was given $25 or thirty days.

  Matilda Gamble was arrested by the police for saying that two officers
  were killed and it was a pity more were not shot. She was given $25 or
  thirty days.


+INSOLENT BLACKS+

"Recorder Hughes received Negroes in the first recorder's office yesterday
morning in a way that they will remember for a long time, and all of them
were before the magistrate for having caused trouble through incendiary
remarks concerning the death of Captain Day and Patrolman Lamb."

"Lee Jackson was before the recorder and was fined $25 or thirty days. He
was lippy around where the trouble happened Tuesday morning, and some
white men punched him good and hard and the police took him. Then the
recorder gave him a dose, and now he is in the parish prison."

"John Kennedy was another black who got into trouble. He said that the
shooting of the police by Charles was a good thing, and for this he was
pounded. Patrolman Lorenzo got him and saved him from being lynched, for
the black had an open razor. He was fined $25 or thirty days."

"Edward McCarthy, a white man, mixed up with the crowd, and an expression
of sympathy nearly cost him his head, for some whites about started for
him, administering licks and blows with fists and umbrellas. The recorder
fined him $25 or thirty days. He is from New York."

"Then James Martin, a white man, and Simon Montegut, Eddie Call, Henry
Turner and Alex Washington were before the magistrate for having failed to
move on when the police ordered them from the square where the bluecoats
were Tuesday, waiting in the hope of catching Charles. All save Martin and
Montegut were fined."

"Eddie Williams, a little Negro who was extremely fresh with the police,
was fined $10 or ten days."


+SHOCKING BRUTALITY+

The whole city was at the mercy of the mob and the display of brutality
was a disgrace to civilization. One instance is described in the
_Picayune_ as follows:

  A smaller party detached itself from the mob at Washington and Rampart
  Streets, and started down the latter thoroughfare. One of the foremost
  spied a Negro, and immediately there was a rush for the unfortunate
  black man. With the sticks they had torn from fences on the line of
  march the young outlaws attacked the black and clubbed him unmercifully,
  acting more like demons than human beings. After being severely beaten
  over the head, the Negro started to run with the whole gang at his
  heels. Several revolvers were brought into play and pumped their lead at
  the refugee. The Negro made rapid progress and took refuge behind the
  blinds of a little cottage in Rampart Street, but he had been seen, and
  the mob hauled him from his hiding place and again commenced beating
  him. There were more this time, some twenty or thirty, all armed with
  sticks and heavy clubs, and under their incessant blows the Negro could
  not last long. He begged for mercy, and his cries were most pitiful, but
  a mob has no heart, and his cries were only answered with more blows.

  "For God's sake, boss, I ain't done nothin'. Don't kill me. I swear I
  ain't done nothin'."

  The white brutes turned

+  A DEAF EAR TO THE PITYING CRIES+

  of the black wretch and the drubbing continued. The cries subsided into
  moans, and soon the black swooned away into unconsciousness. Still not
  content with their heartless work, they pulled the Negro out and kicked
  him into the gutter. For the time those who had beaten the black seemed
  satisfied and left him groaning in the gutter, but others came up, and,
  regretting that they had not had a hand in the affair, they determined
  to evidence their bravery to their fellows and beat the man while he was
  in the gutter, hurling rocks and stones at his black form. One
  thoughtless white brute, worse even than the black slayer of the police
  officers, thought to make himself a hero in the eyes of his fellows and
  fired his revolver repeatedly into the helpless wretch. It was dark and
  the fellow probably aimed carelessly. After firing three or four shots
  he also left without knowing what extent of injury he inflicted on the
  black wretch who was left lying in the gutter.



+MURDER ON THE LEVEE+


One part of the crowd made a raid on the tenderloin district, hoping to
find there some belated Negro for a sacrifice. They were urged on by the
white prostitutes, who applauded their murderous mission. Says an account:

  The red light district was all excitement. Women--that is, the white
  women--were out on their stoops and peeping over their galleries and
  through their windows and doors, shouting to the crowd to go on with
  their work, and kill Negroes for them.

  "Our best wishes, boys," they encouraged; and the mob answered with
  shouts, and whenever a Negro house was sighted a bombardment was started
  on the doors and windows.

No colored men were found on the streets until the mob reached Custom
House Place and Villiers Streets. Here a victim was found and brutally put
to death. The _Picayune_ description is as follows:

  Some stragglers had run a Negro into a car at the corner of Bienville
  and Villere Streets. He was seeking refuge in the conveyance, and he
  believed that the car would not be stopped and could speed along. But
  the mob determined to stop the car, and ordered the motorman to halt. He
  put on his brake. Some white men were in the car.

  "Get out, fellows," shouted several of the mob.

  "All whites fall out," was the second cry, and the poor Negro understood
  that it was meant that he should stay in the car.

  He wanted to save his life. The poor fellow crawled under the seats. But
  some one in the crowd saw him and yelled that he was hiding. Two or
  three men climbed through the windows with their pistols; others jumped
  over the motorman's board, and dozens tumbled into the rear of the car.
  Big, strong hands got the Negro by the shirt. He was dragged out of the
  conveyance, and was pushed to the street. Some fellow ran up and struck
  him with a club. The blow was heavy, but it did not fell him, and the
  Negro ran toward Canal Street, stealing along the wall of the Tulane
  Medical Building. Fifty men ran after him, caught the poor fellow and
  hurried him back into the crowd. Fists were aimed at him, then clubs
  went upon his shoulders, and finally the black plunged into the gutter.

  A gun was fired, and the Negro, who had just gotten to his feet, dropped
  again. He tried to get up, but a volley was sent after him, and in a
  little while he was dead.

  The crowd looked on at the terrible work. Then the lights in the houses
  of ill-fame began to light up again, and women peeped out of the blinds.
  The motorman was given the order to go on. The gong clanged and the
  conveyance sped out of the way. For half an hour the crowd held their
  place at the corner, then the patrol wagon came and the body was picked
  up and hurried to the morgue.

  Coroner Richard held an autopsy on the body of the Negro who was forced
  out of car 98 of the Villere line and shot down. It was found that he
  was wounded four times, the most serious wound being that which struck
  him in the right side, passing through the lungs, and causing
  hemorrhages, which brought about death.

  Nobody tried to identify the poor fellow and his name is unknown.


+A VICTIM IN THE MARKET+


Soon after the murder of the man on the street car many of the same mob
marched down to the market place. There they found a colored market man
named Louis Taylor, who had gone to begin his early morning's work. He was
at once set upon by the mob and killed. The _Picayune_ account says:

  Between 1 and 2 o'clock this morning a mob of several hundred men and
  boys, made up of participants in many of the earlier affairs, marched on
  the French Market. Louis Taylor, a Negro vegetable carrier, who is about
  thirty years of age, was sitting at the soda water stand. As soon as the
  mob saw him fire was opened and the Negro took to his heels. He ran
  directly into another section of the mob and any number of shots were
  fired at him. He fell, face down, on the floor of the market.

  The police in the neighborhood rallied hurriedly and found the victim of
  mob violence seemingly lifeless. Before they arrived the Negro had been
  beaten severely about the head and body. The ambulance was summoned and
  Taylor was carried to the charity hospital, where it was found that he
  had been shot through the abdomen and arm. The examination was a hurried
  one, but it sufficed to show that Taylor was mortally wounded.

  After shooting Taylor the members of the mob were pluming themselves on
  their exploit. "The Nigger was at the soda water stand and we commenced
  shooting him," said one of the rioters. "He put his hands up and ran,
  and we shot until he fell. I understand that he is still alive. If he
  is, he is a wonder. He was certainly shot enough to be killed."

  The members of the mob readily admitted that they had taken part in the
  assaults which marked the earlier part of the evening.

  "We were up on Jackson Avenue and killed a Nigger on Villere Street. We
  came down here, saw a nigger and killed him, too." This was the way they
  told the story.

  "Boys, we are out of ammunition," said someone.

  "Well, we will keep on like we are, and if we can't get some before
  morning, we will take it. We have got to keep this thing up, now we have
  started."

  This declaration was greeted by a chorus of applauding yells, and the
  crowd started up the levee. Half of the men in the crowd, and they were
  all of them young, were drunk.

  Taylor, when seen at the charity hospital, was suffering greatly, and
  presented a pitiable spectacle. His clothing was covered with blood, and
  his face was beaten almost into a pulp. He said that he had gone to the
  market to work and was quietly sitting down when the mob came and began
  to fire on him. He was not aware at first that the crowd was after him.
  When he saw its purpose he tried to run, but fell. He didn't know any of
  the men in the crowd. There is hardly a chance that Taylor will recover.

  The police told the crowd to move on, but no attempt was made to arrest
  anyone.


+A GRAY-HAIRED VICTIM+

The bloodthirsty barbarians, having tasted blood, continued their hunt and
soon ran across an old man of seventy-five years. His life had been spent
in hard work about the French market, and he was well known as an
unoffending, peaceable and industrious old man.

But that made no difference to the mob. He was a Negro, and with a
fiendishness that was worse than that of cannibals they beat his life out.
The report says:

  There was another gang of men parading the streets in the lower part of
  the city, looking for any stray Negro who might be on the streets. As
  they neared the corner of Dauphine and Kerlerec, a square below
  Esplanade Avenue, they came upon Baptiste Thilo, an aged Negro, who
  works in the French Market.

  Thilo for years has been employed by the butchers and fish merchants to
  carry baskets from the stalls to the wagons, and unload the wagons as
  they arrive in the morning. He was on his way to the market, when the
  mob came upon him. One of the gang struck the old Negro, and as he fell,
  another in the crowd, supposed to be a young fellow, fired a shot. The
  bullet entered the body just below the right nipple.

  As the Negro fell the crowd looked into his face and they discovered
  then that the victim was very old. The young man who did the shooting
  said: "Oh, he is an old Negro. I'm sorry that I shot him."

  This is all the old Negro received in the way of consolation.

  He was left where he fell, but later staggered to his feet and made his
  way to the third precinct station. There the police summoned the
  ambulance and the students pronounced the wound very dangerous. He was
  carried to the hospital as rapidly as possible.

  There was no arrest.

Just before daybreak the mob found another victim. He, too, was on his way
to market, driving a meat wagon. But little is told of his treatment,
nothing more than the following brief statement:

  At nearly 3 o'clock this morning a report was sent to the Third Precinct
  station that a Negro was lying on the sidewalk at the corner of Decatur
  and St. Philip. The man had been pulled off of a meat wagon and riddled
  with bullets.

  When the police arrived he was insensible and apparently dying. The
  ambulance students attended the Negro and pronounced the wounds fatal.

  There was nothing found which would lead to the discovery of his
  identity.


+FUN IN GRETNA+

If there are any persons so deluded as to think that human life in the
South is valued any more than the life of a brute, he will be speedily
undeceived by reading the accounts of unspeakable barbarism committed by
the mob in and around New Orleans. In no other civilized country in the
world, nay, more, in no land of barbarians would it be possible to
duplicate the scenes of brutality that are reported from New Orleans. In
the heat of blind fury one might conceive how a mad mob might beat and
kill a man taken red-handed in a brutal murder. But it is almost past
belief to read that civilized white people, men who boast of their
chivalry and blue blood, actually had fun in beating, chasing and shooting
men who had no possible connection with any crime.

But this actually happened in Gretna, a few miles from New Orleans. In its
description of the scenes of Tuesday night, the _Picayune_ mentions the
brutal chase of several colored men whom the mob sought to kill. In the
instances mentioned, the paper said:

  Gretna had its full share of excitement between 8 and 11 o'clock last
  night, in connection with a report that spread through the town that a
  Negro resembling the slayer of Police Captain Day, of New Orleans, had
  been seen on the outskirts of the place.

  It is true that a suspicious-looking Negro was observed by the residents
  of Madison and Amelia Streets lurking about the fences of that
  neighborhood just after dark, and shortly before 8 o'clock John Fist, a
  young white man, saw the Negro on Fourth Street. He followed the darkey
  a short distance, and, coming upon Robert Moore, who is known about town
  as the "black detective," Fist pointed the Negro out and Moore at once
  made a move toward the stranger. The latter observed Moore making in his
  direction, and, without a word, he sped in the direction of the Brooklyn
  pasture, Moore following and firing several shots at him. In a few
  minutes a half hundred white men, including Chief of Police Miller,
  Constable Dannenhauer, Patrolman Keegan and several special officers,
  all well-armed, joined in the chase, but in the darkness the Negro
  escaped.

  Just as the pursuing party reached town again, two of the residents of
  Lafayette Avenue, Peter Leson and Robert Henning, reported that they had
  just chased and shot at a Negro, who had been seen in the yard of the
  former's house. They were positive the Negro had not escaped from the
  square. Their report was enough to set the appetite of the crowd on
  edge, and the square was quickly surrounded, while several dozens of
  men, armed with lanterns and revolvers, made a search of every yard and
  under every house in the square. No Negro was found.

  The crowd of armed men was constantly swelling, and at 10 o'clock it had
  reached the proportions of a small army. At 10:30 o'clock an outbound
  freight train is due to pass through Gretna on the Texas and Pacific
  Road, and the crowd, believing that Captain Day's slayer might be aboard
  one of the cars attempting to leave the scene of his crime, resolved to
  inspect the train. As the train stopped at the Madison Street crossing
  the engineer was requested to pull very slowly through the town, in
  order that the trucks of the cars might be examined. There was a string
  of armed men on each side of the railroad track and in a few moments a
  Negro was espied riding between two cars. A half dozen weapons were
  pointed at him and he was ordered to come out. He sprang out with
  alacrity and was pounced upon almost before he reached the ground.
  Robert Moore grabbed him and pushed an ugly-looking Derringer under his
  nose and the Negro threw up both hands. Constable Dannenhauer and
  Patrolman Keegan took charge of him and hustled him off to jail, where
  he was locked up. The Negro does not at all resemble Robert Charles, but
  it was best for his sake that he was placed under lock and key. The
  crowd was not in a humor to let any Negro pass muster last night. The
  prisoner gave his name as Luke Wallace.

  But now came the real excitement. The train had slowed down almost to a
  standstill, in the very heart of town. Somebody shouted: "There he goes,
  on top of the train!" And sure enough, somebody was going. It was a
  Negro, too, and he was making a bee-line for the front end of the train.
  A veritable shower of bullets, shot and rifle balls greeted the flying
  form, but on it sped. The locomotive had stopped in the middle of the
  square between La voisier and Newton Streets, and the Negro, flying with
  the speed of the wind along the top of the cars, reached the first car
  of the train and jumped to the tender and then into the cab. As he did
  several white men standing at the locomotive made a rush into the cab.
  The Negro sprang swiftly out of the other side, on to the sidewalk. But
  there were several more men, and as he realized that he was rushing
  right into their arms he made a spring to leap over the fence of Mrs.
  Linden's home, on the wood side of the track. Before the Negro got to
  the top one white man had hold of his legs, while another rushed up,
  pistol in hand. The man who was holding the darkey's legs was jostled
  out of the way and the man with the pistol, standing directly beneath
  the Negro, sent two bullets at him.

  There was a wild scramble, and the vision of a fleeing form in the
  Linden yard, but that was the last seen of the black man. The yard was
  entered and searched, and neighboring yards were also searched, but not
  even the trace of blood was found. It is almost impossible to believe
  that the Negro was not wounded, for the man who fired at him held the
  pistol almost against the Negro's body.

  The shots brought out almost everybody--white--in town, and though there
  was nothing to show for the exciting work, except the arrest of the
  Negro, who doesn't answer the description of the man wanted, Gretna's
  male population had its little fan and felt amply repaid for all the
  trouble it was put to, and all the ammunition it wasted.


+BRUTALITY IN NEW ORLEANS+

Mob rule reigned supreme Wednesday, and the scenes that were enacted
challenge belief. How many colored men and women were abused and injured
is not known, for those who escaped were glad to make a place of refuge
and took no time to publish their troubles. The mob made no attempt to
find Charles; its only purpose was to pursue, beat and kill any colored
man or woman who happened to come in sight. Speaking editorially, the
_Picayune_ of Thursday, the twenty-sixth of July, said:


+ESCAPED WITH THEIR LIVES+

At the Charity Hospital Wednesday night more than a score of people were
treated for wounds received at the hands of the mob. Some were able to
tell of their mistreatment, and their recitals are briefly given in the
_Picayune_ as follows:

  Alex. Ruffin, who is quite seriously injured, is a Pullman car porter, a
  native of Chicago. He reached New Orleans at 9:20 o'clock last night,
  and after finishing his work, boarded a Henry Clay Avenue car to go to
  Delachaise Street, where he has a sick son.

  "I hadn't ridden any way," said he, "when I saw a lot of white folks.
  They were shouting to 'Get the Niggers.' I didn't know they were after
  every colored man they saw, and sat still. Two or three men jumped on
  the car and started at me. One of them hit me over the head with a
  slungshot, and they started to shooting at me. I jumped out of the car
  and ran, although I had done nothing. They shot me in the arm and in the
  leg. I would certainly have been killed had not some gentleman taken my
  part. If I had known New Orleans was so excited I would never have left
  my car."

  George Morris is the name of a Negro who was badly injured by a mob
  which went through the Poydras Market. Morris is employed as watchman
  there. He heard the noise of the passing crowd and looked out to see
  what the matter was. As soon as the mob saw him its members started
  after him.

  "One man hit me over the head with a club," said George, after his
  wounds had been dressed, "and somebody cut me in the back. I didn't
  hardly think what was the matter at first, but when I saw they were
  after me I ran for my life. I ran to the coffee stand, where I work, for
  protection, but they were right after me, and somebody shot me in the
  back. At last the police got me away from the crowd. Just before I was
  hit a friend of mine, who was in the crowd, said, 'You had better go
  home, Nigger; they're after your kind.' I didn't know then what he
  meant. I found out pretty quick."

  Morris is at the hospital. He is a perfect wreck, and while he will
  probably get well, he will have had a close call.

  Esther Fields is a Negro washerwoman who lives at South Claiborne and
  Toledano Streets. She was at home when she heard a big noise and went
  out to investigate. She ran into the arms of the mob, and was beaten
  into insensibility in less time than it takes to tell it. Esther is
  being treated at the charity hospital, and should be able to get about
  in a few days. The majority of her bruises are about the head.

  T.P. Sanders fell at the hands of the Jackson Avenue mob. He lives at
  1927 Jackson Avenue, and was sitting in front of his home when he saw
  the crowd marching out the street. He stayed to see what the excitement
  was all about, and was shot in the knee and thorax and horribly beaten
  about the head before the mob came to the conclusion that he had been
  done for, and passed on. The ambulance was called and he was picked up
  and carried to the charity hospital, where his wounds were dressed and
  pronounced serious.

  Oswald McMahon is nothing more than a boy. He was shot in the leg and
  afterward carried to the hospital. His injuries are very slight.

  Dan White is another charity hospital patient. He is a Negro roustabout
  and was sitting in the bar room at Poydras and Franklin Streets when a
  mob passed along and espied him. He was shot in the hand, and would have
  been roughly dealt with had some policeman not been luckily near and
  rescued him.

  In addition to the Negroes who suffered from the violence of the mob
  there were several patients treated at the hospital during the night who
  had been with the rioters and had been struck by stray bullets or
  injured in scuffles. None of this class were hurt to any extent. They
  got their wounds dressed and went out again.


+WAS CHARLES A DESPERADO?+

The press of the country has united in declaring that Robert Charles was a
desperado. As usual, when dealing with a negro, he is assumed to be guilty
because he is charged. Even the most conservative of journals refuse to
ask evidence to prove that the dead man was a criminal, and that his life
had been given over to lawbreaking. The minute that the news was flashed
across the country that he had shot a white man it was at once declared
that he was a fiend incarnate, and that when he was killed the community
would be ridden of a black-hearted desperado. The reporters of the New
Orleans papers, who were in the best position to trace the record of this
man's life, made every possible effort to find evidence to prove that he
was a villain unhung. With all the resources at their command, and
inspired by intense interest to paint him as black a villain as possible,
these reporters signally failed to disclose a single indictment which
charged Robert Charles with a crime. Because they failed to find any legal
evidence that Charles was a lawbreaker and desperado his accusers gave
full license to their imagination and distorted the facts that they had
obtained, in every way possible, to prove a course of criminality, which
the records absolutely refuse to show.

Charles had his first encounter with the police Monday night, in which he
was shot in the street duel which was begun by the police after Officer
Mora had beaten Charles three or four times over the head with his billy
in an attempt to make an illegal arrest. In defending himself against the
combined attack of two officers with a billy and their guns upon him,
Charles shot Officer Mora and escaped.

Early Tuesday morning Charles was traced to Dryades Street by officers who
were instructed to kill him on sight. There, again defending himself, he
shot and killed two officers. This, of course, in the eyes of the American
press, made him a desperado. The New Orleans press, in substantiating the
charges that he was a desperado, make statements which will be interesting
to examine.

In the first place the _New Orleans Times-Democrat_, of July 25, calls
Charles a "ravisher and a daredevil." It says that from all sources that
could be searched "the testimony was cumulative that the character of the
murderer, Robert Charles, is that of a daredevil and a fiend in human
form." Then in the same article it says:

  The belongings of Robert Charles which were found in his room were a
  complete index to the character of the man. Although the room and its
  contents were in a state of chaos on account of the frenzied search for
  clews by officers and citizens, an examination of his personal effects
  revealed the mental state of the murderer and the rancor in his heart
  toward the Caucasian race. Never was the adage, "A little learning is a
  dangerous thing," better exemplified than in the case of the negro who
  shot to death the two officers.

His room was searched, and the evidence upon which the charge that he was
a desperado consisted of pamphlets in support of Negro emigration to
Liberia. On his mantel-piece there was found a bullet mold and an outfit
for reloading cartridges. There were also two pistol scabbards and a
bottle of cocaine. The other evidences that Charles was a desperado the
writer described as follows:

  In his room were found negro periodicals and other "race" propaganda,
  most of which was in the interest of the negro's emigration to Liberia.
  There were Police Gazettes strewn about his room and other papers of a
  similar character. Well-worn textbooks, bearing his name written in his
  own scrawling handwriting, and well-filled copybooks found in his trunk
  showed that he had burnt the midnight oil, and was desirous of improving
  himself intellectually in order that he might conquer the hated white
  race. Much of the literature found among his chattels was of a
  superlatively vituperative character, and attacked the white race in
  unstinted language and asserted the equal rights of the Negro.

  Charles was evidently the local agent of the _Voice of Missions_, a
  "religious" paper, published at Atlanta, as great bundles of that sheet
  were found. It is edited by one Bishop Turner, and seems to be the
  official organ of all haters of the white race. Its editorials are
  anarchistic in the extreme, and urge upon the negro that the sooner he
  realizes that he is as good as the white man the better it will be for
  him. The following verses were clipped from the journal; they were
  marked "till forbidden," and appeared in several successive numbers:


        OUR SENTIMENTS

        H.M.T.

        My country, 'tis of thee,
        Dear land of Africa,
          Of thee we sing.
        Land where our fathers died,
        Land of the Negro's pride,
          God's truth shall ring.

        My native country, thee,
        Land of the black and free,
          Thy name I love;
        To see thy rocks and rills,
        Thy woods and matchless hills,
          Like that above.

        When all thy slanderous ghouls,
        In the bosom of sheol,
          Forgotten lie,
        Thy monumental name shall live,
        And suns thy royal brow shall gild,
        Upheaved to heaven high,
          O'ertopping thrones.

  There were no valuables in his room, and if he was a professional thief
  he had his headquarters for storing his plunder at some other place than
  his room on Fourth Street. Nothing was found in his room that could lead
  to the belief that he was a thief, except fifty or more small bits of
  soap. The inference was that every place he visited he took all of the
  soap lying around, as all of the bits were well worn and had seen long
  service on the washstand.

  His wearing apparel was little more than rags, and financially he was
  evidently not in a flourishing condition. He was in no sense a skilled
  workman, and his room showed, in fact, that he was nothing more than a
  laborer.

  The "philosopher in the garret" was a dirty wretch, and his room, his
  bedding and his clothing were nasty and filthy beyond belief. His object
  in life seemed to have been the discomfiture of the white race, and to
  this purpose he devoted himself with zeal. He declared himself to be a
  "patriot," and wished to be the Moses of his race.

Under the title of "The Making of a Monster," the reporter attempts to
give "something of the personality of the archfiend, Charles." Giving his
imagination full vent the writer says:

  It is only natural that the deepest interest should attach to the
  personality of Robert Charles. What manner of man was this fiend
  incarnate? What conditions developed him? Who were his preceptors? From
  what ancestral strain, if any, did he derive his ferocious hatred of the
  whites, his cunning, his brute courage, the apostolic zeal which he
  displayed in spreading the propaganda of African equality? These are
  questions involving one of the most remarkable psychological problems of
  modern times.

In answer to the questions which he propounds, the reporter proceeds to
admit that he did not learn anything of a very desperate nature connected
with Charles. He says:

  Although Charles was a familiar figure to scores of Negroes in New
  Orleans, and they had been more or less intimately acquainted with him
  for over two years, curiously little can be learned of his habits or
  mode of life. Since the perpetration of his terrible series of crimes it
  goes without saying that his former friends are inclined to be reticent,
  but it is reasonably certain that they have very little to tell. In
  regard to himself, Charles was singularly reticent for a Negro. He did
  not even indulge in the usual lying about his prowess and his
  adventures. This was possibly due to the knowledge that he was wanted
  for a couple of murders. The man had sense enough to know that it would
  be highly unwise to excite any curiosity about his past.

  When Charles first came to New Orleans he worked here and there as a day
  laborer. He was employed at different times in a sawmill, on the street
  gangs, as a roustabout on the levee, as a helper at the sugar works and
  as a coal shoveler in the engine room of the St. Charles Hotel. At each
  of the places where he worked he was known as a quiet, rather surly
  fellow, who had little to say to anybody, and generally performed his
  tasks in morose silence. He managed to convey the impression, however,
  of being a man of more than ordinary intelligence.

  A Negro named William Butts, who drives a team on the levee and lives on
  Washington Street, near Baronne, told a _Times-Democrat_ reporter
  yesterday that Charles got a job about a year ago as agent for a
  Liberian Immigration Society, which has headquarters at Birmingham, and
  was much elated at the prospect of making a living without hard labor.

According to the further investigations of this reporter, Charles was also
agent for Bishop Turner's _Voice of Missions_, the colored missionary
organ of the African Methodist Church, edited by H.M. Turner, of Atlanta,
Georgia. Concerning his service as agent for the _Voice of Missions_, the
reporter says:

  He secured a number of subscribers and visited them once a month to
  collect the installments. In order to insure regular payments it was
  necessary to keep up enthusiasm, which was prone to wane, and Charles
  consequently became an active and continual preacher of the propaganda
  of hatred. Whatever may have been his private sentiments at the outset,
  this constant harping on one string must eventually have had a powerful
  effect upon his own mind.

  Exactly how he received his remuneration is uncertain, but he told
  several of his friends that he got a "big commission." Incidentally he
  solicited subscribers for a Negro paper called the _Voice of the
  Missions_, and when he struck a Negro who did not want to go to Africa
  himself, he begged contributions for the "good of the cause."

  In the course of time Charles developed into a fanatic on the subject of
  the Negro oppression and neglected business to indulge in wild tirades
  whenever he could find a listener. He became more anxious to make
  converts than to obtain subscribers, and the more conservative darkies
  began to get afraid of him. Meanwhile he got into touch with certain
  agitators in the North and made himself a distributing agent for their
  literature, a great deal of which he gave away. Making money was a
  secondary consideration to "the cause."

  One of the most enthusiastic advocates of the Liberian scheme is the
  colored Bishop H.M. Turner, of Atlanta. Turner is a man of unusual
  ability, has been over to Africa personally several times, and has made
  himself conspicuous by denouncing laws which he claimed discriminated
  against the blacks. Charles was one of the bishop's disciples and
  evidence has been found that seems to indicate they were in
  correspondence.

This was all that the _Times-Democrat_'s reporters could find after the
most diligent search to prove that Charles was the fiend incarnate which
the press of New Orleans and elsewhere declared him to be.

The reporters of the _New Orleans Picayune_ were no more successful than
their brethren of the _Times-Democrat_. They, too, were compelled to
substitute fiction for facts in their attempt to prove Charles a
desperado. In the issue of the twenty-sixth of July it was said that
Charles was well known in Vicksburg, and was there a consort of thieves.
They mentioned that a man named Benson Blake was killed in 1894 or 1895,
and that four Negroes were captured, and two escaped. Of the two escaped
they claim that Charles was one. The four negroes who were captured were
put in jail, and as usual, in the high state of civilization which
characterizes Mississippi, the right of the person accused of crime to an
indictment by legal process and a legal trial by jury was considered an
useless formality if the accused happened to be black. A mob went to the
jail that night, the four colored men were delivered to the mob, and all
four were hanged in the court-house yard. The reporters evidently assumed
that Charles was guilty, if, in fact, he was ever there, because the other
four men were lynched. They did not consider it was a fact of any
importance that Charles was never indicted. They called him a murderer on
general principles.


+DIED IN SELF-DEFENSE+

The life, character and death of Robert Charles challenges the thoughtful
consideration of all fair-minded people. In the frenzy of the moment, when
nearly a dozen men lay dead, the victims of his unerring and death-dealing
aim, it was natural for a prejudiced press and for citizens in private
life to denounce him as a desperado and a murderer. But sea depths are not
measured when the ocean rages, nor can absolute justice be determined
while public opinion is lashed into fury. There must be calmness to insure
correctness of judgment. The fury of the hour must abate before we can
deal justly with any man or any cause.

That Charles was not a desperado is amply shown by the discussion in the
preceding chapter. The darkest pictures which the reporters could paint of
Charles were quoted freely, so that the public might find upon what
grounds the press declared him to be a lawbreaker. Unquestionably the
grounds are wholly insufficient. Not a line of evidence has been presented
to prove that Charles was the fiend which the first reports of the New
Orleans charge him to be.

Nothing more should be required to establish his good reputation, for the
rule is universal that a reputation must be assumed to be good until it is
proved bad. But that rule does not apply to the Negro, for as soon as he
is suspected the public judgment immediately determines that he is guilty
of whatever crime he stands charged. For this reason, as a matter of duty
to the race, and the simple justice to the memory of Charles, an
investigation has been made of the life and character of Charles before
the fatal affray which led to his death.

Robert Charles was not an educated man. He was a student who faithfully
investigated all the phases of oppression from which his race has
suffered. That he was a student is amply shown by the _Times-Democrat_
report of the twenty-fifth, which says:

"Well-worn textbooks, bearing his name written in his own scrawling
handwriting, and well-filled copy-books found in his trunk, showed that he
had burned the midnight oil, and desired to improve himself intellectually
in order that he might conquer the hated white race." From this quotation
it will be seen that he spent the hours after days of hard toil in trying
to improve himself, both in the study of textbooks and in writing.

He knew that he was a student of a problem which required all the
intelligence that a man could command, and he was burning his midnight
oil gathering knowledge that he might better be able to come to an
intelligent solution. To his aid in the study of this problem he sought
the aid of a Christian newspaper, the _Voice of Missions_, the organ of
the African Methodist Episcopal Church. He was in communication with its
editor, who is a bishop, and is known all over this country as a man of
learning, a lover of justice and the defender of law and order. Charles
could receive from Bishop Turner not a word of encouragement to be other
than an earnest, tireless and God-fearing student of the complex problems
which affected the race.

For further help and assistance in his studies, Charles turned to an
organization which has existed and flourished for many years, at all times
managed by men of high Christian standing and absolute integrity. These
men believe and preach a doctrine that the best interests of the Negro
will be subserved by an emigration from America back to the Fatherland,
and they do all they can to spread the doctrine of emigration and to give
material assistance to those who desire to leave America and make their
future homes in Africa. This organization is known as "The International
Migration Society." It has its headquarters in Birmingham, Alabama. From
this place it issues pamphlets, some of which were found, in the home of
Robert Charles, and which pamphlets the reporters of the New Orleans
papers declare to be incendiary and dangerous in their doctrine and
teaching.

Nothing could be further from the truth. Copies of any and all of them may
be secured by writing to D.J. Flummer, who is President and in charge of
the home office in Birmingham, Alabama. Three of the pamphlets found in
Charles's room are named respectively:

First, _Prospectus of the Liberian Colonization Society_; which pamphlet
in a few brief pages tells of the work of the society, plans, prices and
terms of transportation of colored people who choose to go to Africa.
These pages are followed by a short, conservative discussion of the Negro
question, and close with an argument that Africa furnishes the best asylum
for the oppressed Negroes in this country.

The second pamphlet is entitled _Christian Civilization of Africa_. This
is a brief statement of the advantages of the Republic of Liberia, and an
argument in support of the superior conditions which colored people may
attain to by leaving the South and settling in Liberia.

The third pamphlet is entitled _The Negro and Liberia_. This is a larger
document than the other two, and treats more exhaustively the question of
emigration, but from the first page to the last there is not an
incendiary line or sentence. There is not even a suggestion of violence in
all of its thirty-two pages, and not a word which could not be preached
from every pulpit in the land.

If it is true that the workman is known by his tools, certainly no harm
could ever come from the doctrines which were preached by Charles or the
papers and pamphlets distributed by him. Nothing ever written in the
_Voice of Missions_, and nothing ever published in the pamphlets above
alluded to in the remotest way suggest that a peaceable man should turn
lawbreaker, or that any man should dye his hands in his brother's blood.

In order to secure as far as possible positive information about the life
and character of Robert Charles, it was plain that the best course to
pursue was to communicate with those with whom he had sustained business
relations. Accordingly a letter was forwarded to Mr. D.J. Flummer, who is
president of the colonization society, in which letter he was asked to
state in reply what information he had of the life and character of Robert
Charles. The result was a very prompt letter in response, the text of
which is as follows:

  Birmingham, Ala., Aug. 21, 1900

  Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett, Chicago, Ill.:

  Dear Madam--Replying to your favor of recent date requesting me to write
  you giving such information as I may have concerning the life, habits
  and character of Robert Charles, who recently shot and killed police
  officers in New Orleans, I wish to say that my knowledge of him is only
  such as I have gained from his business connection with the
  International Migration Society during the past five or six years,
  during which time I was president of the society.

  He having learned that the purpose of this society was to colonize the
  colored people in Liberia, West Africa, and thereby lessen or destroy
  the friction and prejudice existing in this country between the two
  races, set about earnestly and faithfully distributing the literature
  that we issued from time to time. He always appeared to be mild but
  earnest in his advocacy of emigration, and never to my knowledge used
  any method or means that would in the least appear unreasonable, and had
  always kept within the bounds of law and order in advocating emigration.

  The work he performed for this society was all gratuitous, and
  apparently prompted from his love of humanity, and desires to be
  instrumental in building up a Negro Nationality in Africa.

  If he ever violated a law before the killing of the policemen, I do not
  know of it.

  Yours, very truly,

  D.J. Flummer

Besides this statement, Mr. Flummer enclosed a letter received by the
Society two days before the tragedy at New Orleans. This letter was
written by Robert Charles, and it attests his devotion to the cause of
emigration which he had espoused. Memoranda on the margin of the letter
show that the order was filled by mailing the pamphlets. It is very
probable that these were the identical pamphlets which were found by the
mob which broke into the room of Robert Charles and seized upon these
harmless documents and declared they were sufficient evidence to prove
Charles a desperado. In the light of subsequent events the letter of
Charles, which follows, sounds like a voice from the tomb:

New Orleans, July 30,1900

  Mr. D.J. Flummer:

  Dear Sir--I received your last pamphlets and they are all given out. I
  want you to send me some more, and I enclose you the stamps. I think I
  will go over in Greenville, Miss., and give my people some pamphlets
  over there.

  Yours truly,

  Robert Charles

The latest word of information comes from New Orleans from a man who knew
Charles intimately for six years. For obvious reasons, his name is
withheld. In answer to a letter sent him he answers as follows:

  New Orleans, Aug. 23, 1900

  Mrs. Ida B. Wells-Barnett:

  Dear Madam--It affords me great pleasure to inform you as far as I know
  of Robert Charles. I have been acquainted with him about six years in
  this city. He never has, as I know, given any trouble to anyone. He was
  quiet and a peaceful man and was very frank in speaking. He was too much
  of a hero to die; few call be found to equal him. I am very sorry to
  say that I do not know anything of his birthplace, nor his parents, but
  enclosed find letter from his uncle, from which you may find more
  information. You will also find one of the circulars in which Charles
  was in possession of which was styled as a crazy document. Let me say,
  until our preachers preach this document we will always be slaves. If
  you can help circulate this "crazy" doctrine I would be glad to have you
  do so, for I shall never rest until I get to that heaven on earth; that
  is, the west coast of Africa, in Liberia.

  With best wishes to you I still remain, as always, for the good of the
  race,

  ----

By only those whose anger and vindictiveness warp their judgment is Robert
Charles a desperado. Their word is not supported by the statement of a
single fact which justifies their judgment and no criminal record shows
that he was ever indicted for any offense, much less convicted of crime.
On the contrary, his work for many years had been with Christian people,
circulating emigration pamphlets and active as agent for a mission
publication. Men who knew him say that he was a law-abiding, quiet,
industrious, peaceable man. So he lived.

So he lived and so he would have died had not he raised his hand to resent
unprovoked assault and unlawful arrest that fateful Monday night. That
made him an outlaw, and being a man of courage he decided to die with his
face to the foe. The white people of this country may charge that he was a
desperado, but to the people of his own race Robert Charles will always be
regarded as the hero of New Orleans.


+BURNING HUMAN BEINGS ALIVE +

Not only has life been taken by mobs in the past twenty years, but the
ordinary procedure of hanging and shooting have been improved upon during
the past ten years. Fifteen human beings have been burned to death in the
different parts of the country by mobs. Men, women and children have gone
to see the sight, and all have approved the barbarous deeds done in the
high light of the civilization and Christianity of this country.

In 1891 Ed Coy was burned to death in Texarkana, Ark. He was charged with
assaulting a white woman, and after the mob had securely tied him to a
tree, the men and boys amused themselves for some time sticking knives
into Coy's body and slicing off pieces, of flesh. When they had amused
themselves sufficiently, they poured coal oil over him and the women in
the case set fire to him. It is said that fifteen thousand people stood by
and saw him burned. This was on a Sunday night, and press reports told how
the people looked on while the Negro burned to death.

Feb. 1, 1893, Henry Smith was burned to death in Paris, Texas. The entire
county joined in that exhibition. The district attorney himself went for
the prisoner and turned him over to the mob. He was placed upon a float
and drawn by four white horses through the principal streets of the city.
Men, women and children stood at their doors and waved their handkerchiefs
and cheered the echoes. They knew that the man was to be burned to death
because the newspaper had declared for three days previous that this would
be so. Excursions were run by all the railroads, and the mayor of the town
gave the children a holiday so that they might see the sight.

Henry Smith was charged with having assaulted and murdered a little white
girl. He was an imbecile, and while he had killed the child, there was no
proof that he had criminally assaulted her. He was tied to a stake on a
platform which had been built ten feet high, so that everybody might see
the sight. The father and brother and uncle of the little white girl that
had been murdered was upon that platform about fifty minutes entertaining
the crowd of ten thousand persons by burning the victim's flesh with
red-hot irons. Their own newspapers told how they burned his eyes out and,
ran the red-hot iron down his throat, cooking his tongue, and how the
crowd cheered wild delight. At last, having declared themselves satisfied,
coal oil was poured over him and he was burned to death, and the mob
fought over the ashes for bones and pieces of his clothes.

July 7, 1893, in Bardwell, Ky., C.J. Miller was burned to ashes. Since his
death this man has been found to be absolutely innocent of the murder of
the two white girls with which he was charged. But the mob would wait for
no justification. They insisted that, as they were not sure he was the
right man, they would compromise the matter by hanging him instead of
burning. Not to be outdone, they took the body down and made a huge
bonfire out of it.

July 22, 1893, at Memphis, Tenn., the body of Lee Walker was dragged
through the street and burned before the court house. Walker had
frightened some girls in a wagon along a country road by asking them to
let him ride in their wagon. They cried out; some men working in a field
near by said it was at attempt of assault, and of course began to look for
their prey. There was never any charge of rape; the women only declared
that he attempted an assault. After he was apprehended and put in jail and
perfectly helpless, the mob dragged him out, shot him, cut him, beat him
with sticks, built a fire and burned the legs off, then took the trunk of
the body down and dragged further up the street, and at last burned it
before the court house.

Sept. 20, 1893, at Roanoke, Va., the body of a Negro who had quarreled
with a white woman was burned in the presence of several thousand persons.
These people also wreaked their vengeance upon this helpless victim of the
mob's wrath by sticking knives into him, kicking him and beating him with
stones and otherwise mutilating him before life was extinct.

June 11, 1898, at Knoxville, Ark., James Perry was shut up in a cabin
because he had smallpox and burned to death. He had been quarantined in
this cabin when it was declared that he had this disease and the doctor
sent for. When the physician arrived he found only a few smoldering
embers. Upon inquiry some railroad hands who were working nearby revealed
the fact that they had fastened the door of the cabin and set fire to the
cabin and burned man and hut together.

Feb. 22, 1898, at Lake City, S.C., Postmaster Baker and his infant child
were burned to death by a mob that had set fire to his house. Mr. Baker's
crime was that he had refused to give up the post office, to which he had
been appointed by the National Government. The mob had tried to drive him
away by persecution and intimidation. Finding that all else had failed,
they went to his home in the dead of night and set fire to his house, and
as the family rushed forth they were greeted by a volley of bullets. The
father and his baby were shot through the open door and wounded so badly
that they fell back in the fire and were burned to death. The remainder of
the family, consisting of the wife and five children, escaped with their
lives from the burning house, but all of them were shot, one of the number
made a cripple for life.

Jan. 7, 1898, two Indians were tied to a tree at Maud Post Office, Indian
Territory, and burned to death by a white mob. They were charged with
murdering a white woman. There was no proof of their guilt except the
unsupported word of the mob. Yet they were tied to a tree and slowly
roasted to death. Their names were Lewis McGeesy and Hond Martin. Since
that time these boys have been found to be absolutely innocent of the
charge. Of course that discovery is too late to be of any benefit to them,
but because they were Indians the Indian Commissioner demanded and
received from the United States Government an indemnity of $13,000.

April 23, 1899, at Palmetto, Ga., Sam Hose was burned alive in the
presence of a throng, on Sunday afternoon. He was charged with killing a
man named Cranford, his employer, which he admitted he did because his
employer was about to shoot him. To the fact of killing the employer was
added the absolutely false charge that Hose assaulted the wife. Hose was
arrested and no trial was given him. According to the code of reasoning of
the mob, none was needed. A white man had been killed and a white woman
was said to have been assaulted. That was enough. When Hose was found he
had to die.

The Atlanta Constitution, in speaking of the murder of Cranford, said that
the Negro who was suspected would be burned alive. Not only this, but it
offered $500 reward for his capture. After he had been apprehended, it was
publicly announced that he would be burned alive. Excursion trains were
run and bulletins were put up in the small towns. The Governor of Georgia
was in Atlanta while excursion trains were being made up to take visitors
to the burning. Many fair ladies drove out in their carriages on Sunday
afternoon to witness the torture and burning of a human being. Hose's ears
were cut off, then his toes and fingers, and passed round to the crowd.
His eyes were put out, his tongue torn out and flesh cut in strips by
knives. Finally they poured coal oil on him and burned him to death. They
dragged his half-consumed trunk out of the flames, cut it open, extracted
his heart and liver, and sold slices for ten cents each for souvenirs, all
of which was published most promptly in the daily papers of Georgia and
boasted over by the people of that section.

Oct. 19, 1889, at Canton, Miss., Joseph Leflore was burned to death. A
house had been entered and its occupants murdered during the absence of
the husband and father. When the discovery was made, it was immediately
supposed that the crime was the work of a Negro, and the motive that of
assaulting white women.

Bloodhounds were procured and they made a round of the village and
discovered only one colored man absent from his home. This was taken to be
proof sufficient that he was the perpetrator of the deed. When he returned
home he was apprehended, taken into the yard of the house that had been
burned down, tied to a stake, and was slowly roasted to death.

Dec. 6, 1899, at Maysville, Ky., Wm. Coleman also was burned to death. He
was slowly roasted, first one foot and then the other, and dragged out of
the fire so that the torture might be prolonged. All of this without a
shadow of proof or scintilla of evidence that the man had committed the
crime.

Thus have the mobs of this country taken the lives of their victims within
the past ten years. In every single instance except one these burnings
were witnessed by from two thousand to fifteen thousand people, and no one
person in all these crowds throughout the country had the courage to raise
his voice and speak out against the awful barbarism of burning human
beings to death.

Men and women of America, are you proud of this record which the
Anglo-Saxon race has made for itself? Your silence seems to say that you
are. Your silence encourages a continuance of this sort of horror. Only by
earnest, active, united endeavor to arouse public sentiment can we hope to
put a stop to these demonstrations of American barbarism.


+LYNCHING RECORD+

The following table of lynchings has been kept year by year by the Chicago
Tribune, beginning with 1882, and shows the list of Negroes that have been
lynched during that time:

1882, Negroes murdered by mobs       52
1883, Negroes murdered by mobs       39
1884, Negroes murdered by mobs       53
1885, Negroes murdered by mobs      164
1886, Negroes murdered by mobs      136
1887, Negroes murdered by mobs      128
1888, Negroes murdered by mobs      143
1889, Negroes murdered by mobs      127
1890, Negroes murdered by mobs      171
1891, Negroes murdered by mobs      192
1892, Negroes murdered by mobs      241
1893, Negroes murdered by mobs      200
1894, Negroes murdered by mobs      190
1895, Negroes murdered by mobs      171
1896, Negroes murdered by mobs      131
1897, Negroes murdered by mobs      156
1898, Negroes murdered by mobs      127
1899, Negroes murdered by mobs      107

Of these thousands of men and women who have been put to death without
judge or jury, less than one-third of them have been even accused of
criminal assault. The world at large has accepted unquestionably the
statement that Negroes are lynched only for assaults upon white women. Of
those who were lynched from 1882 to 1891, the first ten years of the
tabulated lynching record, the charges are as follows:

Two hundred and sixty-nine were charged with rape; 253 with murder; 44
with robbery; 37 with incendiarism; 4 with burglary; 27 with race
prejudice; 13 quarreled with white men; 10 with making threats; 7 with
rioting; 5 with miscegenation; in 32 cases no reasons were given, the
victims were lynched on general principles.

During the past five years the record is as follows:

Of the 171 persons lynched in 1895 only 34 were charged with this crime.
In 1896, out of 131 persons who were lynched, only 34 were said to have
assaulted women. Of the 156 in 1897, only 32. In 1898, out of 127 persons
lynched, 24 were charged with the alleged "usual crime." In 1899, of the
107 lynchings, 16 were said to be for crimes against women. These figures,
of course, speak for themselves, and to the unprejudiced, fair-minded
person it is only necessary to read and study them in order to show that
the charge that the Negro is a moral outlaw is a false one, made for the
purpose of injuring the Negro's good name and to create public sentiment
against him.

If public sentiment were alive, as it should be upon the subject, it would
refuse to be longer hoodwinked, and the voice of conscience would refuse
to be stilled by these false statements. If the laws of the country were
obeyed and respected by the white men of the country who charge that the
Negro has no respect for law, these things could not be, for every
individual, no matter what the charge, would have a fair trial and an
opportunity to prove his guilt or innocence before a tribunal of law.

That is all the Negro asks--that is all the friends of law and order need
to ask, for once the law of the land is supreme, no individual who commits
crime will escape punishment.

Individual Negroes commit crimes the same as do white men, but that the
Negro race is peculiarly given to assault upon women, is a falsehood of
the deepest dye. The tables given above show that the Negro who is saucy
to white men is lynched as well as the Negro who is charged with assault
upon women. Less than one-sixth of the lynchings last year, 1899, were
charged with rape.

The Negro points to his record during the war in rebuttal of this false
slander. When the white women and children of the South had no protector
save only these Negroes, not one instance is known where the trust was
betrayed. It is remarkably strange that the Negro had more respect for
womanhood with the white men of the South hundreds of miles away, than
they have today, when surrounded by those who take their lives with
impunity and burn and torture, even worse than the "unspeakable Turk."

Again, the white women of the North came South years ago, threaded the
forests, visited the cabins, taught the schools and associated only with
the Negroes whom they came to teach, and had no protectors near at hand.
They had no charge or complaint to make of the danger to themselves after
association with this class of human beings. Not once has the country been
shocked by such recitals from them as come from the women who are
surrounded by their husbands, brothers, lovers and friends. If the Negro's
nature is bestial, it certainly should have proved itself in one of these
two instances. The Negro asks only justice and an impartial consideration
of these facts.






Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






The Red Record:
Tabulated Statistics and
Alleged Causes of Lynching
in the United States

By Ida B. Wells-Barnett


1895

[Transcriber's Note: This pamphlet was first published in 1895 but was
subsequently reprinted. It's not apparent if the curiosities in spelling
date back to the original or were introduced later; they have been
retained as found, and the reader is left to decide. Please verify with
another source before quoting this material.]


PREFACE

HON. FREDERICK DOUGLASS'S LETTER

DEAR MISS WELLS:

Let me give you thanks for your faithful paper on the lynch abomination
now generally practiced against colored people in the South. There has
been no word equal to it in convincing power. I have spoken, but my word
is feeble in comparison. You give us what you know and testify from actual
knowledge. You have dealt with the facts with cool, painstaking fidelity,
and left those naked and uncontradicted facts to speak for themselves.

Brave woman! you have done your people and mine a service which can
neither be weighed nor measured. If the American conscience were only half
alive, if the American church and clergy were only half Christianized, if
American moral sensibility were not hardened by persistent infliction of
outrage and crime against colored people, a scream of horror, shame, and
indignation would rise to Heaven wherever your pamphlet shall be read.

But alas! even crime has power to reproduce itself and create conditions
favorable to its own existence. It sometimes seems we are deserted by
earth and Heaven--yet we must still think, speak and work, and trust in
the power of a merciful God for final deliverance.

Very truly and gratefully yours,
FREDERICK DOUGLASS
Cedar Hill, Anacostia, D.C.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1
The Case Stated      57

CHAPTER 2
Lynch-Law Statistics      65

CHAPTER 3
Lynching Imbeciles      73

CHAPTER 4
Lynching of Innocent Men      84

CHAPTER 5
Lynched for Anything or Nothing      93

CHAPTER 6
History of Some Cases of Rape      108

CHAPTER 7
The Crusade Justified      121

CHAPTER 8
Miss Willard's Attitude      129

CHAPTER 9
Lynching Record for 1894      139

CHAPTER 10
The Remedy      147




1

THE CASE STATED


The student of American sociology will find the year 1894 marked by a
pronounced awakening of the public conscience to a system of anarchy and
outlawry which had grown during a series of ten years to be so common,
that scenes of unusual brutality failed to have any visible effect upon
the humane sentiments of the people of our land.

Beginning with the emancipation of the Negro, the inevitable result of
unbribled power exercised for two and a half centuries, by the white man
over the Negro, began to show itself in acts of conscienceless outlawry.
During the slave regime, the Southern white man owned the Negro body and
soul. It was to his interest to dwarf the soul and preserve the body.
Vested with unlimited power over his slave, to subject him to any and all
kinds of physical punishment, the white man was still restrained from such
punishment as tended to injure the slave by abating his physical powers
and thereby reducing his financial worth. While slaves were scourged
mercilessly, and in countless cases inhumanly treated in other respects,
still the white owner rarely permitted his anger to go so far as to take a
life, which would entail upon him a loss of several hundred dollars. The
slave was rarely killed, he was too valuable; it was easier and quite as
effective, for discipline or revenge, to sell him "Down South."

But Emancipation came and the vested interests of the white man in the
Negro's body were lost. The white man had no right to scourge the
emancipated Negro, still less has he a right to kill him. But the Southern
white people had been educated so long in that school of practice, in
which might makes right, that they disdained to draw strict lines of
action in dealing with the Negro. In slave times the Negro was kept
subservient and submissive by the frequency and severity of the scourging,
but, with freedom, a new system of intimidation came into vogue; the Negro
was not only whipped and scourged; he was killed.

Not all nor nearly all of the murders done by white men, during the past
thirty years in the South, have come to light, but the statistics as
gathered and preserved by white men, and which have not been questioned,
show that during these years more than ten thousand Negroes have been
killed in cold blood, without the formality of judicial trial and legal
execution. And yet, as evidence of the absolute impunity with which the
white man dares to kill a Negro, the same record shows that during all
these years, and for all these murders only three white men have been
tried, convicted, and executed. As no white man has been lynched for the
murder of colored people, these three executions are the only instances of
the death penalty being visited upon white men for murdering Negroes.

Naturally enough the commission of these crimes began to tell upon the
public conscience, and the Southern white man, as a tribute to the
nineteenth-century civilization, was in a manner compelled to give excuses
for his barbarism. His excuses have adapted themselves to the emergency,
and are aptly outlined by that greatest of all Negroes, Frederick
Douglass, in an article of recent date, in which he shows that there have
been three distinct eras of Southern barbarism, to account for which three
distinct excuses have been made.

The first excuse given to the civilized world for the murder of
unoffending Negroes was the necessity of the white man to repress and
stamp out alleged "race riots." For years immediately succeeding the war
there was an appalling slaughter of colored people, and the wires usually
conveyed to northern people and the world the intelligence, first, that an
insurrection was being planned by Negroes, which, a few hours later, would
prove to have been vigorously resisted by white men, and controlled with a
resulting loss of several killed and wounded. It was always a remarkable
feature in these insurrections and riots that only Negroes were killed
during the rioting, and that all the white men escaped unharmed.

From 1865 to 1872, hundreds of colored men and women were mercilessly
murdered and the almost invariable reason assigned was that they met their
death by being alleged participants in an insurrection or riot. But this
story at last wore itself out. No insurrection ever materialized; no
Negro rioter was ever apprehended and proven guilty, and no dynamite ever
recorded the black man's protest against oppression and wrong. It was too
much to ask thoughtful people to believe this transparent story, and the
southern white people at last made up their minds that some other excuse
must be had.

Then came the second excuse, which had its birth during the turbulent
times of reconstruction. By an amendment to the Constitution the Negro was
given the right of franchise, and, theoretically at least, his ballot
became his invaluable emblem of citizenship. In a government "of the
people, for the people, and by the people," the Negro's vote became an
important factor in all matters of state and national politics. But this
did not last long. The southern white man would not consider that the
Negro had any right which a white man was bound to respect, and the idea
of a republican form of government in the southern states grew into
general contempt. It was maintained that "This is a white man's
government," and regardless of numbers the white man should rule. "No
Negro domination" became the new legend on the sanguinary banner of the
sunny South, and under it rode the Ku Klux Klan, the Regulators, and the
lawless mobs, which for any cause chose to murder one man or a dozen as
suited their purpose best. It was a long, gory campaign; the blood chills
and the heart almost loses faith in Christianity when one thinks of Yazoo,
Hamburg, Edgefield, Copiah, and the countless massacres of defenseless
Negroes, whose only crime was the attempt to exercise their right to vote.

But it was a bootless strife for colored people. The government which had
made the Negro a citizen found itself unable to protect him. It gave him
the right to vote, but denied him the protection which should have
maintained that right. Scourged from his home; hunted through the swamps;
hung by midnight raiders, and openly murdered in the light of day, the
Negro clung to his right of franchise with a heroism which would have
wrung admiration from the hearts of savages. He believed that in that
small white ballot there was a subtle something which stood for manhood as
well as citizenship, and thousands of brave black men went to their
graves, exemplifying the one by dying for the other.

The white man's victory soon became complete by fraud, violence,
intimidation and murder. The franchise vouchsafed to the Negro grew to be
a "barren ideality," and regardless of numbers, the colored people found
themselves voiceless in the councils of those whose duty it was to rule.
With no longer the fear of "Negro Domination" before their eyes, the
white man's second excuse became valueless. With the Southern governments
all subverted and the Negro actually eliminated from all participation in
state and national elections, there could be no longer an excuse for
killing Negroes to prevent "Negro Domination."

Brutality still continued; Negroes were whipped, scourged, exiled, shot
and hung whenever and wherever it pleased the white man so to treat them,
and as the civilized world with increasing persistency held the white
people of the South to account for its outlawry, the murderers invented
the third excuse--that Negroes had to be killed to avenge their assaults
upon women. There could be framed no possible excuse more harmful to the
Negro and more unanswerable if true in its sufficiency for the white man.

Humanity abhors the assailant of womanhood, and this charge upon the Negro
at once placed him beyond the pale of human sympathy. With such unanimity,
earnestness and apparent candor was this charge made and reiterated that
the world has accepted the story that the Negro is a monster which the
Southern white man has painted him. And today, the Christian world feels,
that while lynching is a crime, and lawlessness and anarchy the certain
precursors of a nation's fall, it can not by word or deed, extend sympathy
or help to a race of outlaws, who might mistake their plea for justice and
deem it an excuse for their continued wrongs.

The Negro has suffered much and is willing to suffer more. He recognizes
that the wrongs of two centuries can not be righted in a day, and he tries
to bear his burden with patience for today and be hopeful for tomorrow.
But there comes a time when the veriest worm will turn, and the Negro
feels today that after all the work he has done, all the sacrifices he has
made, and all the suffering he has endured, if he did not, now, defend his
name and manhood from this vile accusation, he would be unworthy even of
the contempt of mankind. It is to this charge he now feels he must make
answer.

If the Southern people in defense of their lawlessness, would tell the
truth and admit that colored men and women are lynched for almost any
offense, from murder to a misdemeanor, there would not now be the
necessity for this defense. But when they intentionally, maliciously and
constantly belie the record and bolster up these falsehoods by the words
of legislators, preachers, governors and bishops, then the Negro must give
to the world his side of the awful story.

A word as to the charge itself. In considering the third reason assigned
by the Southern white people for the butchery of blacks, the question must
be asked, what the white man means when he charges the black man with
rape. Does he mean the crime which the statutes of the civilized states
describe as such? Not by any means. With the Southern white man, any
mesalliance existing between a white woman and a colored man is a
sufficient foundation for the charge of rape. The Southern white man says
that it is impossible for a voluntary alliance to exist between a white
woman and a colored man, and therefore, the fact of an alliance is a proof
of force. In numerous instances where colored men have have been lynched
on the charge of rape, it was positively known at the time of lynching,
and indisputably proven after the victim's death, that the relationship
sustained between the man and woman was voluntary and clandestine, and
that in no court of law could even the charge of assault have been
successfully maintained.

It was for the assertion of this fact, in the defense of her own race,
that the writer hereof became an exile; her property destroyed and her
return to her home forbidden under penalty of death, for writing the
following editorial which was printed in her paper, the _Free Speech,_ in
Memphis, Tenn., May 21,1892:

  Eight Negroes lynched since last issue of the _Free Speech_ one at
  Little Rock, Ark., last Saturday morning where the citizens broke(?)
  into the penitentiary and got their man; three near Anniston, Ala., one
  near New Orleans; and three at Clarksville, Ga., the last three for
  killing a white man, and five on the same old racket--the new alarm
  about raping white women. The same programme of hanging, then shooting
  bullets into the lifeless bodies was carried out to the letter. Nobody
  in this section of the country believes the old threadbare lie that
  Negro men rape white women. If Southern white men are not careful, they
  will overreach themselves and public sentiment will have a reaction; a
  conclusion will then be reached which will be very damaging to the moral
  reputation of their women.

But threats cannot suppress the truth, and while the Negro suffers the
soul deformity, resultant from two and a half centuries of slavery, he is
no more guilty of this vilest of all vile charges than the white man who
would blacken his name.

During all the years of slavery, no such charge was ever made, not even
during the dark days of the rebellion, when the white man, following the
fortunes of war went to do battle for the maintenance of slavery. While
the master was away fighting to forge the fetters upon the slave, he left
his wife and children with no protectors save the Negroes themselves. And
yet during those years of trust and peril, no Negro proved recreant to his
trust and no white man returned to a home that had been dispoiled.

Likewise during the period of alleged "insurrection," and alarming "race
riots," it never occurred to the white man, that his wife and children
were in danger of assault. Nor in the Reconstruction era, when the hue and
cry was against "Negro Domination," was there ever a thought that the
domination would ever contaminate a fireside or strike to death the virtue
of womanhood. It must appear strange indeed, to every thoughtful and
candid man, that more than a quarter of a century elapsed before the Negro
began to show signs of such infamous degeneration.

In his remarkable apology for lynching, Bishop Haygood, of Georgia, says:
"No race, not the most savage, tolerates the rape of woman, but it may be
said without reflection upon any other people that the Southern people are
now and always have been most sensitive concerning the honor of their
women--their mothers, wives, sisters and daughters." It is not the purpose
of this defense to say one word against the white women of the South. Such
need not be said, but it is their misfortune that the chivalrous white men
of that section, in order to escape the deserved execration of the
civilized world, should shield themselves by their cowardly and infamously
false excuse, and call into question that very honor about which their
distinguished priestly apologist claims they are most sensitive. To
justify their own barbarism they assume a chivalry which they do not
possess. True chivalry respects all womanhood, and no one who reads the
record, as it is written in the faces of the million mulattoes in the
South, will for a minute conceive that the southern white man had a very
chivalrous regard for the honor due the women of his own race or respect
for the womanhood which circumstances placed in his power. That chivalry
which is "most sensitive concerning the honor of women" can hope for but
little respect from the civilized world, when it confines itself entirely
to the women who happen to be white. Virtue knows no color line, and the
chivalry which depends upon complexion of skin and texture of hair can
command no honest respect.

When emancipation came to the Negroes, there arose in the northern part of
the United States an almost divine sentiment among the noblest, purest
and best white women of the North, who felt called to a mission to educate
and Christianize the millions of southern exslaves. From every nook and
corner of the North, brave young white women answered that call and left
their cultured homes, their happy associations and their lives of ease,
and with heroic determination went to the South to carry light and truth
to the benighted blacks. It was a heroism no less than that which calls
for volunteers for India, Africa and the Isles of the sea. To educate
their unfortunate charges; to teach them the Christian virtues and to
inspire in them the moral sentiments manifest in their own lives, these
young women braved dangers whose record reads more like fiction than fact.
They became social outlaws in the South. The peculiar sensitiveness of the
southern white men for women, never shed its protecting influence about
them. No friendly word from their own race cheered them in their work; no
hospitable doors gave them the companionship like that from which they had
come. No chivalrous white man doffed his hat in honor or respect. They
were "Nigger teachers"--unpardonable offenders in the social ethics of the
South, and were insulted, persecuted and ostracised, not by Negroes, but
by the white manhood which boasts of its chivalry toward women.

And yet these northern women worked on, year after year, unselfishly, with
a heroism which amounted almost to martyrdom. Threading their way through
dense forests, working in schoolhouse, in the cabin and in the church,
thrown at all times and in all places among the unfortunate and lowly
Negroes, whom they had come to find and to serve, these northern women,
thousands and thousands of them, have spent more than a quarter of a
century in giving to the colored people their splendid lessons for home
and heart and soul. Without protection, save that which innocence gives to
every good woman, they went about their work, fearing no assault and
suffering none. Their chivalrous protectors were hundreds of miles away in
their northern homes, and yet they never feared any "great dark-faced
mobs," they dared night or day to "go beyond their own roof trees." They
never complained of assaults, and no mob was ever called into existence to
avenge crimes against them. Before the world adjudges the Negro a moral
monster, a vicious assailant of womanhood and a menace to the sacred
precincts of home, the colored people ask the consideration of the silent
record of gratitude, respect, protection and devotion of the millions of
the race in the South, to the thousands of northern white women who have
served as teachers and missionaries since the war.

The Negro may not have known what chivalry was, but he knew enough to
preserve inviolate the womanhood of the South which was entrusted to his
hands during the war. The finer sensibilities of his soul may have been
crushed out by years of slavery, but his heart was full of gratitude to
the white women of the North, who blessed his home and inspired his soul
in all these years of freedom. Faithful to his trust in both of these
instances, he should now have the impartial ear of the civilized world,
when he dares to speak for himself as against the infamy wherewith he
stands charged.

It is his regret, that, in his own defense, he must disclose to the world
that degree of dehumanizing brutality which fixes upon America the blot of
a national crime. Whatever faults and failings other nations may have in
their dealings with their own subjects or with other people, no other
civilized nation stands condemned before the world with a series of crimes
so peculiarly national. It becomes a painful duty of the Negro to
reproduce a record which shows that a large portion of the American people
avow anarchy, condone murder and defy the contempt of civilization. These
pages are written in no spirit of vindictiveness, for all who give the
subject consideration must concede that far too serious is the condition
of that civilized government in which the spirit of unrestrained outlawry
constantly increases in violence, and casts its blight over a continually
growing area of territory. We plead not for the colored people alone, but
for all victims of the terrible injustice which puts men and women to
death without form of law. During the year 1894, there were 132 persons
executed in the United States by due form of law, while in the same year,
197 persons were put to death by mobs who gave the victims no opportunity
to make a lawful defense. No comment need be made upon a condition of
public sentiment responsible for such alarming results.

The purpose of the pages which follow shall be to give the record which
has been made, not by colored men, but that which is the result of
compilations made by white men, of reports sent over the civilized world
by white men in the South. Out of their own mouths shall the murderers be
condemned. For a number of years the _Chicago Tribune_, admittedly one of
the leading journals of America, has made a specialty of the compilation
of statistics touching upon lynching. The data compiled by that journal
and published to the world January 1, 1894, up to the present time has not
been disputed. In order to be safe from the charge of exaggeration, the
incidents hereinafter reported have been confined to those vouched for by
the Tribune.




2

LYNCH-LAW STATISTICS


From the record published in the _Chicago Tribune_, January 1, 1894, the
following computation of lynching statistics is made referring only to the
colored victims of Lynch Law during the year 1893:

ARSON

Sept. 15, Paul Hill, Carrollton, Ala.; Sept. 15, Paul Archer, Carrollton,
Ala.; Sept. 15, William Archer, Carrollton, Ala.; Sept. 15, Emma Fair,
Carrollton, Ala.


SUSPECTED ROBBERY

Dec. 23, unknown negro, Fannin, Miss.


ASSAULT

Dec. 25, Calvin Thomas, near Brainbridge, Ga.


ATTEMPTED ASSAULT

Dec. 28, Tillman Green, Columbia, La.


INCENDIARISM

Jan. 26, Patrick Wells, Quincy, Fla.; Feb. 9, Frank Harrell, Dickery,
Miss.; Feb. 9, William Filder, Dickery, Miss.


ATTEMPTED RAPE

Feb. 21, Richard Mays, Springville, Mo.; Aug. 14, Dug Hazleton,
Carrollton, Ga.; Sept. 1, Judge McNeil, Cadiz, Ky.; Sept. 11, Frank Smith,
Newton, Miss.; Sept. 16, William Jackson, Nevada, Mo.; Sept. 19, Riley
Gulley, Pine Apple, Ala.; Oct. 9, John Davis, Shorterville, Ala.; Nov. 8,
Robert Kennedy, Spartansburg, S.C.


BURGLARY

Feb. 16, Richard Forman, Granada, Miss.


WIFE BEATING

Oct. 14, David Jackson, Covington, La.


ATTEMPTED MURDER

Sept. 21, Thomas Smith, Roanoke, Va.


ATTEMPTED ROBBERY

Dec. 12, four unknown negroes, near Selma, Ala.


RACE PREJUDICE

Jan. 30, Thomas Carr, Kosciusko, Miss.; Feb. 7, William Butler, Hickory
Creek, Texas; Aug. 27, Charles Tart, Lyons Station, Miss.; Dec. 7, Robert
Greenwood, Cross county, Ark.; July 14, Allen Butler, Lawrenceville, Ill.


THIEVES

Oct. 24, two unknown negroes, Knox Point, La.


ALLEGED BARN BURNING

Nov. 4, Edward Wagner, Lynchburg, Va.; Nov. 4, William Wagner, Lynchburg,
Va.; Nov. 4, Samuel Motlow, Lynchburg, Va.; Nov. 4, Eliza Motlow,
Lynchburg, Va.


ALLEGED MURDER

Jan. 21, Robert Landry, St. James Parish, La.; Jan. 21, Chicken George,
St. James Parish, La.; Jan. 21, Richard Davis, St. James Parish, La.; Dec.
8, Benjamin Menter, Berlin, Ala.; Dec. 8, Robert Wilkins, Berlin, Ala.;
Dec. 8, Joseph Gevhens, Berlin, Ala.


ALLEGED COMPLICITY IN MURDER

Sept. 16, Valsin Julian, Jefferson Parish, La.; Sept. 16, Basil Julian,
Jefferson Parish, La.; Sept. 16, Paul Julian, Jefferson Parish, La.; Sept.
16, John Willis, Jefferson Parish, La.


MURDER

June 29, Samuel Thorp, Savannah, Ga.; June 29, George S. Riechen,
Waynesboro, Ga.; June 30, Joseph Bird, Wilberton, I.T.; July 1, James
Lamar, Darien, Ga.; July 28, Henry Miller, Dallas, Texas; July 28, Ada
Hiers, Walterboro, S.C.; July 28, Alexander Brown, Bastrop, Texas; July
30, W.G. Jamison, Quincy, Ill.; Sept. 1, John Ferguson, Lawrens, S.C.;
Sept. 1, Oscar Johnston, Berkeley, S.C.; Sept. 1, Henry Ewing, Berkeley,
S.C.; Sept. 8, William Smith, Camden, Ark.; Sept. 15, Staples Green,
Livingston, Ala.; Sept. 29, Hiram Jacobs, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Sept. 29,
Lucien Mannet, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Sept. 29, Hire Bevington, Mount Vernon,
Ga.; Sept. 29, Weldon Gordon, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Sept. 29, Parse
Strickland, Mount Vernon, Ga.; Oct. 20, William Dalton, Cartersville, Ga.;
Oct. 27, M.B. Taylor, Wise Court House, Va.; Oct. 27, Isaac Williams,
Madison, Ga.; Nov. 10, Miller Davis, Center Point, Ark.; Nov. 14, John
Johnston, Auburn, N.Y.

Sept. 27, Calvin Stewart, Langley, S.C.; Sept. 29, Henry Coleman, Denton,
La.; Oct. 18, William Richards, Summerfield, Ga.; Oct. 18, James Dickson,
Summerfield, Ga.; Oct. 27, Edward Jenkins, Clayton county, Ga.; Nov. 9,
Henry Boggs, Fort White, Fla.; Nov. 14, three unknown negroes, Lake City
Junction, Fla.; Nov. 14, D.T. Nelson, Varney, Ark.; Nov. 29, Newton Jones,
Baxley, Ga.; Dec. 2, Lucius Holt, Concord, Ga.; Dec. 10, two unknown
negroes, Richmond, Ala.; July 12, Henry Fleming, Columbus, Miss.; July 17,
unknown negro, Briar Field, Ala.; July 18, Meredith Lewis, Roseland, La.
July 29, Edward Bill, Dresden, Tenn.; Aug. 1, Henry Reynolds, Montgomery,
Tenn.; Aug. 9, unknown negro, McCreery, Ark.; Aug. 12, unknown negro,
Brantford, Fla.; Aug. 18, Charles Walton, Morganfield, Ky; Aug. 21,
Charles Tait, near Memphis, Tenn.; Aug. 28, Leonard Taylor, New Castle,
Ky; Sept. 8, Benjamin Jackson, Quincy, Miss.; Sept. 14, John Williams,
Jackson, Tenn.


SELF-DEFENSE

July 30, unknown negro, Wingo, Ky.


POISONING WELLS

Aug. 18, two unknown negroes, Franklin Parish, La.


ALLEGED WELL POISONING

Sept. 15, Benjamin Jackson, Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 15, Mahala Jackson,
Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 15, Louisa Carter, Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 15, W.A.
Haley, Jackson, Miss.; Sept. 16, Rufus Bigley, Jackson, Miss.


INSULTING WHITES

Feb. 18, John Hughes, Moberly, Mo.; June 2, Isaac Lincoln, Fort Madison,
S.C.


MURDEROUS ASSAULT

April 20, Daniel Adams, Selina, Kan.


NO OFFENSE

July 21, Charles Martin, Shelby Co., Tenn.; July 30, William Steen, Paris,
Miss.; Aug. 31, unknown negro, Yarborough, Tex.; Sept. 30, unknown negro,
Houston, Tex.; Dec. 28, Mack Segars, Brantley, Ala.


ALLEGED RAPE

July 7, Charles T. Miller, Bardwell, Ky.; Aug. 10, Daniel Lewis, Waycross,
Ga.; Aug. 10, James Taylor, Waycross, Ga.; Aug. 10, John Chambers,
Waycross, Ga.


ALLEGED STOCK POISONING

Dec. 16, Henry G. Givens, Nebro, Ky.


SUSPECTED MURDER

Dec. 23, Sloan Allen, West Mississippi.


SUSPICION OF RAPE

Feb. 14, Andy Blount, Chattanooga, Tenn.


TURNING STATE'S EVIDENCE

Dec. 19, William Ferguson, Adele, Ga.


RAPE

Jan. 19, James Williams, Pickens Co., Ala.; Feb. 11, unknown negro, Forest
Hill, Tenn.; Feb. 26, Joseph Hayne, or Paine, Jellico, Tenn.; Nov. 1,
Abner Anthony, Hot Springs, Va.; Nov. 1, Thomas Hill, Spring Place, Ga.;
April 24, John Peterson, Denmark, S.C.; May 6, Samuel Gaillard, ----,
S.C.; May 10, Haywood Banks, or Marksdale, Columbia, S.C.; May 12, Israel
Halliway, Napoleonville, La.; May 12, unknown negro, Wytheville, Va.; May
31, John Wallace, Jefferson Springs, Ark.; June 3, Samuel Bush, Decatur,
Ill.; June 8, L.C. Dumas, Gleason, Tenn.; June 13, William Shorter,
Winchester, Va.; June 14, George Williams, near Waco, Tex.; June 24,
Daniel Edwards, Selina or Selma, Ala.; June 27, Ernest Murphy, Daleville,
Ala.; July 6, unknown negro, Poplar Head, La.; July 6, unknown negro,
Poplar Head, La.; July 12, Robert Larkin, Oscola, Tex.; July 17, Warren
Dean, Stone Creek, Ga.; July 21, unknown negro, Brantford, Fla.; July 17,
John Cotton, Connersville, Ark.; July 22, Lee Walker, New Albany, Miss.;
July 26, ---- Handy, Suansea, S.C.; July 30, William Thompson, Columbia,
S.C.; July 28, Isaac Harper, Calera, Ala.; July 30, Thomas Preston,
Columbia, S.C.; July 30, Handy Kaigler, Columbia, S.C.; Aug. 13, Monroe
Smith, Springfield, Ala.; Aug. 19, negro tramp, near Paducah, Ky.; Aug.
21, John Nilson, near Leavenworth, Kan.; Aug. 23, Jacob Davis, Green Wood,
S.C.; Sept. 2, William Arkinson, McKenney, Ky.; Sept. 16, unknown negro,
Centerville, Ala.; Sept. 16, Jessie Mitchell, Amelia C.H., Va.; Sept. 25,
Perry Bratcher, New Boston, Tex.; Oct. 9, William Lacey, Jasper, Ala.;
Oct. 22, John Gamble, Pikesville, Tenn.


OFFENSES CHARGED ARE AS FOLLOWS

Rape, 39; attempted rape, 8; alleged rape, 4; suspicion of rape, 1;
murder, 44; alleged murder, 6; alleged complicity in murder, 4; murderous
assault, 1; attempted murder, 1; attempted robbery, 4; arson, 4;
incendiarism, 3; alleged stock poisoning, 1; poisoning wells, 2; alleged
poisoning wells, 5; burglary, 1; wife beating, 1; self-defense, 1;
suspected robbery, 1; assault and battery, 1; insulting whites, 2;
malpractice, 1; alleged barn burning, 4; stealing, 2; unknown offense, 4;
no offense, 1; race prejudice, 4; total, 159.


LYNCHINGS BY STATES

Alabama, 25; Arkansas, 7; Florida, 7; Georgia, 24; Indian Territory, 1;
Illinois, 3; Kansas, 2; Kentucky, 8; Louisiana, 18; Mississippi, 17;
Missouri, 3; New York, 1; South Carolina, 15; Tennessee, 10; Texas, 8;
Virginia, 10.


RECORD FOR THE YEAR 1892

While it is intended that the record here presented shall include
specially the lynchings of 1893, it will not be amiss to give the record
for the year preceding. The facts contended for will always appear
manifest--that not one-third of the victims lynched were charged with
rape, and further that the charges made embraced a range of offenses from
murders to misdemeanors.

In 1892 there were 241 persons lynched. The entire number is divided among
the following states:

Alabama, 22; Arkansas, 25; California, 3; Florida, 11; Georgia, 17; Idaho,
8; Illinois, 1; Kansas, 3; Kentucky, 9; Louisiana, 29; Maryland, 1;
Mississippi, 16; Missouri, 6; Montana, 4; New York, 1; North Carolina, 5;
North Dakota, 1; Ohio, 3; South Carolina, 5; Tennessee, 28; Texas, 15;
Virginia, 7; West Virginia, 5; Wyoming, 9; Arizona Territory, 3; Oklahoma,
2.

Of this number 160 were of Negro descent. Four of them were lynched in New
York, Ohio and Kansas; the remainder were murdered in the South. Five of
this number were females. The charges for which they were lynched cover a
wide range. They are as follows:

Rape, 46; murder, 58; rioting, 3; race prejudice, 6; no cause given, 4;
incendiarism, 6; robbery, 6; assault and battery, 1; attempted rape, 11;
suspected robbery, 4; larceny, 1; self-defense, 1; insulting women, 2;
desperadoes, 6; fraud, 1; attempted murder, 2; no offense stated, boy and
girl, 2.

In the case of the boy and girl above referred to, their father, named
Hastings, was accused of the murder of a white man; his fourteen-year-old
daughter and sixteen-year-old son were hanged and their bodies filled with
bullets, then the father was also lynched. This was in November, 1892, at
Jonesville, Louisiana.




3

LYNCHING IMBECILES

_(An Arkansas Butchery)_


The only excuse which capital punishment attempts to find is upon the
theory that the criminal is past the power of reformation and his life is
a constant menace to the community. If, however, he is mentally
unbalanced, irresponsible for his acts, there can be no more inhuman act
conceived of than the wilful sacrifice of his life. So thoroughly is that
principle grounded in the law, that all civilized society surrounds human
life with a safeguard, which prevents the execution of a criminal who is
insane, even if sane at the time of his criminal act. Should he become
insane after its commission the law steps in and protects him during the
period of his insanity. But Lynch Law has no such regard for human life.
Assuming for itself an absolute supremacy over the law of the land, it has
time and again dyed its hands in the blood of men who were imbeciles. Two
or three noteworthy cases will suffice to show with what inhuman ferocity
irresponsible men have been put to death by this system of injustice.

An instance occurred during the year 1892 in Arkansas, a report of which
is given in full in the _Arkansas Democrat_, published at Little Rock, in
that state, on the eleventh day of February of that year. The paper
mentioned is perhaps one of the leading weeklies in that state and the
account given in detail has every mark of a careful and conscientious
investigation. The victims of this tragedy were a colored man, named Hamp
Biscoe, his wife and a thirteen-year-old son. Hamp Biscoe, it appears, was
a hard working, thrifty farmer, who lived near England, Arkansas, upon a
small farm with his family. The investigation of the tragedy was
conducted by a resident of Arkansas named R.B. Caries, a white man, who
furnished the account to the _Arkansas Democrat_ over his own signature.
He says the original trouble which led to the lynching was a quarrel
between Biscoe and a white man about a debt. About six years after Biscoe
preempted his land, a white man made a demand of $100 upon him for
services in showing him the land and making the sale. Biscoe denied the
service and refused to pay the demand. The white man, however, brought
suit, obtained judgment for the hundred dollars and Biscoe's farm was sold
to pay the judgment.

The suit, judgment and subsequent legal proceedings appear to have driven
Biscoe almost crazy and brooding over his wrongs he grew to be a confirmed
imbecile. He would allow but few men, white or colored, to come upon his
place, as he suspected every stranger to be planning to steal his farm. A
week preceding the tragedy, a white man named Venable, whose farm adjoined
Biscoe's, let down the fence and proceeded to drive through Biscoe's
field. The latter saw him; grew very excited, cursed him and drove him
from his farm with bitter oaths and violent threats. Venable went away and
secured a warrant for Biscoe's arrest. This warrant was placed in the
hands of a constable named John Ford, who took a colored deputy and two
white men out to Biscoe's farm to make the arrest. When they arrived at
the house Biscoe refused to be arrested and warned them he would shoot if
they persisted in their attempt to arrest him. The warning was unheeded by
Ford, who entered upon the premises, when Biscoe, true to his word, fired
upon him. The load tore a part of his clothes from his body, one shot
going through his arm and entering his breast. After he had fallen, Ford
drew his revolver and shot Biscoe in the head and his wife through the
arm. The Negro deputy then began firing and struck Biscoe in the small of
the back. Ford's wound was not dangerous and in a few days he was able to
be around again. Biscoe, however, was so severely shot that he was unable
to stand after the firing was over.

Two other white men hearing the exchange of shots went to the rescue of
the officers, forced open the door of Biscoe's cabin and arrested him, his
wife and thirteen-year-old son, and took them, together with a babe at the
breast, to a small frame house near the depot and put them under guard.
The subsequent proceedings were briefly told by Mr. Carlee in the columns
of the _Arkansas Democrat_ above mentioned, from whose account the
following excerpt is taken:

  It was rumored here that the Negroes were to be lynched that night, but
  I do not think it was generally credited, as it was not believed that
  Ford was greatly hurt and the Negro was held to be fatally injured and
  crazy at that. But that night, about 8 o'clock, a party of perhaps
  twelve or fifteen men, a number of whom were known to the guards, came
  to the house and told the Negro guards they would take care of the
  prisoners now, and for them to leave; as they did not obey at once they
  were persuaded to leave with words that did not admit of delay.

  The woman began to cry and said, "You intend to kill us to get our
  money." They told her to hush (she was heavy with child and had a child
  at her breast) as they intended to give her a nice present. The guards
  heard no more, but hastened to a Negro church near by and urged the
  preacher to go up and stop the mob. A few minutes after, the shooting
  began, perhaps about forty shots being fired. The white men then left
  rapidly and the Negroes went to the house. Hamp Biscoe and his wife were
  killed, the baby had a slight wound across the upper lip; the boy was
  still alive and lived until after midnight, talking rationally and
  telling who did the shooting.

  He said when they came in and shot his father, he attempted to run out
  of doors and a young man shot him in the bowels and that he fell. He saw
  another man shoot his mother and a taller young man, whom he did not
  know, shoot his father. After they had killed them, the young man who
  had shot his mother pulled off her stockings and took $220 in currency
  that she had hid there. The men then came to the door where the boy was
  lying and one of them turned him over and put his pistol to his breast
  and shot him again. This is the story the dying boy told as near as I
  can get it. It is quite singular that the guards and those who had
  conversed with him were not required to testify. The woman was known to
  have the money as she had exposed it that day. She also had $36 in
  silver, which the plunderer of the body did not get. The Negro was
  undoubtedly insane and had been for several years. The citizens of this
  community condemn the murder and have no sympathy with it. The Negro was
  a well-to-do farmer, but had become crazed because he was convinced some
  plot had been made to steal his land and only a few days ago declared
  that he expected to die in defense of his home in a short time and he
  did not care how soon. The killing of a woman with the child at her
  breast and in her condition, and also a young boy, was extremely brutal.
  As for Hamp Biscoe he was dangerous and should long have been confined
  in the insane asylum. Such were the facts as near as I can get them and
  you can use them as you see fit, but I would prefer you would suppress
  the names charged by the Negroes with the killing.

Perhaps the civilized world will think, that with all these facts laid
before the public, by a writer who signs his name to his communication, in
a land where grand juries are sworn to investigate, where judges and
juries are sworn to administer the law and sheriffs are paid to execute
the decrees of the courts, and where, in fact, every instrument of
civilization is supposed to work for the common good of all citizens, that
this matter was duly investigated, the criminals apprehended and the
punishment meted out to the murderers. But this is a mistake; nothing of
the kind was done or attempted. Six months after the publication, above
referred to, an investigator, writing to find out what had been done in
the matter, received the following reply:

  OFFICE OF
  S.S. GLOVER,
  SHERIFF AND COLLECTOR,
  LONOKE COUNTY.

  Lonoke, Ark., 9-12-1892

  Geo. Washington, Esq.,
  Chicago, Ill.

  DEAR SIR:--The parties who killed Hamp Briscoe February the ninth, have
  never been arrested. The parties are still in the county. It was done by
  some of the citizens, and those who know will not tell.

  S.S. GLOVER, Sheriff

Thus acts the mob with the victim of its fury, conscious that it will
never be called to an account. Not only is this true, but the moral
support of those who are chosen by the people to execute the law, is
frequently given to the support of lawlessness and mob violence. The press
and even the pulpit, in the main either by silence or open apology, have
condoned and encouraged this state of anarchy.


TORTURED AND BURNED IN TEXAS

Never In the history of civilization has any Christian people stooped to
such shocking brutality and indescribable barbarism as that which
characterized the people of Paris, Texas, and adjacent communities on the
first of February, 1893. The cause of this awful outbreak of human passion
was the murder of a four-year-old child, daughter of a man named Vance.
This man, Vance, had been a police officer in Paris for years, and was
known to be a man of bad temper, overbearing manner and given to harshly
treating the prisoners under his care. He had arrested Smith and, it is
said, cruelly mistreated him. Whether or not the murder of his child was
an art of fiendish revenge, it has not been shown, but many persons who
know of the incident have suggested that the secret of the attack on the
child lay in a desire for revenge against its father.

In the same town there lived a Negro, named Henry Smith, a well-known
character, a kind of roustabout, who was generally considered a harmless,
weak-minded fellow, not capable of doing any important work, but
sufficiently able to do chores and odd jobs around the houses of the white
people who cared to employ him. A few days before the final tragedy, this
man, Smith, was accused of murdering Myrtle Vance. The crime of murder was
of itself bad enough, and to prove that against Smith would have been
amply sufficient in Texas to have committed him to the gallows, but the
finding of the child so exasperated the father and his friends, that they
at once shamefully exaggerated the facts and declared that the babe had
been ruthlessly assaulted and then killed. The truth was bad enough, but
the white people of the community made it a point to exaggerate every
detail of the awful affair, and to inflame the public mind so that nothing
less than immediate and violent death would satisfy the populace. As a
matter of fact, the child was not brutally assaulted as the world has been
told in excuse for the awful barbarism of that day. Persons who saw the
child after its death, have stated, under the most solemn pledge to truth,
that there was no evidence of such an assault as was published at that
time, only a slight abrasion and discoloration was noticeable and that
mostly about the neck. In spite of this fact, so eminent a man as Bishop
Haygood deliberately and, it must also appear, maliciously falsified the
fact by stating that the child was torn limb from limb, or to quote his
own words, "First outraged with demoniacal cruelty and then taken by her
heels and torn asunder in the mad wantonness of gorilla ferocity."

Nothing is farther from the truth than that statement. It is a
coldblooded, deliberate, brutal falsehood which this Christian(?) Bishop
uses to bolster up the infamous plea that the people of Paris were driven
to insanity by learning that the little child had been viciously
assaulted, choked to death, and then torn to pieces by a demon in human
form. It was a brutal murder, but no more brutal than hundreds of murders
which occur in this country, and which have been equalled every year in
fiendishness and brutality, and for which the death penalty is prescribed
by law and inflicted only after the person has been legally adjudged
guilty of the crime. Those who knew Smith, believe that Vance had at some
time given him cause to seek revenge and that this fearful crime was the
outgrowth of his attempt to avenge himself of some real or fancied wrong.
That the murderer was known as an imbecile, had no effect whatever upon
the people who thirsted for his blood. They determined to make an example
of him and proceeded to carry out their purpose with unspeakably greater
ferocity than that which characterized the half-crazy object of their
revenge.

For a day or so after the child was found in the woods, Smith remained in
the vicinity as if nothing had happened, and when finally becoming aware
that he was suspected, he made an attempt to escape. He was apprehended,
however, not far from the scene of his crime and the news flashed across
the country that the white Christian people of Paris, Texas and the
communities thereabout had deliberately determined to lay aside all forms
of law and inaugurate an entirely new form of punishment for the murder.
They absolutely refused to make any inquiry as to the sanity or insanity
of their prisoner, but set the day and hour when in the presence of
assembled thousands they put their helpless victim to the stake, tortured
him, and then burned him to death for the delectation and satisfaction of
Christian people.

Lest it might be charged that any description of the deeds of that day are
exaggerated, a white man's description which was published in the white
journals of this country is used. The _New York Sun_ of February 2, 1893,
contains an account, from which we make the following excerpt:

  PARIS, Tex., Feb. 1, 1893.--Henry Smith, the negro ravisher of
  four-year-old Myrtle Vance, has expiated in part his awful crime by
  death at the stake. Ever since the perpetration of his awful crime this
  city and the entire surrounding country has been in a wild frenzy of
  excitement. When the news came last night that he had been captured at
  Hope, Ark., that he had been identified by B.B. Sturgeon, James T.
  Hicks, and many other of the Paris searching party, the city was wild
  with joy over the apprehension of the brute. Hundreds of people poured
  into the city from the adjoining country and the word passed from lip
  to lip that the punishment of the fiend should fit the crime that death
  by fire was the penalty Smith should pay for the most atrocious murder
  and terrible outrage in Texas history. Curious and sympathizing alike,
  they came on train and wagons, on horse, and on foot to see if the frail
  mind of a man could think of a way to sufficiently punish the
  perpetrator of so terrible a crime. Whisky shops were closed, unruly
  mobs were dispersed, schools were dismissed by a proclamation from the
  mayor, and everything was done in a business-like manner.


MEETING OF CITIZENS

About 2 o'clock Friday a mass meeting was called at the courthouse and
captains appointed to search for the child. She was found mangled beyond
recognition, covered with leaves and brush as above mentioned. As soon as
it was learned upon the recovery of the body that the crime was so
atrocious the whole town turned out in the chase. The railroads put up
bulletins offering free transportation to all who would join in the
search. Posses went in every direction, and not a stone was left unturned.
Smith was tracked to Detroit on foot, where he jumped on a freight train
and left for his old home in Hempstead county, Arkansas. To this county he
was tracked and yesterday captured at Clow, a flag station on the Arkansas
& Louisiana railway about twenty miles north of Hope. Upon being
questioned the fiend denied everything, but upon being stripped for
examination his undergarments were seen to be spattered with blood and a
part of his shirt was torn off. He was kept under heavy guard at Hope last
night, and later on confessed the crime.

This morning he was brought through Texarkana, where 5,000 people awaited
the train, anxious to see a man who had received the fate of Ed. Coy. At
that place speeches were made by prominent Paris citizens, who asked that
the prisoner be not molested by Texarkana people, but that the guard be
allowed to deliver him up to the outraged and indignant citizens of Paris.
Along the road the train gathered strength from the various towns, the
people crowded upon the platforms and tops of coaches anxious to see the
lynching and the negro who was soon to be delivered to an infuriated mob.


BURNED AT THE STAKE

Arriving here at 12 o'clock the train was met by a surging mass of
humanity 10,000 strong. The negro was placed upon a carnival float in
mockery of a king upon his throne, and, followed by an immense crowd, was
escorted through the city so that all might see the most inhuman monster
known in current history. The line of march was up Main Street to the
square, around the square down Clarksville street to Church Street, thence
to the open prairies about 300 yards from the Texas & Pacific depot. Here
Smith was placed upon a scaffold, six feet square and ten feet high,
securely bound, within the view of all beholders. Here the victim was
tortured for fifty minutes by red-hot iron brands thrust against his
quivering body. Commencing at the feet the brands were placed against him
inch by inch until they were thrust against the face. Then, being
apparently dead, kerosene was poured upon him, cottonseed hulls placed
beneath him and set on fire. In less time than it takes to relate it, the
tortured man was wafted beyond the grave to another fire, hotter and more
terrible than the one just experienced.

Curiosity seekers have carried away already all that was left of the
memorable event, even to pieces of charcoal. The cause of the crime was
that Henry Vance when a deputy policeman, in the course of his duty was
called to arrest Henry Smith for being drunk and disorderly. The Negro was
unruly, and Vance was forced to use his club. The Negro swore vengeance,
and several times assaulted Vance. In his greed for revenge, last
Thursday, he grabbed up the little girl and committed the crime. The
father is prostrated with grief and the mother now lies at death's door,
but she has lived to see the slayer of her innocent babe suffer the most
horrible death that could be conceived.


TORTURE BEYOND DESCRIPTION

Words to describe the awful torture inflicted upon Smith cannot be found.
The Negro, for a long time after starting on the journey to Paris, did not
realize his plight. At last when he was told that he must die by slow
torture he begged for protection. His agony was awful. He pleaded and
writhed in bodily and mental pain. Scarcely had the train reached Paris
than this torture commenced. His clothes were torn off piecemeal and
scattered in the crowd, people catching the shreds and putting them away
as mementos. The child's father, her brother, and two uncles then gathered
about the Negro as he lay fastened to the torture platform and thrust hot
irons into his quivering flesh. It was horrible--the man dying by slow
torture in the midst of smoke from his own burning flesh. Every groan from
the fiend, every contortion of his body was cheered by the thickly packed
crowd of 10,000 persons. The mass of beings 600 yards in diameter, the
scaffold being the center. After burning the feet and legs, the hot
irons--plenty of fresh ones being at hand--were rolled up and down Smith's
stomach, back, and arms. Then the eyes were burned out and irons were
thrust down his throat.

The men of the Vance family having wreaked vengeance, the crowd piled all
kinds of combustible stuff around the scaffold, poured oil on it and set
it afire. The Negro rolled and tossed out of the mass, only to be pushed
back by the people nearest him. He tossed out again, and was roped and
pulled back. Hundreds of people turned away, but the vast crowd still
looked calmly on. People were here from every part of this section. They
came from Dallas, Fort Worth, Sherman, Denison, Bonham, Texarkana, Fort
Smith, Ark., and a party of fifteen came from Hempstead county, Arkansas,
where he was captured. Every train that came in was loaded to its utmost
capacity, and there were demands at many points for special trains to
bring the people here to see the unparalleled punishment for an
unparalleled crime. When the news of the burning went over the country
like wildfire, at every country town anvils boomed forth the announcement.


SHOULD HAVE BEEN IN AN ASYLUM

It may not be amiss in connection with this awful affair, in proof of our
assertion that Smith was an imbecile, to give the testimony of a
well-known colored minister, who lived at Paris, Texas, at the time of the
lynching. He was a witness of the awful scenes there enacted, and
attempted, in the name of God and humanity, to interfere in the programme.
He barely escaped with his life, was driven out of the city and became an
exile because of his actions. Reverend King was in New York about the
middle of February, and he was there interviewed for a daily paper for
that city, and we quote his account as an eye witness of the affair. Said
he:

  I was ridden out of Paris on a rail because I was the only man in Lamar
  county to raise my voice against the lynching of Smith. I opposed the
  illegal measures before the arrival of Henry Smith as a prisoner, and I
  was warned that I might meet his fate if I was not careful; but the
  sense of justice made me bold, and when I saw the poor wretch trembling
  with fear, and got so near him that I could hear his teeth chatter, I
  determined to stand by him to the last.

  I hated him for his crime, but two crimes do not make a virtue; and in
  the brief conversation I had with Smith I was more firmly convinced than
  ever that he was irresponsible.

  I had known Smith for years, and there were times when Smith was out of
  his head for weeks. Two years ago I made an effort to have him put in an
  asylum, but the white people were trying to fasten the murder of a young
  colored girl upon him, and would not listen. For days before the murder
  of the little Vance girl, Smith was out of his head and dangerous. He
  had just undergone an attack of delirium tremens and was in no condition
  to be allowed at large. He realized his condition, for I spoke with him
  not three weeks ago, and in answer to my exhortations, he promised to
  reform. The next time I saw him was on the day of his execution.

  "Drink did it! drink did it," he sobbed. Then bowing his face in his
  hands, he asked: "Is it true, did I kill her? Oh, my God, my God!" For a
  moment he seemed to forget the awful fate that awaited him, and his body
  swayed to and fro with grief. Some one seized me by the shoulder and
  hurled me back, and Smith fell writhing to the ground in terror as four
  men seized his arms to drag him to the float on which he was to be
  exhibited before he was finally burned at the stake.

  I followed the procession and wept aloud as I saw little children of my
  own race follow the unfortunate man and taunt him with jeers. Even at
  the stake, children of both sexes and colors gathered in groups, and
  when the father of the murdered child raised the hissing iron with which
  he was about to torture the helpless victim, the children became as
  frantic as the grown people and struggled forward to obtain places of
  advantage.

  It was terrible. One little tot scarcely older than little Myrtle Vance
  clapped her baby hands as her father held her on his shoulders above the
  heads of the people.

  "For God's sake," I shouted, "send the children home."

  "No, no," shouted a hundred maddened voices; "let them learn a lesson."

  I love children, but as I looked about the little faces distorted with
  passion and the bloodshot eyes of the cruel parents who held them high
  in their arms, I thanked God that I have none of my own.

  As the hot iron sank deep into poor Henry's flesh a hideous yell rent
  the air, and, with a sound as terrible as the cry, of lost souls on
  judgment day, 20,000 maddened people took up the victim's cry of agony
  and a prolonged howl of maddened glee rent the air.

  No one was himself now. Every man, woman and child in that awful crowd
  was worked up to a greater frenzy than that which actuated Smith's
  horrible crime. The people were capable of any new atrocity now, and as
  Smith's yells became more and more frequent, it was difficult to hold
  the crowd back, so anxious were the savages to participate in the
  sickening tortures.

  For half an hour I tried to pray as the beads of agony rolled down my
  forehead and bathed my face.

  For an instant a hush spread over the people. I could stand no more, and
  with a superhuman effort dashed through the compact mass of humanity and
  stood at the foot of the burning scaffold.

  "In the name of God," I cried, "I command you to cease this torture."

  The heavy butt of a Winchester rifle descended on my head and I fell to
  the ground. Rough hands seized me and angry men bore me away, and I was
  thankful.

  At the outskirts of the crowd I was attacked again, and then several
  men, no doubt glad to get away from the fearful place, escorted me to my
  home, where I was allowed to take a small amount of clothing. A jeering
  crowd gathered without, and when I appeared at the door ready hands
  seized me and I was placed upon a rail, and, with curses and oaths,
  taken to the railway station and placed upon a train. As the train moved
  out some one thrust a roll of bills into my hand and said, "God bless
  you, but it was no use."

When asked if he should ever return to Paris, Mr. King said: "I shall
never go south again. The impressions of that awful day will stay with me
forever."


LYNCHING OF INNOCENT MEN

(Lynched on Account of Relationship)

If no other reason appealed to the sober sense of the American people to
check the growth of Lynch Law, the absolute unreliability and recklessness
of the mob in inflicting punishment for crimes done, should do so. Several
instances of this spirit have occurred in the year past. In Louisiana,
near New Orleans, in July, 1893, Roselius Julian, a colored man, shot and
killed a white judge, named Victor Estopinal. The cause of the shooting
has never been definitely ascertained. It is claimed that the Negro
resented an insult to his wife, and the killing of the white man was an
act of a Negro (who dared) to defend his home. The judge was killed in the
court house, and Julian, heavily armed, made his escape to the swamps near
the city. He has never been apprehended, nor has any information ever been
gleaned as to his whereabouts. A mob determined to secure the fugitive
murderer and burn him alive. The swamps were hunted through and through in
vain, when, being unable to wreak their revenge upon the murderer, the mob
turned its attention to his unfortunate relatives. Dispatches from New
Orleans, dated September 19, 1893, described the affair as follows:

  Posses were immediately organized and the surrounding country was
  scoured, but the search was fruitless so far as the real criminal was
  concerned. The mother, three brothers and two sisters of the Negro were
  arrested yesterday at the Black Ridge in the rear of the city by the
  police and taken to the little jail on Judge Estopinal's place about
  Southport, because of the belief that they were succoring the fugitive.

  About 11 o'clock twenty-five men, some armed with rifles and shotguns,
  came up to the jail. They unlocked the door and held a conference among
  themselves as to what they should do. Some were in favor of hanging the
  five, while others insisted that only two of the brothers should be
  strung up. This was finally agreed to, and the two doomed negroes were
  hurried to a pasture one hundred yards distant, and there asked to take
  their last chance of saving their lives by making a confession, but the
  Negroes made no reply. They were then told to kneel down and pray. One
  did so, the other remained standing, but both prayed fervently. The
  taller Negro was then hoisted up. The shorter Negro stood gazing at the
  horrible death of his brother without flinching. Five minutes later he
  was also hanged. The mob decided to take the remaining brother out to
  Camp Parapet and hang him there. The other two were to be taken out and
  flogged, with an order to get out of the parish in less than half an
  hour. The third brother, Paul, was taken out to the camp, which is about
  a mile distant in the interior, and there he was hanged to a tree.

Another young man, who was in no way related to Julian, who perhaps did
not even know the man and who was entirely innocent of any offense in
connection therewith, was murdered by the same mob. The same paper says:

  During the search for Julian on Saturday one branch of the posse visited
  the house of a Negro family in the neighborhood of Camp Parapet, and
  failing to find the object of their search, tried to induce John Willis,
  a young Negro, to disclose the whereabouts of Julian. He refused to do
  so, or could not do so, and was kicked to death by the gang.


AN INDIANA CASE

Almost equal to the ferocity of the mob which killed the three brothers,
Julian and the unoffending, John Willis, because of the murder of Judge
Estopinal, was the action of a mob near Vincennes, Ind. In this case a
wealthy colored man, named Allen Butler, who was well known in the
community, and enjoyed the confidence and respect of the entire country,
was made the victim of a mob and hung because his son had become unduly
intimate with a white girl who was a servant around his house. There was
no pretense that the facts were otherwise than as here stated. The woman
lived at Butler's house as a servant, and she and Butler's son fell in
love with each other, and later it was found that the girl was in a
delicate condition. It was claimed, but with how much truth no one has
ever been able to tell, that the father had procured an abortion, or
himself had operated on the girl, and that she had left the house to go
back to her home. It was never claimed that the father was in any way
responsible for the action of his son, but the authorities procured the
arrest of both father and son, and at the preliminary examination the
father gave bail to appear before the Grand Jury when it should convene.
On the same night, however, the mob took the matter in hand and with the
intention of hanging the son. It assembled near Sumner, while the boy, who
had been unable to give bail, was lodged in jail at Lawrenceville. As it
was impossible to reach Lawrenceville and hang the son, the leaders of the
mob concluded they would go to Butler's house and hang him. Butler was
found at his home, taken out by the mob and hung to a tree. This was in
the lawabiding state of Indiana, which furnished the United States its
last president and which claims all the honor, pride and glory of northern
civilization. None of the leaders of the mob were apprehended, and no
steps whatever were taken to bring the murderers to justice.


KILLED FOR HIS STEPFATHER'S CRIME

An account has been given of the cremation of Henry Smith, at Paris,
Texas, for the murder of the infant child of a man named Vance. It would
appear that human ferocity was not sated when it vented itself upon a
human being by burning his eyes out, by thrusting a red-hot iron down his
throat, and then by burning his body to ashes. Henry Smith, the victim of
these savage orgies, was beyond all the power of torture, but a few miles
outside of Paris, some members of the community concluded that it would be
proper to kill a stepson named William Butler as a partial penalty for the
original crime. This young man, against whom no word has ever been said,
and who was in fact an orderly, peaceable boy, had been watched with the
severest scrutiny by members of the mob who believed he knew something of
the whereabouts of Smith. He declared from the very first that he did not
know where his stepfather was, which statement was well proven to be a
fact after the discovery of Smith in Arkansas, whence he had fled through
swamps and woods and unfrequented places. Yet Butler was apprehended,
placed under arrest, and on the night of February 6, taken out on Hickory
Creek, five miles southeast of Paris, and hung for his stepfather's crime.
After his body was suspended in the air, the mob filled it with bullets.


LYNCHED BECAUSE THE JURY ACQUITTED HIM

The entire system of the judiciary of this country is in the hands of
white people. To this add the fact of the inherent prejudice against
colored people, and it will be clearly seen that a white jury is certain
to find a Negro prisoner guilty if there is the least evidence to warrant
such a finding.

Meredith Lewis was arrested in Roseland, La., in July of last year. A
white jury found him not guilty of the crime of murder wherewith he stood
charged. This did not suit the mob. A few nights after the verdict was
rendered, and he declared to be innocent, a mob gathered in his vicinity
and went to his house. He was called, and suspecting nothing, went
outside. He was seized and hurried off to a convenient spot and hanged by
the neck until he was dead for the murder of a woman of which the jury had
said he was innocent.


LYNCHED AS A SCAPEGOAT

Wednesday, July 5, about 10 o'clock in the morning, a terrible crime was
committed within four miles of Wickliffe, Ky. Two girls, Mary and Ruby
Ray, were found murdered a short distance from their home. The news of
this terrible cowardly murder of two helpless young girls spread like wild
fire, and searching parties scoured the territory surrounding Wickliffe
and Bardwell. Two of the searching party, the Clark brothers, saw a man
enter the Dupoyster cornfield; they got their guns and fired at the
fleeing figure, but without effect; he got away, but they said he was a
white man or nearly so. The search continued all day without effect, save
the arrest of two or three strange Negroes. A bloodhound was brought from
the penitentiary and put on the trail which he followed from the scene of
the murder to the river and into the boat of a fisherman named Gordon.
Gordon stated that he had ferried one man and only one across the river
about about half past six the evening of July 5; that his passenger sat in
front of him, and he was a white man or a very bright mulatto, who could
not be told from a white man. The bloodhound was put across the river in
the boat, and he struck a trail again at Bird's Point on the Missouri
side, ran about three hundred yards to the cottage of a white farmer named
Grant and there lay down refusing to go further.

Thursday morning a brakesman on a freight train going out of Sikeston,
Mo., discovered a Negro stealing a ride; he ordered him off and had hot
words which terminated in a fight. The brakesman had the Negro arrested.
When arrested, between 11 and 12 o'clock, he had on a dark woolen shirt,
light pants and coat, and no vest. He had twelve dollars in paper, two
silver dollars and ninety-five cents in change; he had also four rings in
his pockets, a knife and a razor which were rusted and stained. The
Sikeston authorities immediately jumped to the conclusion that this man
was the murderer for whom the Kentuckians across the river were searching.
They telegraphed to Bardwell that their prisoner had on no coat, but wore
a blue vest and pants which would perhaps correspond with the coat found
at the scene of the murder, and that the names of the murdered girls were
in the rings found in his possession.

As soon as this news was received, the sheriffs of Ballard and Carlisle
counties and a posse(?) of thirty well-armed and determined Kentuckians,
who had pledged their word the prisoner should be taken back to the scene
of the supposed crime, to be executed there if proved to be the guilty
man, chartered a train and at nine o'clock Thursday night started for
Sikeston. Arriving there two hours later, the sheriff at Sikeston, who had
no warrant for the prisoner's arrest and detention, delivered him into the
hands of the mob without authority for so doing, and accompanied them to
Bird's Point. The prisoner gave his name as Miller, his home at
Springfield, and said he had never been in Kentucky in his life, but the
sheriff turned him over to the mob to be taken to Wickliffe, that Frank
Gordon, the fisherman, who had put a man across the river might identify
him.

In other words, the protection of the law was withdrawn from C.J. Miller,
and he was given to a mob by this sheriff at Sikeston, who knew that the
prisoner's life depended on one man's word. After an altercation with the
train men, who wanted another $50 for taking the train back to Bird's
Point, the crowd arrived there at three o'clock, Friday morning. Here was
anchored _The Three States_, a ferryboat plying between Wickliffe, Ky,
Cairo, Ill., and Bird's Point, Mo. This boat left Cairo at twelve o'clock,
Thursday, with nearly three hundred of Cairo's best(?) citizens and thirty
kegs of beer on board. This was consumed while the crowd and the
bloodhound waited for the prisoner.

When the prisoner was on board _The Three States_ the dog was turned
loose, and after moving aimlessly around, followed the crowd to where
Miller sat handcuffed and there stopped. The crowd closed in on the pair
and insisted that the brute had identified him because of that action.
When the boat reached Wickliffe, Gordon, the fisherman, was called on to
say whether the prisoner was the man he ferried over the river the day of
the murder.

[Illustration: Lynching of C.J. Miller, at Bardwell, Kentucky, July 7,
1893.]

The sheriff of Ballard County informed him, sternly that if the prisoner
was not the man, he (the fisherman) would be held responsible as knowing
who the guilty man was. Gordon stated before, that the man he ferried
across was a white man or a bright colored man; Miller was a dark brown
skinned man, with kinky hair, "neither yellow nor black," says the _Cairo
Evening Telegram_ of Friday, July 7. The fisherman went up to Miller from
behind, looked at him without speaking for fully five minutes, then slowly
said, "Yes, that's the man I crossed over." This was about six o'clock,
Friday morning, and the crowd wished to hang Miller then and there. But
Mr. Ray, the father of the girls, insisted that he be taken to Bardwell,
the county seat of Ballard, and twelve miles inland. He said he thought a
white man committed the crime, and that he was not satisfied that was the
man. They took him to Bardwell and at ten o'clock, this same excited,
unauthorized mob undertook to determine Miller's guilt. One of the Clark
brothers who shot at a fleeing man in the Dupoyster cornfield, said the
prisoner was the same man; the other said he was not, but the testimony of
the first was accepted. A colored woman who had said she gave breakfast to
a colored man clad in a blue flannel suit the morning of the murder, said
positively that she had never seen Miller before. The gold rings found in
his possession had no names in them, as had been asserted, and Mr. Ray
said they did not belong to his daughters. Meantime a funeral pyre for the
purpose of burning Miller to death had been erected in the center of the
village. While the crowd swayed by passion was clamoring that he be burnt,
Miller stepped forward and made the following statement: "My name is
C.J. Miller. I am from Springfield, Ill.; my wife lives at 716 N. 2d
Street. I am here among you today, looked upon as one of the most brutal
men before the people. I stand here surrounded by men who are excited, men
who are not willing to let the law take its course, and as far as the
crime is concerned, I have committed no crime, and certainly no crime
gross enough to deprive me of my life and liberty to walk upon the green
earth."

A telegram was sent to the chief of the police at Springfield, Ill.,
asking if one C.J. Miller lived there. An answer in the negative was
returned. A few hours after, it was ascertained that a man named Miller,
and his wife, did live at the number the prisoner gave in his speech, but
the information came to Bardwell too late to do the prisoner any good.
Miller was taken to jail, every stitch of clothing literally torn from his
body and examined again. On the lower left side of the bosom of his shirt
was found a dark reddish spot about the size of a dime. Miller said it was
paint which he had gotten on him at Jefferson Barracks. This spot was only
on the right side, and could not be seen from the under side at all, thus
showing it had not gone through the cloth as blood or any liquid substance
would do.

Chief-of-Police Mahaney, of Cairo, Ill., was with the prisoner, and he
took his knife and scraped at the spot, particles of which came off in his
hand. Miller told them to take his clothes to any expert, and if the spot
was shown to be blood, they might do anything they wished with him. They
took his clothes away and were gone some time. After a while they were
brought back and thrown into the cell without a word. It is needless to
say that if the spot had been found to be blood, that fact would have been
announced, and the shirt retained as evidence. Meanwhile numbers of rough,
drunken men crowded into the cell and tried to force a confession of the
deed from the prisoner's lips. He refused to talk save to reiterate his
innocence. To Mr. Mahaney, who talked seriously and kindly to him, telling
him the mob meant to burn and torture him at three o'clock, Miller said:
"Burning and torture here lasts but a little while, but if I die with a
lie on my soul, I shall be tortured forever. I am innocent." For more than
three hours, all sorts of pressure in the way of threats, abuse and
urging, was brought to bear to force him to confess to the murder and thus
justify the mob in its deed of murder. Miller remained firm; but as the
hour drew near, and the crowd became more impatient, he asked for a
priest. As none could be procured, he then asked for a Methodist minister,
who came, prayed with the doomed man, baptized him and exhorted Miller to
confess. To keep up the flagging spirits of the dense crowd around the
jail, the rumor went out more than once, that Miller had confessed. But
the solemn assurance of the minister, chief-of-police, and leading
editor--who were with Miller all along--is that this rumor is absolutely
false.

At three o'clock the mob rushed to the jail to secure the prisoner. Mr.
Ray had changed his mind about the promised burning; he was still in doubt
as to the prisoner's guilt. He again addressed the crowd to that effect,
urging them not to burn Miller, and the mob heeded him so far, that they
compromised on hanging instead of burning, which was agreed to by Mr. Ray.
There was a loud yell, and a rush was made for the prisoner. He was
stripped naked, his clothing literally torn from his body, and his shirt
was tied around his loins. Some one declared the rope was a "white man's
death," and a log-chain, nearly a hundred feet in length, weighing over
one hundred pounds, was placed round Miller's neck and body, and he was
led and dragged through the streets of the village in that condition
followed by thousands of people. He fainted from exhaustion several times,
but was supported to the platform where they first intended burning him.

The chain was hooked around his neck, a man climbed the telegraph pole and
the other end of the chain was passed up to him and made fast to the
cross-arm. Others brought a long forked stick which Miller was made to
straddle. By this means he was raised several feet from the ground and
then let fall. The first fall broke his neck, but he was raised in this
way and let fall a second time. Numberless shots were fired into the
dangling body, for most of that crowd were heavily armed, and had been
drinking all day.

Miller's body hung thus exposed from three to five o'clock, during which
time, several photographs of him as he hung dangling at the end of the
chain were taken, and his toes and fingers were cut off. His body was
taken down, placed on the platform, the torch applied, and in a few
moments there was nothing left of C.J. Miller save a few bones and ashes.
Thus perished another of the many victims of Lynch Law, but it is the
honest and sober belief of many who witnessed the scene that an innocent
man has been barbarously and shockingly put to death in the glare of the
nineteenth-century civilization, by those who profess to believe in
Christianity, law and order.




5

LYNCHED FOR ANYTHING OR NOTHING

(_Lynched for Wife Beating_)


In nearly all communities wife beating is punishable with a fine, and in
no community is it made a felony. Dave Jackson, of Abita, La., was a
colored man who had beaten his wife. He had not killed her, nor seriously
wounded her, but as Louisiana lynchers had not filled out their quota of
crimes, his case was deemed of sufficient importance to apply the method
of that barbarous people. He was in the custody of the officials, but the
mob went to the jail and took him out in front of the prison and hanged
him by the neck until he was dead. This was in Nov. 1893.


HANGED FOR STEALING HOGS

Details are very meagre of a lynching which occurred near Knox Point, La.,
on the twenty-fourth of October, 1893. Upon one point, however, there was
no uncertainty, and that is, that the persons lynched were Negroes. It was
claimed that they had been stealing hogs, but even this claim had not been
subjected to the investigation of a court. That matter was not considered
necessary. A few of the neighbors who had lost hogs suspected these men
were responsible for their loss, and made up their minds to furnish an
example for others to be warned by. The two men were secured by a mob and
hanged.


LYNCHED FOR NO OFFENSE

Perhaps the most characteristic feature of this record of lynch law for
the year 1893, is the remarkable fact that five human beings were lynched
and that the matter was considered of so little importance that the
powerful press bureaus of the country did not consider the matter of
enough importance to ascertain the causes for which they were hanged. It
tells the world, with perhaps greater emphasis than any other feature of
the record, that Lynch Law has become so common in the United States that
the finding of the dead body of a Negro, suspended between heaven and
earth to the limb of a tree, is of so slight importance that neither the
civil authorities nor press agencies consider the matter worth
investigating. July 21, in Shelby County, Tenn., a colored man by the name
of Charles Martin was lynched. July 30, at Paris, Mo., a colored man named
William Steen shared the same fate. December 28, Mack Segars was announced
to have been lynched at Brantley, Alabama. August 31, at Yarborough,
Texas, and on September 19, at Houston, a colored man was found lynched,
but so little attention was paid to the matter that not only was no record
made as to why these last two men were lynched, but even their names were
not given. The dispatches simply stated that an unknown Negro was found
lynched in each case.

There are friends of humanity who feel their souls shrink from any
compromise with murder, but whose deep and abiding reverence for womanhood
causes them to hesitate in giving their support to this crusade against
Lynch Law, out of fear that they may encourage the miscreants whose deeds
are worse than murder. But to these friends it must appear certain that
these five men could not have been guilty of any terrible crime. They were
simply lynched by parties of men who had it in their power to kill them,
and who chose to avenge some fancied wrong by murder, rather than submit
their grievances to court.


LYNCHED BECAUSE THEY WERE SAUCY

At Moberly, Mo., February 18 and at Fort Madison, S.C., June 2, both in
1892, a record was made in the line of lynching which should certainly
appeal to every humanitarian who has any regard for the sacredness of
human life. John Hughes, of Moberly, and Isaac Lincoln, of Fort Madison,
and Will Lewis in Tullahoma, Tenn., suffered death for no more serious
charge than that they "were saucy to white people." In the days of slavery
it was held to be a very serious matter for a colored person to fail to
yield the sidewalk at the demand of a white person, and it will not be
surprising to find some evidence of this intolerance existing in the days
of freedom. But the most that could be expected as a penalty for acting or
speaking saucily to a white person would be a slight physical chastisement
to make the Negro "know his place" or an arrest and fine. But Missouri,
Tennessee and South Carolina chose to make precedents in their cases and
as a result both men, after being charged with their offense and
apprehended, were taken by a mob and lynched. The civil authorities, who
in either case would have been very quick to satisfy the aggrieved white
people had they complained and brought the prisoners to court, by imposing
proper penalty upon them, did not feel it their duty to make any
investigation after the Negroes were killed. They were dead and out of the
way and as no one would be called upon to render an account for their
taking off, the matter was dismissed from the public mind.


LYNCHED FOR A QUARREL

One of the most notable instances of lynching for the year 1893, occurred
about the twentieth of September. It was notable for the fact that the
mayor of the city exerted every available power to protect the victim of
the lynching from the mob. In his splendid endeavor to uphold the law, the
mayor called out the troops, and the result was a deadly fight between the
militia and mob, nine of the mob being killed. The trouble occurred at
Roanoke, Va. It is frequently claimed that lynchings occur only in
sparsely settled districts, and, in fact, it is a favorite plea of
governors and reverend apologists to couple two arrant falsehoods, stating
that lynchings occur only because of assaults upon white women, and that
these assaults occur and the lynchings follow in thinly inhabited
districts where the power of the law is entirely inadequate to meet the
emergency. This Roanoke case is a double refutation, for it not only
disproves the alleged charge that the Negro assaulted a white woman, as
was telegraphed all over the country at the time, but it also shows
conclusively that even in one of the largest cities of the old state of
Virginia, one of the original thirteen colonies, which prides itself of
being the mother of presidents, it was possible for a lynching to occur in
broad daylight under circumstances of revolting savagery.

When the news first came from Roanoke of the contemplated lynching, it was
stated that a big burly Negro had assaulted a white woman, that he had
been apprehended and that the citizens were determined to summarily
dispose of his case. Mayor Trout was a man who believed in maintaining the
majesty of the law, and who at once gave notice that no lynching would be
permitted in Roanoke, and that the Negro, whose name was Smith, being in
the custody of the law, should be dealt with according to law; but the mob
did not pay any attention to the brave words of the mayor. It evidently
thought that it was only another case of swagger, such as frequently
characterizes lynching episodes. Mayor Trout, finding immense crowds
gathering about the city, and fearing an attempt to lynch Smith, called
out the militia and stationed them at the jail.

It was known that the woman refused to accuse Smith of assaulting her, and
that his offense consisted in quarreling with her about the change of
money in a transaction in which he bought something from her market booth.
Both parties lost their temper, and the result was a row from which Smith
had to make his escape. At once the old cry was sounded that the woman had
been assaulted, and in a few hours all the town was wild with people
thirsting for the assailant's blood. The further incidents of that day may
well be told by a dispatch from Roanoke under date of the twenty-first of
September and published in the _Chicago Record_. It says:

  It is claimed by members of the military company that they frequently
  warned the mob to keep away from the jail, under penalty of being shot.
  Capt. Bird told them he was under orders to protect the prisoner whose
  life the mob so eagerly sought, and come what may he would not allow him
  to be taken by the mob. To this the crowd replied with hoots and
  derisive jeers. The rioters appeared to become frenzied at the
  determined stand taken by the men and Captain Bird, and finally a crowd
  of excited men made a rush for the side door of the jail. The captain
  directed his men to drive the would-be lynchers back.

  At this moment the mob opened fire on the soldiers. This appeared for a
  moment to startle the captain and his men. But it was only for a moment.
  Then he coolly gave the command: "Ready! aim! fire!" The company obeyed
  to the instant, and poured a volley of bullets into that part of the
  mob which was trying to batter down the side door of the jail.

  The rioters fell back before the fire of the militia, leaving one man
  writhing in the agonies of death at the doorstep. There was a lull for a
  moment. Then the word was quickly passed through the throng in front of
  the jail and down the street that a man was killed. Then there was an
  awful rush toward the little band of soldiers. Excited men were yelling
  like demons.

  The fight became general, and ere it was ended nine men were dead and
  more than forty wounded.

This stubborn stand on behalf of law and order disconcerted the crowd and
it fell back in disorder. It did not long remain inactive but assembled
again for a second assault. Having only a small band of militia, and
knowing they would be absolutely at the mercy of the thousands who were
gathering to wreak vengeance upon them, the mayor ordered them to disperse
and go to their homes, and he himself, having been wounded, was quietly
conveyed out of the city.

The next day the mob grew in numbers and its rage increased in its
intensity. There was no longer any doubt that Smith, innocent as he was of
any crime, would be killed, for with the mayor out of the city and the
governor of the state using no effort to control the mob, it was only a
question of a few hours when the assault would be repeated and its victim
put to death. All this happened as per programme. The description of that
morning's carnival appeared in the paper above quoted and reads as
follows:

  A squad of twenty men took the negro Smith from three policemen just
  before five o'clock this morning and hanged him to a hickory limb on
  Ninth Avenue, in the residence section of the city. They riddled his
  body with bullets and put a placard on it saying: "This is Mayor Trout's
  friend." A coroner's jury of Bismel was summoned and viewed the body and
  rendered a verdict of death at the hands of unknown men. Thousands of
  persons visited the scene of the lynching between daylight and eight
  o'clock when the body was cut down. After the jury had completed its
  work the body was placed in the hands of officers, who were unable to
  keep back the mob. Three hundred men tried to drag the body through the
  streets of the town, but the Rev. Dr. Campbell of the First Presbyterian
  church and Capt. R.B. Moorman, with pleas and by force prevented them.

  Capt. Moorman hired a wagon and the body was put in it. It was then
  conveyed to the bank of the Roanoke, about two miles from the scene of
  the lynching. Here the body was dragged from the wagon by ropes for
  about 200 yards and burned. Piles of dry brushwood were brought, and the
  body was placed upon it, and more brushwood piled on the body, leaving
  only the head bare. The whole pile was then saturated with coal oil and
  a match was applied. The body was consumed within an hour. The cremation
  was witnessed by several thousand people. At one time the mob threatened
  to burn the Negro in Mayor Trout's yard.

Thus did the people of Roanoke, Va., add this measure of proof to maintain
our contention that it is only necessary to charge a Negro with a crime in
order to secure his certain death. It was well known in the city before he
was killed that he had not assaulted the woman with whom he had had the
trouble, but he dared to have an altercation with a white woman, and he
must pay the penalty. For an offense which would not in any civilized
community have brought upon him a punishment greater than a fine of a few
dollars, this unfortunate Negro was hung, shot and burned.


SUSPECTED, INNOCENT AND LYNCHED

Five persons, Benjamin Jackson, his wife, Mahala Jackson, his
mother-in-law, Lou Carter, Rufus Bigley, were lynched near Quincy, Miss.,
the charge against them being suspicion of well poisoning. It appears from
the newspaper dispatches at that time that a family by the name of
Woodruff was taken ill in September of 1892. As a result of their illness
one or more of the family are said to have died, though that matter is not
stated definitely. It was suspected that the cause of their illness was
the existence of poison in the water, some miscreant having placed poison
in the well. Suspicion pointed to a colored man named Benjamin Jackson who
was at once arrested. With him also were arrested his wife and
mother-in-law and all were held on the same charge.

The matter came up for judicial investigation, but as might have been
expected, the white people concluded it was unnecessary to wait the result
of the investigation--that it was preferable to hang the accused first and
try him afterward. By this method of procedure, the desired result was
always obtained--the accused was hanged. Accordingly Benjamin Jackson was
taken from the officers by a crowd of about two hundred people, while the
inquest was being held, and hanged. After the killing of Jackson, the
inquest was continued to ascertain the possible connection of the other
persons charged with the crime. Against the wife and mother-in-law of the
unfortunate man there was not the slightest evidence and the coroner's
jury was fair enough to give them their liberty. They were declared
innocent and returned to their homes. But this did not protect the women
from the demands of the Christian white people of that section of the
country. In any other land and with any other people, the fact that these
two accused persons were women would have pleaded in their favor for
protection and fair play, but that had no weight with the Mississippi
Christians nor the further fact that a jury of white men had declared them
innocent. The hanging of one victim on an unproven charge did not begin to
satisfy the mob in its bloodthirsty demands and the result was that even
after the women had been discharged, they were at once taken in charge by
a mob, which hung them by the neck until they were dead.

Still the mob was not satisfied. During the coroner's investigation the
name of a fourth person, Rufus Bigley, was mentioned. He was acquainted
with the Jacksons and that fact, together with some testimony adduced at
the inquest, prompted the mob to decide that he should die also. Search
was at once made for him and the next day he was apprehended. He was not
given over into the hands of the civil authorities for trial nor did the
coroner's inquest find that he was guilty, but the mob was quite
sufficient in itself. After finding Bigley, he was strung up to a tree and
his body left hanging, where it was found next day. It may be remarked
here in passing that this instance of the moral degradation of the people
of Mississippi did not excite any interest in the public at large.
American Christianity heard of this awful affair and read of its details
and neither press nor pulpit gave the matter more than a passing comment.
Had it occurred in the wilds of interior Africa, there would have been an
outcry from the humane people of this country against the savagery which
would so mercilessly put men and women to death. But it was an evidence of
American civilization to be passed by unnoticed, to be denied or condoned
as the requirements of any future emergency might determine.


LYNCHED FOR AN ATTEMPTED ASSAULT

With only a little more aggravation than that of Smith who quarreled at
Roanoke with the market woman, was the assault which operated as the
incentive to a most brutal lynching in Memphis, Tenn. Memphis is one of
the queen cities of the south, with a population of about seventy thousand
souls--easily one of the twenty largest, most progressive and wealthiest
cities of the United States. And yet in its streets there occurred a scene
of shocking savagery which would have disgraced the Congo. No woman was
harmed, no serious indignity suffered. Two women driving to town in a
wagon, were suddenly accosted by Lee Walker. He claimed that he demanded
something to eat. The women claimed that he attempted to assault them.
They gave such an alarm that he ran away. At once the dispatches spread
over the entire country that a big, burly Negro had brutally assaulted two
women. Crowds began to search for the alleged fiend. While hunting him
they shot another Negro dead in his tracks for refusing to stop when
ordered to do so. After a few days Lee Walker was found, and put in jail
in Memphis until the mob there was ready for him.

The _Memphis Commercial_ of Sunday, July 23, contains a full account of
the tragedy from which the following extracts are made:

  At 12 o'clock last night, Lee Walker, who attempted to outrage Miss
  Mollie McCadden, last Tuesday morning, was taken from the county jail
  and hanged to a telegraph pole just north of the prison. All day rumors
  were afloat that with nightfall an attack would be made upon the jail,
  and as everyone anticipated that a vigorous resistance would be made, a
  conflict between the mob and the authorities was feared.

  At 10 o'clock Capt. O'Haver, Sergt. Horan and several patrolmen were on
  hand, but they could do nothing with the crowd. An attack by the mob was
  made on the door in the south wall, and it yielded. Sheriff McLendon and
  several of his men threw themselves into the breach, but two or three of
  the storming party shoved by. They were seized by the police, but were
  not subdued, the officers refraining from using their clubs. The entire
  mob might at first have been dispersed by ten policemen who would use
  their clubs, but the sheriff insisted that no violence be done.

  The mob got an iron rail and used it as a battering ram against the
  lobby doors. Sheriff McLendon tried to stop them, and some one of the
  mob knocked him down with a chair. Still he counseled moderation and
  would not order his deputies and the police to disperse the crowd by
  force. The pacific policy of the sheriff impressed the mob with the idea
  that the officers were afraid, or at least would do them no harm, and
  they redoubled their efforts, urged on by a big switchman. At 12 o'clock
  the door of the prison was broken in with a rail.

  As soon as the rapist was brought out of the door calls were heard for a
  rope; then someone shouted, "Burn him!" But there was no time to make a
  fire. When Walker got into the lobby a dozen of the men began beating
  and stabbing him. He was half dragged, half carried to the corner of
  Front Street and the alley between Sycamore and Mill, and hung to a
  telegraph pole.

  Walker made a desperate resistance. Two men entered his cell first and
  ordered him to come forth. He refused, and they failing to drag him out,
  others entered. He scratched and bit his assailants, wounding several of
  them severely with his teeth. The mob retaliated by striking and cutting
  him with fists and knives. When he reached the steps leading down to the
  door he made another stand and was stabbed again and again. By the time
  he reached the lobby his power to resist was gone, and he was shoved
  along through the mob of yelling, cursing men and boys, who beat, spat
  upon and slashed the wretch-like demon. One of the leaders of the mob
  fell, and the crowd walked ruthlessly over him. He was badly hurt--a
  jawbone fractured and internal injuries inflicted. After the lynching
  friends took charge of him.

  The mob proceeded north on Front Street with the victim, stopping at
  Sycamore Street to get a rope from a grocery. "Take him to the iron
  bridge on Main Street," yelled several men. The men who had hold of the
  Negro were in a hurry to finish the job, however, and when they reached
  the telephone pole at the corner of Front Street and the first alley
  north of Sycamore they stopped. A hastily improvised noose was slipped
  over the Negro's head, and several young men mounted a pile of lumber
  near the pole and threw the rope over one of the iron stepping pins. The
  Negro was lifted up until his feet were three feet above the ground, the
  rope was made taut, and a corpse dangled in midair. A big fellow who
  helped lead the mob pulled the Negro's legs until his neck cracked. The
  wretch's clothes had been torn off, and, as he swung, the man who pulled
  his legs mutilated the corpse.

  One or two knife cuts, more or less, made little difference in the
  appearance of the dead rapist, however, for before the rope was around
  his neck his skin was cut almost to ribbons. One pistol shot was fired
  while the corpse was hanging. A dozen voices protested against the use
  of firearms, and there was no more shooting. The body was permitted to
  hang for half an hour, then it was cut down and the rope divided among
  those who lingered around the scene of the tragedy. Then it was
  suggested that the corpse be burned, and it was done. The entire
  performance, from the assault on the jail to the burning of the dead
  Negro was witnessed by a score or so of policemen and as many deputy
  sheriffs, but not a hand was lifted to stop the proceedings after the
  jail door yielded.

  As the body hung to the telegraph pole, blood streaming down from the
  knife wounds in his neck, his hips and lower part of his legs also
  slashed with knives, the crowd hurled expletives at him, swung the body
  so that it was dashed against the pole, and, so far from the ghastly
  sight proving trying to the nerves, the crowd looked on with
  complaisance, if not with real pleasure. The Negro died hard. The neck
  was not broken, as the body was drawn up without being given a fall, and
  death came by strangulation. For fully ten minutes after he was strung
  up the chest heaved occasionally, and there were convulsive movements of
  the limbs. Finally he was pronounced dead, and a few minutes later
  Detective Richardson climbed on a pile of staves and cut the rope. The
  body fell in a ghastly heap, and the crowd laughed at the sound and
  crowded around the prostrate body, a few kicking the inanimate carcass.

  Detective Richardson, who is also a deputy coroner, then proceeded to
  impanel the following jury of inquest: J.S. Moody, A.C. Waldran, B.J.
  Childs, J.N. House, Nelson Bills, T.L. Smith, and A. Newhouse. After
  viewing the body the inquest was adjourned without any testimony being
  taken until 9 o'clock this morning. The jury will meet at the coroner's
  office, 51 Beale Street, upstairs, and decide on a verdict. If no
  witnesses are forthcoming, the jury will be able to arrive at a verdict
  just the same, as all members of it saw the lynching. Then someone
  raised the cry of "Burn him!" It was quickly taken up and soon resounded
  from a hundred throats. Detective Richardson, for a long time,
  single-handed, stood the crowd off. He talked and begged the men not to
  bring disgrace on the city by burning the body, arguing that all the
  vengeance possible had been wrought.

  While this was going on a small crowd was busy starting a fire in the
  middle of the street. The material was handy. Some bundles of staves
  were taken from the adjoining lumber yard for kindling. Heavier wood was
  obtained from the same source, and coal oil from a neighboring grocery.
  Then the cries of "Burn him! Burn him!" were redoubled.

  Half a dozen men seized the naked body. The crowd cheered. They marched
  to the fire, and giving the body a swing, it was landed in the middle of
  the fire. There was a cry for more wood, as the fire had begun to die
  owing to the long delay. Willing hands procured the wood, and it was
  piled up on the Negro, almost, for a time, obscuring him from view. The
  head was in plain view, as also were the limbs, and one arm which stood
  out high above the body, the elbow crooked, held in that position by a
  stick of wood. In a few moments the hands began to swell, then came
  great blisters over all the exposed parts of the body; then in places
  the flesh was burned away and the bones began to show through. It was a
  horrible sight, one which, perhaps, none there had ever witnessed
  before. It proved too much for a large part of the crowd and the
  majority of the mob left very shortly after the burning began.

  But a large number stayed, and were not a bit set back by the sight of a
  human body being burned to ashes. Two or three white women, accompanied
  by their escorts, pushed to the front to obtain an unobstructed view,
  and looked on with astonishing coolness and nonchalance. One man and
  woman brought a little girl, not over twelve years old, apparently their
  daughter, to view a scene which was calculated to drive sleep from the
  child's eyes for many nights, if not to produce a permanent injury to
  her nervous system. The comments of the crowd were varied. Some remarked
  on the efficacy of this style of cure for rapists, others rejoiced that
  men's wives and daughters were now safe from this wretch. Some laughed
  as the flesh cracked and blistered, and while a large number pronounced
  the burning of a dead body as a useless episode, not in all that throng
  was a word of sympathy heard for the wretch himself.

  The rope that was used to hang the Negro, and also that which was used
  to lead him from the jail, were eagerly sought by relic hunters. They
  almost fought for a chance to cut off a piece of rope, and in an
  incredibly short time both ropes had disappeared and were scattered in
  the pockets of the crowd in sections of from an inch to six inches long.
  Others of the relic hunters remained until the ashes cooled to obtain
  such ghastly relics as the teeth, nails, and bits of charred skin of the
  immolated victim of his own lust. After burning the body the mob tied a
  rope around the charred trunk and dragged it down Main Street to the
  courthouse, where it was hanged to a center pole. The rope broke and the
  corpse dropped with a thud, but it was again hoisted, the charred legs
  barely touching the ground. The teeth were knocked out and the
  fingernails cut off as souvenirs. The crowd made so much noise that the
  police interfered. Undertaker Walsh was telephoned for, who took
  charge of the body and carried it to his establishment, where it will be
  prepared for burial in the potter's field today.

[Illustration: Scene of lynching at Clanton, Alabama, August 1891.]

[Illustration: Facsimile of back of photograph. W.R. MARTIN, Traveling
Photographer. (Handwritten: This S.O.B. was hung at Clanton Ala. Friday
Aug 21st/91 for murdering a little boy in cold blood for 35¢ in cash. He
is a good specimen of your "Black Christian hung by White Heathens"
[illegible] of the Committee.)]

A prelude to this exhibition of nineteenth-century barbarism was the
following telegram received by the _Chicago Inter Ocean_, at 2 o'clock,
Saturday afternoon--ten hours before the lynching:

  MEMPHIS TENN., July 22, To _Inter-Ocean_, Chicago.

  Lee Walker, colored man, accused of raping white women, in jail here,
  will be taken out and burned by whites tonight. Can you send Miss Ida
  Wells to write it up? Answer. R.M. Martin, with _Public Ledger_.

The _Public Ledger_ is one of the oldest evening daily papers in Memphis,
and this telegram shows that the intentions of the mob were well known
long before they were executed. The personnel of the mob is given by the
_Memphis Appeal-Avalanche_. It says, "At first it seemed as if a crowd of
roughs were the principals, but as it increased in size, men in all walks
of life figured as leaders, although the majority were young men."

This was the punishment meted out to a Negro, charged, not with rape, but
attempted assault, and without any proof as to his guilt, for the women
were not given a chance to identify him. It was only a little less
horrible than the burning alive of Henry Smith, at Paris, Texas, February
1, 1893, or that of Edward Coy, in Texarkana, Texas, February 20, 1892.
Both were charged with assault on white women, and both were tied to the
stake and burned while yet alive, in the presence of ten thousand persons.
In the case of Coy, the white woman in the case applied the match, even
while the victim protested his innocence.

The cut which is here given is the exact reproduction of the photograph
taken at the scene of the lynching at Clanton, Alabama, August, 1891. The
cause for which the man was hanged is given in the words of the mob which
were written on the back of the photograph, and they are also given. This
photograph was sent to Judge A.W. Tourgee, of Mayville, N.Y.

In some of these cases the mob affects to believe in the Negro's guilt.
The world is told that the white woman in the case identifies him, or the
prisoner "confesses." But in the lynching which took place in Barnwell
County, South Carolina, April 24, 1893, the mob's victim, John Peterson,
escaped and placed himself under Governor Tillman's protection; not only
did he declare his innocence, but offered to prove an alibi, by white
witnesses. Before his witnesses could be brought, the mob arrived at the
Governor's mansion and demanded the prisoner. He was given up, and
although the white woman in the case said he was not the man, he was
hanged twenty-four hours after, and over a thousand bullets fired into his
body, on the declaration that "a crime had been committed and someone had
to hang for it."




6

HISTORY OF SOME CASES OF RAPE


It has been claimed that the Southern white women have been slandered
because, in defending the Negro race from the charge that all colored men,
who are lynched, only pay penalty for assaulting women. It is certain that
lynching mobs have not only refused to give the Negro a chance to defend
himself, but have killed their victim with a full knowledge that the
relationship of the alleged assailant with the woman who accused him, was
voluntary and clandestine. As a matter of fact, one of the prime causes of
the Lynch Law agitation has been a necessity for defending the Negro from
this awful charge against him. This defense has been necessary because the
apologists for outlawry insist that in no case has the accusing woman been
a willing consort of her paramour, who is lynched because overtaken in
wrong. It is well known, however, that such is the case. In July of this
year, 1894, John Paul Bocock, a Southern white man living in New York, and
assistant editor of the _New York Tribune_, took occasion to defy the
publication of any instance where the lynched Negro was the victim of a
white woman's falsehood. Such cases are not rare, but the press and people
conversant with the facts, almost invariably suppress them.

The _New York Sun_ of July 30,1894, contained a synopsis of interviews
with leading congressmen and editors of the South. Speaker Crisp, of the
House of Representatives, who was recently a Judge of the Supreme Court of
Georgia, led in declaring that lynching seldom or never took place, save
for vile crime against women and children. Dr. Hass, editor of the leading
organ of the Methodist Church South, published in its columns that it was
his belief that more than three hundred women had been assaulted by Negro
men within three months. When asked to prove his charges, or give a single
case upon which his "belief" was founded, he said that he could do so, but
the details were unfit for publication. No other evidence but his "belief"
could be adduced to substantiate this grave charge, yet Bishop Haygood, in
the _Forum_ of October, 1893, quotes this "belief" in apology for
lynching, and voluntarily adds: "It is my opinion that this is an
underestimate." The "opinion" of this man, based upon a "belief," had
greater weight coming from a man who has posed as a friend to "Our Brother
in Black," and was accepted as authority. An interview of Miss Frances E.
Willard, the great apostle of temperance, the daughter of abolitionists
and a personal friend and helper of many individual colored people, has
been quoted in support of the utterance of this calumny against a weak and
defenseless race. In the _New York Voice_ of October 23, 1890, after a
tour in the South, where she was told all these things by the "best white
people," she said: "The grogshop is the Negro's center of power. Better
whisky and more of it is the rallying cry of great, dark-faced mobs. The
colored race multiplies like the locusts of Egypt. The grogshop is its
center of power. The safety of woman, of childhood, the home, is menaced
in a thousand localities at this moment, so that men dare not go beyond
the sight of their own roof-tree."

These charges so often reiterated, have had the effect of fastening the
odium upon the race of a peculiar propensity for this foul crime. The
Negro is thus forced to a defense of his good name, and this chapter will
be devoted to the history of some of the cases where assault upon white
women by Negroes is charged. He is not the aggressor in this fight, but
the situation demands that the facts be given, and they will speak for
themselves. Of the 1,115 Negro men, women and children hanged, shot and
roasted alive from January 1, 1882, to January 1, 1894, inclusive, only
348 of that number were charged with rape. Nearly 700 of these persons
were lynched for any other reason which could be manufactured by a mob
wishing to indulge in a lynching bee.


A WHITE WOMAN'S FALSEHOOD

The _Cleveland, Ohio, Gazette_, January 16, 1892, gives an account of one
of these cases of "rape."

Mrs. J.C. Underwood, the wife of a minister of Elyria, Ohio, accused an
Afro-American of rape. She told her husband that during his absence in
1888, stumping the state for the Prohibition Party, the man came to the
kitchen door, forced his way in the house and insulted her. She tried to
drive him out with a heavy poker, but he overpowered and chloroformed her,
and when she revived her clothing was torn and she was in a horrible
condition. She did not know the man, but could identify him. She
subsequently pointed out William Offett, a married man, who was arrested,
and, being in Ohio, was granted a trial.

The prisoner vehemently denied the charge of rape, but confessed he went
to Mrs. Underwood's residence at her invitation and was criminally
intimate with her at her request. This availed him nothing against the
sworn testimony of a minister's wife, a lady of the highest
respectability. He was found guilty, and entered the penitentiary,
December 14, 1888, for fifteen years. Sometime afterwards the woman's
remorse led her to confess to her husband that the man was innocent. These
are her words: "I met Offett at the postoffice. It was raining. He was
polite to me, and as I had several bundles in my arms he offered to carry
them home for me, which he did. He had a strange fascination for me, and I
invited him to call on me. He called, bringing chestnuts and candy for the
children. By this means we got them to leave us alone in the room. Then I
sat on his lap. He made a proposal to me and I readily consented. Why I
did so I do not know, but that I did is true. He visited me several times
after that and each time I was indiscreet. I did not care after the first
time. In fact I could not have resisted, and had no desire to resist."

When asked by her husband why she told him she had been outraged, she
said: "I had several reasons for telling you. One was the neighbors saw
the fellow here, another was, I was afraid I had contracted a loathsome
disease, and still another was that I feared I might give birth to a Negro
baby. I hoped to save my reputation by telling you a deliberate lie." Her
husband, horrified by the confession, had Offett, who had already served
four years, released and secured a divorce.

There have been many such cases throughout the South, with the difference
that the Southern white men in insensate fury wreak their vengeance
without intervention of law upon the Negro who consorts with their women.


TRIED TO MANUFACTURE AN OUTRAGE

The _Memphis (Tenn.) Ledger_, of June 8, 1892, has the following:

  If Lillie Bailey, a rather pretty white girl, seventeen years of age,
  who is now at the city hospital, would be somewhat less reserved about
  her disgrace there would be some very nauseating details in the story of
  her life. She is the mother of a little coon. The truth might reveal
  fearful depravity or the evidence of a rank outrage. She will not
  divulge the name of the man who has left such black evidence of her
  disgrace, and in fact says it is a matter in which there can be no
  interest to the outside world. She came to Memphis nearly three months
  ago, and was taken in at the Woman's Refuge in the southern part of the
  city. She remained there until a few weeks ago when the child was born.
  The ladies in charge of the Refuge were horrified. The girl was at once
  sent to the city hospital, where she has been since May 30. She is a
  country girl. She came to Memphis from her father's farm, a short
  distance from Hernando, Miss. Just when she left there she would not
  say. In fact she says she came to Memphis from Arkansas, and says her
  home is in that state. She is rather good looking, has blue eyes, a low
  forehead and dark red hair. The ladies at the Woman's Refuge do not know
  anything about the girl further than what they learned when she was an
  inmate of the institution; and she would not tell much. When the child
  was born an attempt was made to get the girl to reveal the name of the
  Negro who had disgraced her, she obstinately refused and it was
  impossible to elicit any information from her on the subject.

Note the wording: "The truth might reveal fearful depravity or rank
outrage." If it had been a white child or if Lillie Bailey had told a
pitiful story of Negro outrage, it would have been a case of woman's
weakness or assault and she could have remained at the Woman's Refuge. But
a Negro child and to withhold its father's name and thus prevent the
killing of another Negro "rapist" was a case of "fearful depravity." Had
she revealed the father's name, he would have been lynched and his taking
off charged to an assault upon a white woman.


BURNED ALIVE FOR ADULTERY

In Texarkana, Arkansas, Edward Coy was accused of assaulting a white
woman. The press dispatches of February 18, 1892, told in detail how he
was tied to a tree, the flesh cut from his body by men and boys, and after
coal oil was poured over him, the woman he had assaulted gladly set fire
to him, and 15,000 persons saw him burn to death. October 1, the _Chicago
Inter Ocean_ contained the following account of that horror from the pen
of the "Bystander" Judge Albion W. Tourgee--as the result of his
investigations:

  1. The woman who was paraded as victim of violence was of bad character;
  her husband was a drunkard and a gambler.

  2. She was publicly reported and generally known to have been criminally
  intimate with Coy for more than a year previous.

  3. She was compelled by threats, if not by violence, to make the charge
  against the victim.

  4. When she came to apply the match Coy asked her if she would burn him
  after they had "been sweethearting" so long.

  5. A large majority of the "superior" white men prominent in the affair
  are the reputed fathers of mulatto children.

  These are not pleasant facts, but they are illustrative of the vital
  phase of the so-called race question, which should properly be
  designated an earnest inquiry as to the best methods by which religion,
  science, law and political power may be employed to excuse injustice,
  barbarity and crime done to a people because of race and color. There
  can be no possible belief that these people were inspired by any
  consuming zeal to vindicate God's law against miscegenationists of the
  most practical sort. The woman was a willing partner in the victim's
  guilt, and being of the "superior" race must naturally have been more
  guilty.


NOT IDENTIFIED BUT LYNCHED

February 11, 1893, there occurred in Shelby County, Tennessee, the fourth
Negro lynching within fifteen months. The three first were lynched in the
city of Memphis for firing on white men in self-defense. This Negro,
Richard Neal, was lynched a few miles from the city limits, and the
following is taken from the _Memphis (Tenn.) Scimitar_:

  As the _Scimitar_ stated on Saturday the Negro, Richard Neal, who raped
  Mrs. Jack White near Forest Hill, in this county, was lynched by a mob
  of about 200 white citizens of the neighborhood. Sheriff McLendon,
  accompanied by Deputies Perkins, App and Harvey and a _Scimitar_
  reporter, arrived on the scene of the execution about 3:30 in the
  afternoon. The body was suspended from the first limb of a post oak tree
  by a new quarter-inch grass rope. A hangman's knot, evidently tied by an
  expert, fitted snugly under the left ear of the corpse, and a new hame
  string pinioned the victim's arms behind him. His legs were not tied.
  The body was perfectly limber when the Sheriff's posse cut it down and
  retained enough heat to warm the feet of Deputy Perkins, whose road cart
  was converted into a hearse. On arriving with the body at Forest Hill
  the Sheriff made a bargain with a stalwart young man with a blonde
  mustache and deep blue eyes, who told the _Scimitar_ reporter that he
  was the leader of the mob, to haul the body to Germantown for $3.

  When within half-a-mile of Germantown the Sheriff and posse were
  overtaken by Squire McDonald of Collierville, who had come down to hold
  the inquest. The Squire had his jury with him, and it was agreed for the
  convenience of all parties that he should proceed with the corpse to
  Germantown and conduct the inquiry as to the cause of death. He did so,
  and a verdict of death from hanging by parties unknown was returned in
  due form.

  The execution of Neal was done deliberately and by the best people of
  the Collierville, Germantown and Forest Hill neighborhoods, without
  passion or exhibition of anger.

  He was arrested on Friday about ten o'clock, by Constable Bob Cash, who
  carried him before Mrs. White. She said: "I think he is the man. I am
  almost certain of it. If he isn't the man he is exactly like him."

  The Negro's coat was torn also, and there were other circumstances
  against him. The committee returned and made its report, and the
  chairman put the question of guilt or innocence to a vote.

  All who thought the proof strong enough to warrant execution were
  invited to cross over to the other side of the road. Everybody but four
  or five negroes crossed over.

  The committee then placed Neal on a mule with his arms tied behind him,
  and proceeded to the scene of the crime, followed by the mob. The rope,
  with a noose already prepared, was tied to the limb nearest the spot
  where the unpardonable sin was committed, and the doomed man's mule was
  brought to a standstill beneath it.

  Then Neal confessed. He said he was the right man, but denied that he
  used force or threats to accomplish his purpose. It was a matter of
  purchase, he claimed, and said the price paid was twenty-five cents. He
  warned the colored men present to beware of white women and resist
  temptation, for to yield to their blandishments or to the passions of
  men, meant death.

  While he was speaking, Mrs. White came from her home and calling
  Constable Cash to one side, asked if he could not save the Negro's life.
  The reply was, "No," and Mrs. White returned to the house.

  When all was in readiness, the husband of Neal's victim leaped upon the
  mule's back and adjusted the rope around the Negro's neck. No cap was
  used, and Neal showed no fear, nor did he beg for mercy. The mule was
  struck with a whip and bounded out from under Neal, leaving him
  suspended in the air with his feet about three feet from the ground.


DELIVERED TO THE MOB BY THE GOVERNOR OF THE STATE

John Peterson, near Denmark, S.C., was suspected of rape, but escaped,
went to Columbia, and placed himself under Gov. Tillman's protection,
declaring he too could prove an alibi by white witnesses. A white reporter
hearing his declaration volunteered to find these witnesses, and
telegraphed the governor that he would be in Columbia with them on Monday.
In the meantime the mob at Denmark, learning Peterson's whereabouts, went
to the governor and demanded the prisoner. Gov. Tillman, who had during
his canvass for reelection the year before, declared that he would lead a
mob to lynch a Negro that assaulted a white woman, gave Peterson up to the
mob. He was taken back to Denmark, and the white girl in the case as
positively declared that he was not the man. But the verdict of the mob
was that "the crime had been committed and somebody had to hang for it,
and if he, Peterson, was not guilty of that he was of some other crime,"
and he was hung, and his body riddled with 1,000 bullets.


LYNCHED AS A WARNING

Alabama furnishes a case in point. A colored man named Daniel Edwards,
lived near Selma, Alabama, and worked for a family of a farmer near that
place. This resulted in an intimacy between the young man and a daughter
of the householder, which finally developed in the disgrace of the girl.
After the birth of the child, the mother disclosed the fact that Edwards
was its father. The relationship had been sustained for more than a year,
and yet this colored man was apprehended, thrown into jail from whence he
was taken by a mob of one hundred neighbors and hung to a tree and his
body riddled with bullets. A dispatch which describes the lynching, ends
as follows. "Upon his back was found pinned this morning the following:
'Warning to all Negroes that are too intimate with white girls. This the
work of one hundred best citizens of the South Side.'"

There can be no doubt from the announcement made by this "one hundred best
citizens" that they understood full well the character of the relationship
which existed between Edwards and the girl, but when the dispatches were
sent out, describing the affair, it was claimed that Edwards was lynched
for rape.


SUPPRESSING THE TRUTH

In a county in Mississippi during the month of July the Associated Press
dispatches sent out a report that the sheriff's eight-year-old daughter
had been assaulted by a big, black, burly brute who had been promptly
lynched. The facts which have since been investigated show that the girl
was more than eighteen years old and that she was discovered by her father
in this young man's room who was a servant on the place. But these facts
the Associated Press has not given to the world, nor did the same agency
acquaint the world with the fact that a Negro youth who was lynched in
Tuscumbia, Ala., the same year on the same charge told the white girl who
accused him before the mob, that he had met her in the woods often by
appointment. There is a young mulatto in one of the State prisons of the
South today who is there by charge of a young white woman to screen
herself. He is a college graduate and had been corresponding with, and
clandestinely visiting her until he was surprised and run out of her room
en deshabille by her father. He was put in prison in another town to save
his life from the mob and his lawyer advised that it were better to save
his life by pleading guilty to charges made and being sentenced for years,
than to attempt a defense by exhibiting the letters written him by this
girl. In the latter event, the mob would surely murder him, while there
was a chance for his life by adopting the former course. Names, places and
dates are not given for the same reason.

The excuse has come to be so safe, it is not surprising that a
Philadelphia girl, beautiful and well educated, and of good family, should
make a confession published in all the daily papers of that city October,
1894, that she had been stealing for some time, and that to cover one of
her thefts, she had said she had been bound and gagged in her father's
house by a colored man, and money stolen therefrom by him. Had this been
done in many localities, it would only have been necessary for her to
"identify" the first Negro in that vicinity, to have brought about another
lynching bee.


A VILE SLANDER WITH SCANT RETRACTION

The following published in the _Cleveland (Ohio) Leader_ of Oct. 23, 1894,
only emphasizes our demand that a fair trial shall be given those accused
of crime, and the protection of the law be extended until time for a
defense be granted.

  The sensational story sent out last night from Hicksville that a Negro
  had outraged a little four-year-old girl proves to be a base canard. The
  correspondents who went into the details should have taken the pains to
  investigate, and the officials should have known more of the matter
  before they gave out such grossly exaggerated information.

  The Negro, Charles O'Neil, had been working for a couple of women and,
  it seems, had worked all winter without being remunerated. There is a
  little girl, and the girl's mother and grandmother evidently started the
  story with idea of frightening the Negro out of the country and thus
  balancing accounts. The town was considerably wrought up and for a time
  things looked serious. The accused had a preliminary hearing today and
  not an iota of evidence was produced to indicate that such a crime had
  been committed, or that he had even attempted such an outrage. The
  village marshal was frightened nearly out of his wits and did little to
  quiet the excitement last night.

  The affair was an outrage on the Negro, at the expense of innocent
  childhood, a brainless fabrication from start to finish.

The original story was sent throughout this country and England, but the
_Cleveland Leader_, so far as known, is the only journal which has
published these facts in refutation of the slander so often published
against the race. Not only is it true that many of the alleged cases of
rape against the Negro, are like the foregoing, but the same crime
committed by white men against Negro women and girls, is never punished by
mob or the law. A leading journal in South Carolina openly said some
months ago that "it is not the same thing for a white man to assault a
colored woman as for a colored man to assault a white woman, because the
colored woman had no finer feelings nor virtue to be outraged!" Yet
colored women have always had far more reason to complain of white men in
this respect than ever white women have had of Negroes.


ILLINOIS HAS A LYNCHING

In the month of June, 1893, the proud commonwealth of Illinois joined the
ranks of Lynching States. Illinois, which gave to the world the immortal
heroes, Lincoln, Grant and Logan, trailed its banner of justice in the
dust--dyed its hands red in the blood of a man not proven guilty of crime.

June 3,1893, the country about Decatur, one of the largest cities of the
state was startled with the cry that a white woman had been assaulted by a
colored tramp. Three days later a colored man named Samuel Bush was
arrested and put in jail. A white man testified that Bush, on the day of
the assault, asked him where he could get a drink and he pointed to the
house where the farmer's wife was subsequently said to have been
assaulted. Bush said he went to the well but did not go near the house,
and did not assault the woman. After he was arrested the alleged victim
did not see him to identify him--he was presumed to be guilty.

The citizens determined to kill him. The mob gathered, went to the jail,
met with no resistance, took the suspected man, dragged him out tearing
every stitch of clothing from his body, then hanged him to a telegraph
pole. The grand jury refused to indict the lynchers though the names of
over twenty persons who were leaders in the mob were well known. In fact
twenty-two persons were indicted, but the grand jurors and the prosecuting
attorney disagreed as to the form of the indictments, which caused the
jurors to change their minds. All indictments were reconsidered and the
matter was dropped. Not one of the dozens of men prominent in that murder
have suffered a whit more inconvenience for the butchery of that man, than
they would have suffered for shooting a dog.


COLOR LINE JUSTICE

In Baltimore, Maryland, a gang of white ruffians assaulted a respectable
colored girl who was out walking with a young man of her own race. They
held her escort and outraged the girl. It was a deed dastardly enough to
arouse Southern blood, which gives its horror of rape as excuse for
lawlessness, but she was a colored woman. The case went to the courts and
they were acquitted.

In Nashville, Tennessee, there was a white man, Pat Hanifan, who outraged
a little colored girl, and from the physical injuries received she was
ruined for life. He was jailed for six months, discharged, and is now a
detective in that city. In the same city, last May, a white man outraged a
colored girl in a drug store. He was arrested and released on bail at the
trial. It was rumored that five hundred colored men had organized to lynch
him. Two hundred and fifty white citizens armed themselves with
Winchesters and guarded him. A cannon was placed in front of his home, and
the Buchanan Rifles (State Militia) ordered to the scene for his
protection. The colored mob did not show up. Only two weeks before, Eph.
Grizzard, who had only been charged with rape upon a white woman, had been
taken from the jail, with Governor Buchanan and the police and militia
standing by, dragged through the streets in broad daylight, knives plunged
into him at every step, and with every fiendish cruelty that a frenzied
mob could devise, he was at last swung out on the bridge with hands cut to
pieces as he tried to climb up the stanchions. A naked, bloody example of
the bloodthirstiness of the nineteenth-century civilization of the Athens
of the South! No cannon nor military were called out in his defense. He
dared to visit a white woman.

At the very moment when these civilized whites were announcing their
determination "to protect their wives and daughters," by murdering
Grizzard, a white man was in the same jail for raping eight-year-old
Maggie Reese, a colored girl. He was not harmed. The "honor" of grown
women who were glad enough to be supported by the Grizzard boys and Ed.
Coy, as long as the liaison was not known, needed protection; they were
white. The outrage upon helpless childhood needed no avenging in this
case; she was black.

A white man in Guthrie, Oklahoma Territory, two months after inflicted
such injuries upon another colored girl that she died. He was not
punished, but an attempt was made in the same town in the month of June to
lynch a colored man who visited a white woman.

In Memphis, Tennessee, in the month of June, Ellerton L. Dorr, who is the
husband of Russell Hancock's widow, was arrested for attempted rape on
Mattie Cole, a neighbor's cook; he was only prevented from accomplishing
his purpose by the appearance of Mattie's employer. Dorr's friends say he
was drunk and, not responsible for his actions. The grand jury refused to
indict him and he was discharged.

In Tallahassee, Florida, a colored girl, Charlotte Gilliam, was assaulted
by white men. Her father went to have a warrant for their arrest issued,
but the judge refused to issue it.

In Bowling Green, Virginia, Moses Christopher, a colored lad, was charged
with assault, September 10. He was indicted, tried, convicted and
sentenced to death in one day. In the same state at Danville, two weeks
before--August 29, Thomas J. Penn, a white man, committed a criminal
assault upon Lina Hanna, a twelve-year-old colored girl, but he has not
been tried, certainly not killed either by the law or the mob.

In Surrey county, Virginia, C.L. Brock, a white man, criminally assaulted
a ten-year-old colored girl, and threatened to kill her if she told.
Notwithstanding, she confessed to her aunt, Mrs. Alice Bates, and the
white brute added further crime by killing Mrs. Bates when she upbraided
him about his crime upon her niece. He emptied the contents of his
revolver into her body as she lay. Brock has never been apprehended, and
no effort has been made to do so by the legal authorities.

But even when punishment is meted out by law to white villians for this
horrible crime, it is seldom or never that capital punishment is invoked.
Two cases just clipped from the daily papers will suffice to show how this
crime is punished when committed by white offenders and black.

LOUISVILLE, KY., October 19.--Smith Young, colored, was today sentenced to
be hanged. Young criminally assaulted a six-year-old child about six
months ago.

Jacques Blucher, the Pontiac Frenchman who was arrested at that place for
a criminal assault on his daughter Fanny on July 29 last, pleaded nolo
contendere when placed on trial at East Greenwich, near Providence, R.I.,
Tuesday, and was sentenced to five years in State Prison.

Charles Wilson was convicted of assault upon seven-year-old Mamie Keys in
Philadelphia, in October, and sentenced to ten years in prison. He was
white. Indianapolis courts sentenced a white man in September to eight
years in prison for assault upon a twelve-year-old white girl.

April 24, 1893, a lynching was set for Denmark, S.C., on the charge of
rape. A white girl accused a Negro of assault, and the mob was about to
lynch him. A few hours before the lynching three reputable white men rode
into the town and solemnly testified that the accused Negro was at work
with them 25 miles away on the day and at the hour the crime had been
committed. He was accordingly set free. A white person's word is taken as
absolutely for as against a Negro.




7

THE CRUSADE JUSTIFIED

_(Appeal from America to the World_)


It has been urged in criticism of the movement appealing to the English
people for sympathy and support in our crusade against Lynch Law that our
action was unpatriotic, vindictive and useless. It is not a part of the
plan of this pamphlet to make any defense for that crusade nor to indict
any apology for the motives which led to the presentation of the facts of
American lynchings to the world at large. To those who are not willfully
blind and unjustly critical, the record of more than a thousand lynchings
in ten years is enough to justify any peaceable movement tending to
ameliorate the conditions which led to this unprecedented slaughter of
human beings.

If America would not hear the cry of men, women and children whose dying
groans ascended to heaven praying for relief, not only for them but for
others who might soon be treated as they, then certainly no fair-minded
person can charge disloyalty to those who make an appeal to the
civilization of the world for such sympathy and help as it is possible to
extend. If stating the facts of these lynchings, as they appeared from
time to time in the white newspapers of America--the news gathered by
white correspondents, compiled by white press bureaus and disseminated
among white people--shows any vindictiveness, then the mind which so
charges is not amenable to argument.

But it is the desire of this pamphlet to urge that the crusade started and
thus far continued has not been useless, but has been blessed with the
most salutary results. The many evidences of the good results can not here
be mentioned, but the thoughtful student of the situation can himself
find ample proof. There need not here be mentioned the fact that for the
first time since lynching began, has there been any occasion for the
governors of the several states to speak out in reference to these crimes
against law and order.

No matter how heinous the act of the lynchers may have been, it was
discussed only for a day or so and then dismissed from the attention of
the public. In one or two instances the governor has called attention to
the crime, but the civil processes entirely failed to bring the murderers
to justice. Since the crusade against lynching was started, however,
governors of states, newspapers, senators and representatives and bishops
of churches have all been compelled to take cognizance of the prevalence
of this crime and to speak in one way or another in the defense of the
charge against this barbarism in the United States. This has not been
because there was any latent spirit of justice voluntarily asserting
itself, especially in those who do the lynching, but because the entire
American people now feel, both North and South, that they are objects in
the gaze of the civilized world and that for every lynching humanity asks
that America render its account to civilization and itself.


AWFUL BARBARISM IGNORED

Much has been said during the months of September and October of 1894
about the lynching of six colered men who on suspicion of incendiarism
were made the victims of a most barbarous massacre.

They were arrested, one by one, by officers of the law; they were
handcuffed and chained together and by the officers of the law loaded in a
wagon and deliberately driven into an ambush where a mob of lynchers
awaited them. At the time and upon the chosen spot, in the darkness of the
night and far removed from the habitation of any human soul, the wagon was
halted and the mob fired upon the six manacled men, shooting them to death
as no humane person would have shot dogs. Chained together as they were,
in their awful struggles after the first volley, the victims tumbled out
of the wagon upon the ground and there in the mud, struggling in their
death throes, the victims were made the target of the murderous shotguns,
which fired into the writhing, struggling, dying mass of humanity, until
every spark of life was gone. Then the officers of the law who had them in
charge, drove away to give the alarm and to tell the world that they had
been waylaid and their prisoners forcibly taken from them and killed.

It has been claimed that the prompt, vigorous and highly commendable steps
of the governor of the State of Tennessee and the judge having
jurisdiction over the crime, and of the citizens of Memphis generally, was
the natural revolt of the humane conscience in that section of the
country, and the determination of honest and honorable men to rid the
community of such men as those who were guilty of this terrible massacre.
It has further been claimed that this vigorous uprising of the people and
this most commendably prompt action of the civil authorities, is ample
proof that the American people will not tolerate the lynching of innocent
men, and that in cases where brutal lynchings have not been promptly dealt
with, the crimes on the part of the victims were such as to put them
outside the pale of humanity and that the world considered their death a
necessary sacrifice for the good of all.

But this line of argument can in no possible way be truthfully sustained.
The lynching of the six men in 1894, barbarous as it was, was in no way
more barbarous than took nothing more than a passing notice. It was only
the other lynchings which preceded it, and of which the public fact that
the attention of the civilized world has been called to lynching in
America which made the people of Tennessee feel the absolute necessity for
a prompt, vigorous and just arraignment of all the murderers connected
with that crime. Lynching is no longer "Our Problem," it is the problem of
the civilized world, and Tennessee could not afford to refuse the legal
measures which Christianity demands shall be used for the punishment of
crime.


MEMPHIS THEN AND NOW

Only two years prior to the massacre of the six men near Memphis, that
same city took part in a massacre in every way as bloody and brutal as
that of September last. It was the murder of three young colored men and
who were known to be among the most honorable, reliable, worthy and
peaceable colored citizens of the community. All of them were engaged in
the mercantile business, being members of a corporation which conducted a
large grocery store, and one of the three being a letter carrier in the
employ of the government. These three men were arrested for resisting an
attack of a mob upon their store, in which melee none of the assailants,
who had armed themselves for their devilish deeds by securing court
processes, were killed or even seriously injured. But these three men were
put in jail, and on three or four nights after their incarceration a mob
of less than a dozen men, by collusion with the civil authorities, entered
the jail, took the three men from the custody of the law and shot them to
death. Memphis knew of this awful crime, knew then and knows today who the
men were who committed it, and yet not the first step was ever taken to
apprehend the guilty wretches who walk the streets today with the brand of
murder upon their foreheads, but as safe from harm as the most upright
citizen of that community. Memphis would have been just as calm and
complacent and self-satisfied over the murder of the six colored men in
1894 as it was over these three colored men in 1892, had it not recognized
the fact that to escape the brand of barbarism it had not only to speak
its denunciation but to act vigorously in vindication of its name.


AN ALABAMA HORROR IGNORED

A further instance of this absolute disregard of every principle of
justice and the indifference to the barbarism of Lynch Law may be cited
here, and is furnished by white residents in the city of Carrolton,
Alabama. Several cases of arson had been discovered, and in their search
for the guilty parties, suspicion was found to rest upon three men and a
woman. The four suspects were Paul Hill, Paul Archer, William Archer, his
brother, and a woman named Emma Fair. The prisoners were apprehended,
earnestly asserted their innocence, but went to jail without making any
resistance. They claimed that they could easily prove their innocence upon
trial.

One would suspect that the civilization which defends itself against the
barbarisms of Lynch Law by stating that it lynches human beings only when
they are guilty of awful attacks upon women and children, would have been
very careful to have given these four prisoners, who were simply charged
with arson, a fair trial, to which they were entitled upon every principle
of law and humanity. Especially would this seem to be the case when if is
considered that one of the prisoners charged was a woman, and if the
nineteenth century has shown any advancement upon any lines of human
action, it is preeminently shown in its reverence, respect and protection
of its womanhood. But the people of Alabama failed to have any regard for
womanhood whatever.

The three men and the woman were put in jail to await trial. A few days
later it was rumored that they were to be subjects of Lynch Law, and, sure
enough, at night a mob of lynchers went to the jail, not to avenge any
awful crime against womanhood, but to kill four people who had been
suspected of setting a house on fire. They were caged in their cells,
helpless and defenseless; they were at the mercy of civilized white
Americans, who, armed with shotguns, were there to maintain the majesty of
American law. And most effectively was their duty done by these splendid
representatives of Governor Fishback's brave and honorable white
southerners, who resent "outside interference." They lined themselves up
in the most effective manner and poured volley after volley into the
bodies of their helpless, pleading victims, who in their bolted prison
cells could do nothing but suffer and die. Then these lynchers went
quietly away and the bodies of the woman and three men were taken out and
buried with as little ceremony as men would bury hogs.

No one will say that the massacre near Memphis in 1894 was any worse than
this bloody crime of Alabama in 1892. The details of this shocking affair
were given to the public by the press, but public sentiment was not moved
to action in the least; it was only a matter of a day's notice and then
went to swell the list of murders which stand charged against the noble,
Christian people of Alabama.


AMERICA AWAKENED

But there is now an awakened conscience throughout the land, and Lynch Law
can not flourish in the future as it has in the past. The close of the
year 1894 witnessed an aroused interest, an assertative humane principle
which must tend to the extirpation of that crime. The awful butchery last
mentioned failed to excite more than a passing comment In 1894, but far
different is it today. Gov. Jones, of Alabama, in 1893 dared to speak out
against the rule of the mob in no uncertain terms. His address indicated a
most helpful result of the present agitation. In face of the many denials
of the outrages on the one hand and apologies for lynchers on the other,
Gov. Jones admits the awful lawlessness charged and refuses to join in
the infamous plea made to condone the crime. No stronger nor more
effective words have been said than those following from Gov. Jones.

  While the ability of the state to deal with open revolts against the
  supremacy of its laws has been ably demonstrated, I regret that
  deplorable acts of violence have been perpetrated, in at least four
  instances, within the past two years by mobs, whose sudden work and
  quick dispersions rendered it impossible to protect their victims.
  Within the past two years nine prisoners, who were either in jail or in
  the custody of the officers, have been taken from them without
  resistance, and put to death. There was doubt of the guilt of the
  defendants in most of these cases, and few of them were charged with
  capital offenses. None of them involved the crime of rape. The largest
  rewards allowed by law were offered for the apprehension of the
  offenders, and officers were charged to a vigilant performance of their
  duties, and aided in some instances by the services of skilled
  detectives; but not a single arrest has been made and the grand juries
  in these counties have returned no bills of indictment. This would
  indicate either that local public sentiment approved these acts of
  violence or was too weak to punish them, or that the officers charged
  with that duty were in some way lacking in their performance. The evil
  cannot be cured or remedied by silence as to its existence. Unchecked,
  it will continue until it becomes a reproach to our good name, and a
  menace to our prosperity and peace; and it behooves you to exhaust all
  remedies within your power to find better preventives for such crimes.


A FRIENDLY WARNING

From England comes a friendly voice which must give to every patriotic
citizen food for earnese thought. Writing from London, to the _Chicago
Inter Ocean_, Nov. 25, 1894, the distinguished compiler of our last
census, Hon. Robert P. Porter, gives the American people a most
interesting review of the antilynching crusade in England, submitting
editorial opinions from all sections of England and Scotland, showing the
consensus of British opinion on this subject. It hardly need be said, that
without exception, the current of English thought deprecates the rule of
mob law, and the conscience of England is shocked by the revelation made
during the present crusade. In his letter Mr. Porter says:

  While some English journals have joined certain American journals in
  ridiculing the well-meaning people who have formed the antilynching
  committee, there is a deep under current on this subject which is
  injuring the Southern States far more than those who have not been drawn
  into the question of English investment for the South as I have can
  surmise. This feeling is by no means all sentiment. An Englishman whose
  word and active cooperation could send a million sterling to any
  legitimate Southern enterprise said the other day: "I will not invest a
  farthing in States where these horrors occur. I have no particular
  sympathy with the antilynching committee, but such outrages indicate to
  my mind that where life is held to be of such little value there is even
  less assurance that the laws will protect property. As I understand it
  the States, not the national government, control in such matters, and
  where those laws are strongest there is the best field for British
  capital."

Probably the most bitter attack on the antilynching committee has come
from the _London Times_. Those Southern Governors who had their bombastic
letters published in the _Times_, with favorable editorial comment, may
have had their laugh at the antilynchers here too soon. A few days ago, in
commenting on an interesting communication from Richard H. Edmonds, editor
of the _Manufacturer's Record_, setting forth the industrial advantages of
the Southern States, which was published in its columns, the _Times_ says:

  Without in any way countenancing the impertinence of "antilynching"
  committee, we may say that a state of things in which the killing of
  Negroes by bloodthirsty mobs is an incident of not unfrequent occurrence
  is not conducive to success in industry. Its existence, however, is a
  serious obstacle to the success of the South in industry; for even now
  Negro labor, which means at best inefficient labor, must be largely
  relied on there, and its efficiency must be still further diminished by
  spasmodic terrorism.

  Those interested in the development of the resources of the Southern
  States, and no one in proportion to his means has shown more faith in
  the progress of the South than the writer of this article, must take
  hold of this matter earnestly and intelligently. Sneering at the
  antilynching committee will do no good. Back of them, in fact, if not in
  form, is the public opinion of Great Britain. Even the _Times_ cannot
  deny this. It may not be generally known in the United States, but while
  the Southern and some of the Northern newspapers are making a target of
  Miss Wells, the young colored woman who started this English movement,
  and cracking their jokes at the expense of Miss Florence Balgarnie, who,
  as honorable secretary, conducts the committee's correspondence, the
  strongest sort of sentiment is really at the back of the movement. Here
  we have crystallized every phase of political opinion. Extreme Unionists
  like the Duke of Argyll and advanced home rulers such as Justin
  McCarthy; Thomas Burt, the labor leader; Herbert Burrows, the Socialist,
  and Tom Mann, representing all phases of the Labor party, are
  cooperating with conservatives like Sir T. Eldon Gorst. But the real
  strength of this committee is not visible to the casual observer. As a
  matter of fact it represents many of the leading and most powerful
  British journals. A.E. Fletcher is editor of the _London Daily
  Chronicle_; P.W. Clayden is prominent in the counsels of the _London
  Daily News_; Professor James Stuart is Gladstone's great friend and
  editor of the _London Star_, William Byles is editor and proprietor of
  the _Bradford Observer_, Sir Hugh Gilzen Reid is a leading Birmingham
  editor; in short, this committee has secured if not the leading editors,
  certainly important and warm friends, representing the Manchester
  Guardian, the _Leeds Mercury_, the _Plymouth Western News, Newcastle
  Leader_, the _London Daily Graphic_, the _Westminster Gazette_, the
  _London Echo_, a host of minor papers all over the kingdom, and
  practically the entire religious press of the kingdom.

  The greatest victory for the antilynchers comes this morning in the
  publication in the _London Times_ of William Lloyd Garrison's letter.
  This letter will have immense effect here. It may have been printed in
  full in the United States, but nevertheless I will quote a paragraph
  which will strengthen the antilynchers greatly in their crusade here:

  A year ago the South derided and resented Northern protests; today it
  listens, explains and apologizes for its uncovered cruelties. Surely a
  great triumph for a little woman to accomplish! It is the power of truth
  simply and unreservedly spoken, for her language was inadequate to
  describe the horrors exposed.

If the Southern states are wise, and I say this with the earnestness of a
friend and one who has built a home in the mountain regions of the South
and thrown his lot in with them, they will not only listen, but stop
lawlessness of all kinds. If they do, and thus secure the confidence of
Englishmen, we may in the next decade realize some of the hopes for the
new South we have so fondly cherished.




8

MISS WILLARD'S ATTITUDE


No class of American citizens stands in greater need of the humane and
thoughtful consideration of all sections of our country than do the
colored people, nor does any class exceed us in the measure of grateful
regard for acts of kindly interest in our behalf. It is, therefore, to us,
a matter of keen regret that a Christian organization, so large and
influential as the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, should refuse to
give its sympathy and support to our oppressed people who ask no further
favor than the promotion of public sentiment which shall guarantee to
every person accused of crime the safeguard of a fair and impartial trial,
and protection from butchery by brutal mobs. Accustomed as we are to the
indifference and apathy of Christian people, we would bear this instance
of ill fortune in silence, had not Miss Willard gone out of her way to
antagonize the cause so dear to our hearts by including in her Annual
Address to the W.C.T.U. Convention at Cleveland, November 5, 1894, a
studied, unjust and wholly unwarranted attack upon our work.

In her address Miss Willard said:

  The zeal for her race of Miss Ida B. Wells, a bright young colored
  woman, has, it seems to me, clouded her perception as to who were her
  friends and well-wishers in all high-minded and legitimate efforts to
  banish the abomination of lynching and torture from the land of the free
  and the home of the brave. It is my firm belief that in the statements
  made by Miss Wells concerning white women having taken the initiative
  in nameless acts between the races she has put an imputation upon half
  the white race in this country that is unjust, and, save in the rarest
  exceptional instances, wholly without foundation. This is the unanimous
  opinion of the most disinterested and observant leaders of opinion whom
  I have consulted on the subject, and I do not fear to say that the
  laudable efforts she is making are greatly handicapped by statements of
  this kind, nor to urge her as a friend and well-wisher to banish from
  her vocabulary all such allusions as a source of weakness to the cause
  she has at heart.

This paragraph, brief as it is, contains two statements which have not the
slightest foundation in fact. At no time, nor in any place, have I made
statements "concerning white women having taken the initiative in nameless
acts between the races." Further, at no time, or place nor under any
circumstance, have I directly or inferentially "put an imputation upon
half the white race in this country" and I challenge this "friend and
well-wisher" to give proof of the truth of her charge. Miss Willard
protests against lynching in one paragraph and then, in the next,
deliberately misrepresents my position in order that she may criticise a
movement, whose only purpose is to protect our oppressed race from
vindictive slander and Lynch Law.

What I have said and what I now repeat--in answer to her first charge--is,
that colored men have been lynched for assault upon women, when the facts
were plain that the relationship between the victim lynched and the
alleged victim of his assault was voluntary, clandestine and illicit. For
that very reason we maintain, that, in every section of our land, the
accused should have a fair, impartial trial, so that a man who is colored
shall not be hanged for an offense, which, if he were white, would not be
adjudged a crime. Facts cited in another chapter--"History of Some Cases
of Rape"--amply maintain this position. The publication of these facts in
defense of the good name of the race casts no "imputation upon half the
white race in this country" and no such imputation can be inferred except
by persons deliberately determined to be unjust.

But this is not the only injury which this cause has suffered at the hands
of our "friend and well-wisher." It has been said that the Women's
Christian Temperance Union, the most powerful organization of women in
America, was misrepresented by me while I was in England. Miss Willard was
in England at the time and knowing that no such misrepresentation came to
her notice, she has permitted that impression to become fixed and
widespread, when a word from her would have made the facts plain.

I never at any time or place or in any way misrepresented that
organization. When asked what concerted action had been taken by churches
and great moral agencies in America to put down Lynch Law, I was compelled
in truth to say that no such action had occurred, that pulpit, press and
moral agencies in the main were silent and for reasons known to
themselves, ignored the awful conditions which to the English people
appeared so abhorent. Then the question was asked what the great moral
reformers like Miss Frances Willard and Mr. Moody had done to suppress
Lynch Law and again I answered nothing. That Mr. Moody had never said a
word against lynching in any of his trips to the South, or in the North
either, so far as was known, and that Miss Willard's only public utterance
on the situation had condoned lynching and other unjust practices of the
South against the Negro. When proof of these statements was demanded, I
sent a letter containing a copy of the _New York Voice_, Oct. 23,1890, in
which appeared Miss Willard's own words of wholesale slander against the
colored race and condonation of Southern white people's outrages against
us. My letter in part reads as follows:

  But Miss Willard, the great temperance leader, went even further in
  putting the seal of her approval upon the southerners' method of dealing
  with the Negro. In October, 1890, the Women's Christian Temperance Union
  held its national meeting at Atlanta, Georgia. It was the first time in
  the history of the organization that it had gone south for a national
  meeting, and met the southerners in their own homes. They were welcomed
  with open arms. The governor of the state and the legislature gave
  special audiences in the halls of state legislation to the temperance
  workers. They set out to capture the northerners to their way of seeing
  things, and without troubling to hear the Negro side of the question,
  these temperance people accepted the white man's story of the problem
  with which he had to deal. State organizers were appointed that year,
  who had gone through the southern states since then, but in obedience to
  southern prejudices have confined their work to white persons only. It
  is only after Negroes are in prison for crimes that efforts of these
  temperance women are exerted without regard to "race, color, or previous
  condition." No "ounce of prevention" is used in their case; they are
  black, and if these women went among the Negroes for this work, the
  whites would not receive them. Except here and there, are found no
  temperance workers of the Negro race; "the great dark-faced mobs" are
  left the easy prey of the saloonkeepers.

  There was pending in the National Congress at this time a Federal
  Election Bill, the object being to give the National Government control
  of the national elections in the several states. Had this bill become a
  law, the Negro, whose vote has been systematically suppressed since 1875
  in the southern states, would have had the protection of the National
  Government, and his vote counted. The South would have been no longer
  "solid"; the Southerners saw that the balance of power which they
  unlawfully held in the House of Representatives and the Electoral
  College, based on the Negro population, would be wrested from them. So
  they nick-named the pending elections law the "Force Bill"--probably
  because it would force them to disgorge their ill-gotten political
  gains--and defeated it. While it was being discussed, the question was
  submitted to Miss Willard: "What do you think of the race problem and
  the Force Bill?"

  Said Miss Willard: "Now, as to the 'race problem' in its minified,
  current meaning, I am a true lover of the southern people--have spoken
  and worked in, perhaps, 200 of their towns and cities; have been taken
  into their love and confidence at scores of hospitable firesides; have
  heard them pour out their hearts in the splendid frankness of their
  impetuous natures. And I have said to them at such times: 'When I go
  North there will be wafted to you no word from pen or voice that is not
  loyal to what we are saying here and now.' Going South, a woman, a
  temperance woman, and a Northern temperance woman--three great barriers
  to their good will yonder--I was received by them with a confidence that
  was one of the most delightful surprises of my life. I think we have
  wronged the South, though we did not mean to do so. The reason was, in
  part, that we had irreparably wronged ourselves by putting no safeguards
  on the ballot box at the North that would sift out alien illiterates.
  They rule our cities today; the saloon is their palace, and the toddy
  stick their sceptre. It is not fair that they should vote, nor is it
  fair that a plantation Negro, who can neither read nor write, whose
  ideas are bounded by the fence of his own field and the price of his own
  mule, should be entrusted with the ballot. We ought to have put an
  educational test upon that ballot from the first. The Anglo-Saxon race
  will never submit to be dominated by the Negro so long as his altitude
  reaches no higher than the personal liberty of the saloon, and the power
  of appreciating the amount of liquor that a dollar will buy. New England
  would no more submit to this than South Carolina. 'Better whisky and
  more of it' has been the rallying cry of great dark-faced mobs in the
  Southern localities where local option was snowed under by the colored
  vote. Temperance has no enemy like that, for it is unreasoning and
  unreasonable. Tonight it promises in a great congregation to vote for
  temperance at the polls tomorrow; but tomorrow twenty-five cents changes
  that vote in favor of the liquor-seller.

  "I pity the southerners, and I believe the great mass of them are as
  conscientious and kindly intentioned toward the colored man as an equal
  number of white church-members of the North. Would-be demagogues lead
  the colored people to destruction. Half-drunken white roughs murder them
  at the polls, or intimidate them so that they do not vote. But the
  better class of people must not be blamed for this, and a more
  thoroughly American population than the Christian people of the South
  does not exist. They have the traditions, the kindness, the probity, the
  courage of our forefathers. The problem on their hands is immeasurable.
  The colored race multiplies like the locusts of Egypt. The grog-shop is
  its center of power. 'The safety of woman, of childhood, of the home, is
  menaced in a thousand localities at this moment, so that the men dare
  not go beyond the sight of their own roof-tree.' How little we know of
  all this, seated in comfort and affluence here at the North, descanting
  upon the rights of every man to cast one vote and have it fairly
  counted; that well-worn shibboleth invoked once more to dodge a living
  issue.

  "The fact is that illiterate colored men will not vote at the South
  until the white population chooses to have them do so; and under similar
  conditions they would not at the North." Here we have Miss Willard's
  words in full, condoning fraud, violence, murder, at the ballot box;
  rapine, shooting, hanging and burning; for all these things are done and
  being done now by the Southern white people. She does not stop there,
  but goes a step further to aid them in blackening the good name of an
  entire race, as shown by the sentences quoted in the paragraph above.
  These utterances, for which the colored people have never forgiven Miss
  Willard, and which Frederick Douglass has denounced as false, are to be
  found in full in the Voice of October 23,1890, a temperance organ
  published at New York City.

This letter appeared in the May number of _Fraternity_, the organ of the
first Anti-Lynching society of Great Britain. When Lady Henry Somerset
learned through Miss Florence Balgarnie that this letter had been
published she informed me that if the interview was published she would
take steps to let the public know that my statements must be received with
caution. As I had no money to pay the printer to suppress the edition
which was already published and these ladies did not care to do so, the
May number of _Fraternity_ was sent to its subscribers as usual. Three
days later there appeared in the daily _Westminster Gazette_ an
"interview" with Miss Willard, written by Lady Henry Somerset, which was
so subtly unjust in its wording that I was forced to reply in my own
defense. In that reply I made only statements which, like those concerning
Miss Willard's _Voice_ interview, have not been and cannot be denied. It
was as follows:

  LADY HENRY SOMERSET'S INTERVIEW WITH MISS WILLARD

  To the Editor of the _Westminster Gazette_: Sir--The interview published
  in your columns today hardly merits a reply, because of the indifference
  to suffering manifested. Two ladies are represented sitting under a tree
  at Reigate, and, after some preliminary remarks on the terrible subject
  of lynching, Miss Willard laughingly replies by cracking a joke. And the
  concluding sentence of the interview shows the object is not to
  determine how best they may help the Negro who is being hanged, shot and
  burned, but "to guard Miss Willard's reputation."

  With me it is not myself nor my reputation, but the life of my people,
  which is at stake, and I affirm that this is the first time to my
  knowledge that Miss Willard has said a single word in denunciation of
  lynching or demand for law. The year 1890, the one in which the
  interview appears, had a larger lynching record than any previous year,
  and the number and territory have increased, to say nothing of the human
  beings burnt alive.

  If so earnest as she would have the English public believe her to be,
  why was she silent when five minutes were given me to speak last June at
  Princes' Hall, and in Holborn Town Hall this May? I should say it was as
  President of the Women's Christian Temperance Union of America she is
  timid, because all these unions in the South emphasize the hatred of the
  Negro by excluding him. There is not a single colored woman admitted to
  the Southern W.C.T.U., but still Miss Willard blames the Negro for the
  defeat of Prohibition in the South. Miss Willard quotes from
  _Fraternity_, but forgets to add my immediate recognition of her
  presence on the platform at Holborn Town Hall, when, amidst many other
  resolutions on temperance and other subjects in which she is interested,
  time was granted to carry an anti-lynching resolution. I was so thankful
  for this crumb of her speechless presence that I hurried off to the
  editor of _Fraternity_ and added a postscript to my article blazoning
  forth that fact.

  Any statements I have made concerning Miss Willard are confirmed by the
  Hon. Frederick Douglass (late United States minister to Hayti) in a
  speech delivered by him in Washington in January of this year, which has
  since been published in a pamphlet. The fact is, Miss Willard is no
  better or worse than the great bulk of white Americans on the Negro
  questions. They are all afraid to speak out, and it is only British
  public opinion which will move them, as I am thankful to see it has
  already begun to move Miss Willard. I am, etc.,

  May 21

  IDA B. WELLS

Unable to deny the truth of these assertions, the charge has been made
that I have attacked Miss Willard and misrepresented the W.C.T.U. If to
state facts is misrepresentation, then I plead guilty to the charge.

I said then and repeat now, that in all the ten terrible years of
shooting, hanging and burning of men, women and children in America, the
Women's Christian Temperance Union never suggested one plan or made one
move to prevent those awful crimes. If this statement is untrue the
records of that organization would disprove it before the ink is dry. It
is clearly an issue of fact and in all fairness this charge of
misrepresentation should either be substantiated or withdrawn.

It is not necessary, however, to make any representation concerning the
W.C.T.U. and the lynching question. The record of that organization speaks
for itself. During all the years prior to the agitation begun against
Lynch Law, in which years men, women and children were scourged, hanged,
shot and burned, the W.C.T.U. had no word, either of pity or protest; its
great heart, which concerns itself about humanity the world over, was,
toward our cause, pulseless as a stone. Let those who deny this speak by
the record. Not until after the first British campaign, in 1893, was even
a resolution passed by the body which is the self-constituted guardian for
"God, home and native land."

Nor need we go back to other years. The annual session of that
organization held in Cleveland in November, 1894, made a record which
confirms and emphasizes the silence charged against it. At that session,
earnest efforts were made to secure the adoption of a resolution of
protest against lynching. At that very time two men were being tried for
the murder of six colored men who were arrested on charge of barn burning,
chained together, and on pretense of being taken to jail, were driven into
the woods where they were ambushed and all six shot to death. The six
widows of the butchered men had just finished the most pathetic recital
ever heard in any court room, and the mute appeal of twenty-seven orphans
for justice touched the stoutest hearts. Only two weeks prior to the
session, Gov. Jones of Alabama, in his last message to the retiring state
legislature, cited the fact that in the two years just past, nine colored
men had been taken from the legal authorities by lynching mobs and
butchered in cold blood--and not one of these victims was even charged
with an assault upon womanhood.

It was thought that this great organization, in face of these facts, would
not hesitate to place itself on record in a resolution of protest against
this awful brutality towards colored people. Miss Willard gave assurance
that such a resolution would be adopted, and that assurance was relied on.
The record of the session shows in what good faith that assurance was
kept. After recommending an expression against Lynch Law, the President
attacked the antilynching movement, deliberately misrepresenting my
position, and in her annual address, charging me with a statement I never
made.

Further than that, when the committee on resolutions reported their work,
not a word was said against lynching. In the interest of the cause I
smothered the resentment. I felt because of the unwarranted and unjust
attack of the President, and labored with members to secure an expression
of some kind, tending to abate the awful slaughter of my race. A
resolution against lynching was introduced by Mrs. Fessenden and read, and
then that great Christian body, which in its resolutions had expressed
itself in opposition to the social amusement of card playing, athletic
sports and promiscuous dancing; had protested against the licensing of
saloons, inveighed against tobacco, pledged its allegiance to the
Prohibition party, and thanked the Populist party in Kansas, the
Republican party in California and the Democratic party in the South,
wholly ignored the seven millions of colored people of this country whose
plea was for a word of sympathy and support for the movement in their
behalf. The resolution was not adopted, and the convention adjourned.

In the _Union Signal_ Dec. 6, 1894, among the resolutions is found this
one:

  Resolved, That the National W.C.T.U, which has for years counted among
  its departments that of peace and arbitration, is utterly opposed to all
  lawless acts in any and all parts of our common lands and it urges these
  principles upon the public, praying that the time may speedily come
  when no human being shall be condemned without due process of law; and
  when the unspeakable outrages which have so often provoked such
  lawlessness shall be banished from the world, and childhood, maidenhood
  and womanhood shall no more be the victims of atrocities worse than
  death.

This is not the resolution offered by Mrs. Fessenden. She offered the one
passed last year by the W.C.T.U. which was a strong unequivocal
denunciation of lynching. But she was told by the chairman of the
committee on resolutions, Mrs. Rounds, that there was already a lynching
resolution in the hands of the committee. Mrs. Fessenden yielded the floor
on that assurance, and no resolution of any kind against lynching was
submitted and none was voted upon, not even the one above, taken from the
columns of the _Union Signal_, the organ of the national W.C.T.U!

Even the wording of this resolution which was printed by the W.C.T.U.,
reiterates the false and unjust charge which has been so often made as an
excuse for lynchers. Statistics show that less than one-third of the
lynching victims are hanged, shot and burned alive for "unspeakable
outrages against womanhood, maidenhood and childhood;" and that nearly a
thousand, including women and children, have been lynched upon any pretext
whatsoever; and that all have met death upon the unsupported word of white
men and women. Despite these facts this resolution which was printed,
cloaks an apology for lawlessness, in the same paragraph which affects to
condemn it, where it speaks of "the unspeakable outrages which have so
often provoked such lawlessness."

Miss Willard told me the day before the resolutions were offered that the
Southern women present had held a caucus that day. This was after I, as
fraternal delegate from the Woman's Mite Missionary Society of the A.M.E.
Church at Cleveland, O., had been introduced to tender its greetings. In
so doing I expressed the hope of the colored women that the W.C.T.U. would
place itself on record as opposed to lynching which robbed them of
husbands, fathers, brothers and sons and in many cases of women as well.
No note was made either in the daily papers or the _Union Signal_ of that
introduction and greeting, although every other incident of that morning
was published. The failure to submit a lynching resolution and the wording
of the one above appears to have been the result of that Southern caucus.

On the same day I had a private talk with Miss Willard and told her she
had been unjust to me and the cause in her annual address, and asked that
she correct the statement that I had misrepresented the W.C.T.U, or that I
had "put an imputation on one-half the white race in this country." She
said that somebody in England told her it was a pity that I attacked the
white women of America. "Oh," said I, "then you went out of your way to
prejudice me and my cause in your annual address, not upon what you had
heard me say, but what somebody had told you I said?" Her reply was that I
must not blame her for her rhetorical expressions--that I had my way of
expressing things and she had hers. I told her I most assuredly did blame
her when those expressions were calculated to do such harm. I waited for
an honest an unequivocal retraction of her statements based on "hearsay."
Not a word of retraction or explanation was said in the convention and I
remained misrepresented before that body through her connivance and
consent.

The editorial notes in the _Union Signal_, Dec. 6, 1894, however, contains
the following:

  In her repudiation of the charges brought by Miss Ida Wells against
  white women as having taken the initiative in nameless crimes between
  the races, Miss Willard said in her annual address that this statement
  "put an unjust imputation upon half the white race." But as this
  expression has been misunderstood she desires to declare that she did
  not intend a literal interpretation to be given to the language used,
  but employed it to express a tendency that might ensue in public thought
  as a result of utterances so sweeping as some that have been made by
  Miss Wells.

Because this explanation is as unjust as the original offense, I am forced
in self-defense to submit this account of differences. I desire no quarrel
with the W.C.T.U., but my love for the truth is greater than my regard for
an alleged friend who, through ignorance or design misrepresents in the
most harmful way the cause of a long suffering race, and then unable to
maintain the truth of her attack excuses herself as it were by the wave of
the hand, declaring that "she did not intend a literal interpretation to
be given to the language used." When the lives of men, women and children
are at stake, when the inhuman butchers of innocents attempt to justify
their barbarism by fastening upon a whole race the obloque of the most
infamous of crimes, it is little less than criminal to apologize for the
butchers today and tomorrow to repudiate the apology by declaring it a
figure of speech.




9

LYNCHING RECORD FOR 1894



The following tables are based on statistics taken from the columns of the
_Chicago Tribune_, Jan. 1, 1895. They are a valuable appendix to the
foregoing pages. They show, among other things, that in Louisiana, April
23-28, eight Negroes were lynched because one white man was killed by the
Negro, the latter acting in self defense. Only seven of them are given in
the list.

Near Memphis, Tenn., six Negroes were lynched--this time charged with
burning barns. A trial of the indicted resulted in an acquittal, although
it was shown on trial that the lynching was prearranged for them. Six
widows and twenty-seven orphans are indebted to this mob for their
condition, and this lynching swells the number to eleven Negroes lynched
in and about Memphis since March 9, 1892.

In Brooks County, Ga., Dec. 23, while this Christian country was preparing
for Christmas celebration, seven Negroes were lynched in twenty-four hours
because they refused, or were unable to tell the whereabouts of a colored
man named Pike, who killed a white man. The wives and daughters of these
lynched men were horribly and brutally outraged by the murderers of their
husbands and fathers. But the mob has not been punished and again women
and children are robbed of their protectors whose blood cries unavenged to
Heaven and humanity. Georgia heads the list of lynching states.


MURDER

Jan. 9, Samuel Smith, Greenville, Ala., Jan. 11, Sherman Wagoner,
Mitchell, Ind.; Jan. 12, Roscoe Parker, West Union, Ohio; Feb. 7, Henry
Bruce, Gulch Co., Ark.; March 5, Sylvester Rhodes, Collins, Ga.; March 15,
Richard Puryea, Stroudsburg, Pa.; March 29, Oliver Jackson, Montgomery,
Ala.; March 30, ---- Saybrick, Fisher's Ferry, Miss.; April 14, William
Lewis, Lanison, Ala.; April 23, Jefferson Luggle, Cherokee, Kan.; April
23, Samuel Slaugate, Tallulah, La.; April 23, Thomas Claxton, Tallulah,
La.; April 23, David Hawkins, Tallulah, La.; April 27, Thel Claxton,
Tallulah, La.; April 27, Comp Claxton, Tallulah, La.; April 27, Scot
Harvey, Tallulah, La.; April 27, Jerry McCly, Tallulah, La.; May 17, Henry
Scott, Jefferson, Tex.; May 15, Coat Williams, Pine Grove, Fla.; June 2,
Jefferson Crawford, Bethesda, S.C.; June 4, Thondo Underwood, Monroe, La.;
June 8, Isaac Kemp, Cape Charles, Va.; June 13, Lon Hall, Sweethouse,
Tex.; June 13, Bascom Cook, Sweethouse, Tex.; June 15, Luke Thomas,
Biloxi, Miss.; June 29, John Williams, Sulphur, Tex.; June 29, Ulysses
Hayden, Monett, Mo.; July 6, ---- Hood, Amite, Miss.; July 7, James Bell,
Charlotte, Tenn.; Sept. 2, Henderson Hollander, Elkhorn, W. Va.; Sept. 14,
Robert Williams, Concordia Parish, La.; Sept. 22, Luke Washington, Meghee,
Ark.; Sept. 22, Richard Washington, Meghee, Ark.; Sept. 22, Henry
Crobyson, Meghee, Ark.; Nov. 10, Lawrence Younger, Lloyd, Va.; Dec. 17,
unknown Negro, Williamston, S.C.; Dec. 23, Samuel Taylor, Brooks County,
Ga.; Dec. 23, Charles Frazier, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 23, Samuel Pike,
Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 22, Harry Sherard, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 23,
unknown Negro, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 23, unknown Negro, Brooks County,
Ga.; Dec. 23, unknown Negro, Brooks County, Ga.; Dec. 26, Daniel McDonald,
Winston County, Miss.; Dec. 23, William Carter, Winston County, Miss.


RAPE

Jan. 17, John Buckner, Valley Park, Mo.; Jan. 21, M.G. Cambell, Jellico
Mines, Ky.; Jan. 27, unknown, Verona, Mo.; Feb. 11, Henry McCreeg, near
Pioneer, Tenn.; April 6, Daniel Ahren, Greensboro, Ga.; April 15, Seymour
Newland, Rushsylvania, Ohio; April 26, Robert Evarts, Jamaica, Ga.; April
27, James Robinson, Manassas, Va.; April 27, Benjamin White, Manassas,
Va.; May 15, Nim Young, Ocala, Fla.; May 22, unknown, Miller County, Ga.;
June 13, unknown, Blackshear, Ga.; June 18, Owen Opliltree, Forsyth, Ga.;
June 22, Henry Capus, Magnolia, Ark.; June 26, Caleb Godly, Bowling Green,
Ky.; June 28, Fayette Franklin, Mitchell, Ga.; July 2, Joseph Johnson,
Hiller's Creek, Mo.; July 6, Lewis Bankhead, Cooper, Ala.; July 16, Marion
Howard, Scottsville, Ky.; July 20, William Griffith, Woodville, Tex.; Aug.
12, William Nershbread, Rossville, Tenn.; Aug. 14, Marshall Boston,
Frankfort, Ky; Sept. 19, David Gooseby, Atlanta, Ga.; Oct. 15, Willis
Griffey, Princeton, Ky; Nov. 8, Lee Lawrence, Jasper County, Ga.; Nov. 10,
Needham Smith, Tipton County, Tenn.; Nov. 14, Robert Mosely, Dolinite,
Ala.; Dec. 4, William Jackson, Ocala, Fla.; Dec. 18, unknown, Marion
County, Fla.


UNKNOWN OFFENSES

March 6, Lamsen Gregory, Bell's Depot, Tenn.; March 6, unknown woman, near
Marche, Ark.; April 14, Alfred Brenn, Calhoun, Ga.; June 8, Harry Gill,
West Lancaster, S.C.; Nov. 23, unknown, Landrum, S.C.; Dec. 5, Mrs. Teddy
Arthur, Lincoln County, W. Va.


DESPERADO

Jan. 14, Charles Willis, Ocala, Fla.


SUSPECTED INCENDIARISM

Jan. 18, unknown, Bayou Sarah, La.


SUSPECTED ARSON

June 14, J.H. Dave, Monroe, La.


ENTICING SERVANT AWAY

Feb. 10, ---- Collins, Athens, Ga.


TRAIN WRECKING

Feb. 10, Jesse Dillingham, Smokeyville, Tex.


HIGHWAY ROBBERY

June 3, unknown, Dublin, Ga.


INCENDIARISM

Nov. 8, Gabe Nalls, Blackford, Ky.; Nov. 8, Ulysses Nails, Blackford, Ky.


ARSON

Dec. 20, James Allen, Brownsville, Tex.


ASSAULT

Dec. 23, George King, New Orleans, La.


NO OFFENSE

Dec. 28, Scott Sherman, Morehouse Parish, La.


BURGLARY

May 29, Henry Smith, Clinton, Miss.; May 29, William James, Clinton,
Miss.


ALLEGED RAPE

June 4, Ready Murdock, Yazoo, Miss.


ATTEMPTED RAPE

July 14, unknown Negro, Biloxi, Miss.; July 26, Vance McClure, New Iberia,
La.; July 26, William Tyler, Carlisle, Ky.; Sept. 14, James Smith, Stark,
Fla.; Oct. 8, Henry Gibson, Fairfield, Tex.; Oct. 20, ---- Williams, Upper
Marlboro, Md.; June 9, Lewis Williams, Hewett Springs, Miss.; June 28,
George Linton, Brookhaven, Miss.; June 28, Edward White, Hudson, Ala.;
July 6, George Pond, Fulton, Miss.; July 7, Augustus Pond, Tupelo, Miss.


RACE PREJUDICE

June 10, Mark Jacobs, Bienville, La.; July 24, unknown woman, Sampson
County, Miss.


INTRODUCING SMALLPOX

June 10, James Perry, Knoxville, Ark.


KIDNAPPING

March 2, Lentige, Harland County, Ky.


CONSPIRACY

May 29, J.T. Burgis, Palatka, Fla.


HORSE STEALING

June 20, Archie Haynes, Mason County, Ky.; June 20, Burt Haynes, Mason
County, Ky.; June 20, William Haynes, Mason County, Ky.


WRITING LETTER TO WHITE WOMAN

May 9, unknown Negro, West Texas.


GIVING INFORMATION

July 12, James Nelson, Abbeyville, S.C.


STEALING

Jan. 5, Alfred Davis, Live Oak County, Ark.


LARCENY

April 18, Henry Montgomery, Lewisburg, Tenn.


POLITICAL CAUSES

July 19, John Brownlee, Oxford, Ala.


CONJURING

July 20, Allen Myers, Rankin County, Miss.


ATTEMPTED MURDER

June 1, Frank Ballard, Jackson, Tenn.


ALLEGED MURDER

April 5, Negro, near Selma, Ala.; April 5, Negro, near Selma, Ala.


WITHOUT CAUSE

May 17, Samuel Wood, Gates City, Va.


BARN BURNING

April 22, Thomas Black, Tuscumbia, Ala.; April 22, John Williams,
Tuscumbia, Ala.; April 22, Toney Johnson, Tuscumbia, Ala.; July 14,
William Bell, Dixon, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Daniel Hawkins, Millington, Tenn.;
Sept. 1, Robert Haynes, Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Warner Williams,
Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Edward Hall, Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, John
Haynes, Millington, Tenn.; Sept. 1, Graham White, Millington, Tenn.


ASKING WHITE WOMAN TO MARRY HIM

May 23, William Brooks, Galesline, Ark.


OFFENSES CHARGED FOR LYNCHING

Suspected arson, 2; stealing, 1; political causes, 1; murder, 45; rape,
29; desperado, 1; suspected incendiarism, 1; train wrecking, 1; enticing
servant away, 1; kidnapping, 1; unknown offense, 6; larceny, 1; barn
burning, 10; writing letters to a white woman, 1; without cause, 1;
burglary, 1; asking white woman to marry, 1; conspiracy, 1; attempted
murder, 1; horse stealing, 3; highway robbery, 1; alleged rape, 1;
attempted rape, 11; race prejudice, 2; introducing smallpox, 1; giving
information, 1; conjuring, 1; incendiarism, 2; arson, 1; assault, 1; no
offense, 1; alleged murder, 2; total (colored), 134.


LYNCHING STATES

Mississippi, 15; Arkansas, 8; Virginia, 5; Tennessee, 15; Alabama, 12;
Kentucky, 12; Texas, 9; Georgia, 19; South Carolina, 5; Florida, 7;
Louisiana, 15; Missouri, 4; Ohio, 2; Maryland, 1; West Virginia, 2;
Indiana, 1; Kansas, 1; Pennsylvania, 1.


LYNCHING BY THE MONTH

January, 11; February, 17; March, 8; April, 36; May, 16; June, 31; July,
21; August, 4; September, 17; October, 7; November, 9; December, 20; total
colored and white, 197.


WOMEN LYNCHED

July 24, unknown woman, race prejudice, Sampson County, Miss.; March 6,
unknown, woman, unknown offense, Marche, Ark.; Dec. 5, Mrs. Teddy Arthur,
unknown cause, Lincoln County, W. Va.




10

THE REMEDY


It is a well-established principle of law that every wrong has a remedy.
Herein rests our respect for law. The Negro does not claim that all of the
one thousand black men, women and children, who have been hanged, shot and
burned alive during the past ten years, were innocent of the charges made
against them. We have associated too long with the white man not to have
copied his vices as well as his virtues. But we do insist that the
punishment is not the same for both classes of criminals. In lynching,
opportunity is not given the Negro to defend himself against the
unsupported accusations of white men and women. The word of the accuser is
held to be true and the excited bloodthirsty mob demands that the rule of
law be reversed and instead of proving the accused to be guilty, the
victim of their hate and revenge must prove himself innocent. No evidence
he can offer will satisfy the mob; he is bound hand and foot and swung
into eternity. Then to excuse its infamy, the mob almost invariably
reports the monstrous falsehood that its victim made a full confession
before he was hanged.

With all military, legal and political power in their hands, only two of
the lynching States have attempted a check by exercising the power which
is theirs. Mayor Trout, of Roanoke, Virginia, called out the militia in
1893, to protect a Negro prisoner, and in so doing nine men were killed
and a number wounded. Then the mayor and militia withdrew, left the Negro
to his fate and he was promptly lynched. The business men realized the
blow to the town's were given light sentences, the highest being one of
twelve financial interests, called the mayor home, the grand jury
indicted and prosecuted the ringleaders of the mob. They months in State
prison. The day he arrived at the penitentiary, he was pardoned by the
governor of the State.

The only other real attempt made by the authorities to protect a prisoner
of the law, and which was more successful, was that of Gov. McKinley, of
Ohio, who sent the militia to Washington Courthouse, O., in October, 1894,
and five men were killed and twenty wounded in maintaining the principle
that the law must be upheld.

In South Carolina, in April, 1893, Gov. Tillman aided the mob by yielding
up to be killed, a prisoner of the law, who had voluntarily placed himself
under the Governor's protection. Public sentiment by its representatives
has encouraged Lynch Law, and upon the revolution of this sentiment we
must depend for its abolition.

Therefore, we demand a fair trial by law for those accused of crime, and
punishment by law after honest conviction. No maudlin sympathy for
criminals is solicited, but we do ask that the law shall punish all alike.
We earnestly desire those that control the forces which make public
sentiment to join with us in the demand. Surely the humanitarian spirit of
this country which reaches out to denounce the treatment of the Russian
Jews, the Armenian Christians, the laboring poor of Europe, the Siberian
exiles and the native women of India--will not longer refuse to lift its
voice on this subject. If it were known that the cannibals or the savage
Indians had burned three human beings alive in the past two years, the
whole of Christendom would be roused, to devise ways and means to put a
stop to it. Can you remain silent and inactive when such things are done
in our own community and country? Is your duty to humanity in the United
States less binding?

What can you do, reader, to prevent lynching, to thwart anarchy and
promote law and order throughout our land?

1st. You can help disseminate the facts contained in this book by bringing
them to the knowledge of every one with whom you come in contact, to the
end that public sentiment may be revolutionized. Let the facts speak for
themselves, with you as a medium.

2d. You can be instrumental in having churches, missionary societies,
Y.M.C.A.'s, W.C.T.U.'s and all Christian and moral forces in connection
with your religious and social life, pass resolutions of condemnation and
protest every time a lynching takes place; and see that they axe sent to
the place where these outrages occur.

3d. Bring to the intelligent consideration of Southern people the refusal
of capital to invest where lawlessness and mob violence hold sway. Many
labor organizations have declared by resolution that they would avoid
lynch infested localities as they would the pestilence when seeking new
homes. If the South wishes to build up its waste places quickly, there is
no better way than to uphold the majesty of the law by enforcing obedience
to the same, and meting out the same punishment to all classes of
criminals, white as well as black. "Equality before the law," must become
a fact as well as a theory before America is truly the "land of the free
and the home of the brave."

4th. Think and act on independent lines in this behalf, remembering that
after all, it is the white man's civilization and the white man's
government which are on trial. This crusade will determine whether that
civilization can maintain itself by itself, or whether anarchy shall
prevail; Whether this Nation shall write itself down a success at self
government, or in deepest humiliation admit its failure complete; whether
the precepts and theories of Christianity are professed and practiced by
American white people as Golden Rules of thought and action, or adopted as
a system of morals to be preached to, heathen until they attain to the
intelligence which needs the system of Lynch Law.

5th. Congressman Blair offered a resolution in the House of
Representatives, August, 1894. The organized life of the country can
speedily make this a law by sending resolutions to Congress indorsing Mr.
Blair's bill and asking Congress to create the commission. In no better
way can the question be settled, and the Negro does not fear the issue.
The following is the resolution:

  Resolved, By the House of Representatives and Senate in congress
  assembled, That the committee on labor be instructed to investigate and
  report the number, location and date of all alleged assaults by males
  upon females throughout the country during the ten years last preceding
  the passing of this joint resolution, for or on account of which
  organized but unlawful violence has been inflicted or attempted to be
  inflicted. Also to ascertain and report all facts of organized but
  unlawful violence to the person, with the attendant facts and
  circumstances, which have been inflicted upon accused persons alleged to
  have been guilty of crimes punishable by due process of law which have
  taken place in any part of the country within the ten years last
  preceding the passage of this resolution. Such investigation shall be
  made by the usual methods and agencies of the Department of Labor, and
  report made to Congress as soon as the work can be satisfactorily done,
  and the sum of $25,000, or so much thereof as may be necessary, is
  hereby appropriated to pay the expenses out of any money in the treasury
  not otherwise appropriated.

The belief has been constantly expressed in England that in the United
States, which has produced Wm. Lloyd Garrison, Henry Ward Beecher, James
Russell Lowell, John G. Whittier and Abraham Lincoln there must be those
of their descendants who would take hold of the work of inaugurating an
era of law and order. The colored people of this country who have been
loyal to the flag believe the same, and strong in that belief have begun
this crusade. To those who still feel they have no obligation in the
matter, we commend the following lines of Lowell on "Freedom."

    Men! whose boast it is that ye
    Come of fathers brave and free,
    If there breathe on earth a slave
    Are ye truly free and brave?
    If ye do not feel the chain,
    When it works a brother's pain,
    Are ye not base slaves indeed,
    Slaves unworthy to be freed?

    Women! who shall one day bear
    Sons to breathe New England air,
    If ye hear without a blush,
    Deeds to make the roused blood rush
    Like red lava through your veins,
    For your sisters now in chains,--
    Answer! are ye fit to be
    Mothers of the brave and free?

    Is true freedom but to break
    Fetters for our own dear sake,
    And, with leathern hearts, forget
    That we owe mankind a debt?
    No! true freedom is to share
    All the chains our brothers wear,
    And, with heart and hand, to be
    Earnest to make others free!

    There are slaves who fear to speak
    For the fallen and the weak;
    They are slaves who will not choose
    Hatred, scoffing, and abuse,
    Rather than in silence shrink
    From the truth they needs must think;
    They are slaves who dare not be
    In the right with two or three.


A FIELD FOR PRACTICAL WORK

The very frequent inquiry made after my lectures by interested friends is
"What can I do to help the cause?" The answer always is: "Tell the world
the facts." When the Christian world knows the alarming growth and extent
of outlawry in our land, some means will be found to stop it.

The object of this publication is to tell the facts, and friends of the
cause can lend a helping hand by aiding in the distribution of these
books. When I present our cause to a minister, editor, lecturer, or
representative of any moral agency, the first demand is for facts and
figures. Plainly, I can not then hand out a book with a twenty-five-cent
tariff on the information contained. This would be only a new method in
the book agents' art. In all such cases it is a pleasure to submit this
book for investigation, with the certain assurance of gaining a friend to
the cause.

There are many agencies which may be enlisted in our cause by the general
circulation of the facts herein contained. The preachers, teachers,
editors and humanitarians of the white race, at home and abroad, must have
facts laid before them, and it is our duty to supply these facts. The
Central Anti-Lynching League, Room 9, 128 Clark St., Chicago, has
established a Free Distribution Fund, the work of which can be promoted by
all who are interested in this work.

Antilynching leagues, societies and individuals can order books from this
fund at agents' rates. The books will be sent to their order, or, if
desired, will be distributed by the League among those whose cooperative
aid we so greatly need. The writer hereof assures prompt distribution of
books according to order, and public acknowledgment of all orders through
the public press.






Produced by Afra Ullah and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




CRIME AND ITS CAUSES



BY

WILLIAM DOUGLAS MORRISON

OF H.M. PRISON, WANDSWORTH



LONDON
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO., LIM.
NEW YORK : CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

1902




OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

"The science of criminology is pursued vigorously among the Italians,
but this is one of the first English books to make the phenomena of
crime the subject of a strictly scientific investigation."--_Daily
Chronicle_.

"The book is an important addition to the Social Science Series.
It throws light upon some of the most complex problems with which
society has to deal, and incidentally affords much interesting
reading."--_Manchester Examiner_.

"This is a work which, considering its limits and modest pretensions,
it is difficult to over praise. It is a calm and thoughtful study by a
writer in whom the deliberate determination to look on things as they
are has not extinguished a reasoned faith in the possibility of their
amelioration. The work is conceived throughout in a genuinely
philosophical spirit."--_International Journal of Ethics_.

"A thoughtful and thought suggesting book--well worthy of consideration
by penologists, whether specialists or amateurs."--_Annals of the
American Academy_.

"Mr. Morrison's book is especially valuable, because, without attempting
to enforce this or that conclusion, it furnishes the authentic _data_
on which all sound conclusions must be based."--_Times_.

"Cramful of suggestive facts and solid arguments on the great questions
how criminals are made, and how crime is best to be dealt with. Many
cherished superstitions and fallacies are exploded in Mr. Morrison's
pages."--_Star_.

First Edition, _February 1891_.

Second Edition, _February 1902_.




CONTENTS.


CHAP.

   I. THE STATISTICS OF CRIME

  II. CLIMATE AND CRIME

 III. THE SEASONS AND CRIME

  IV. DESTITUTION AND CRIME

   V. POVERTY AND CRIME

  VI. SEX, AGE, AND CRIME

 VII. THE CRIMINAL IN BODY AND MIND

VIII. THE PUNISHMENT OF CRIME

      APPENDICES




PREFACE.

This volume, as its title indicates, is occupied with an examination
of some of the principal causes of crime, and is designed as an
introduction to the study of criminal questions in general. In spite
of all the attention these questions have hitherto received and are
now receiving, crime still remains one of the most perplexing and
obstinate of social problems. It is much more formidable than
pauperism, and almost as costly. A social system which has to try
hundreds of thousands of offenders annually before the criminal courts
is in a very imperfect condition; the causes which lead to this state
of things deserve careful consideration from all who take an interest
in social welfare.

In the following pages I have endeavoured to show that crime is a more
complicated phenomenon than is generally supposed. When society will
be able to stamp it out is a question it would be extremely hard to
answer. If it ever does so, it will not be the work of one generation
but of many, and it will not be effected by the application of any
single specific.

Punishment alone will never succeed in putting an end to crime.
Punishment will and does hold crime to a certain extent in check, but
it will never transform the delinquent population into honest
citizens, for the simple reason that it can only strike at the
full-fledged criminal and not at the causes which have made him so.
Economic prosperity, however widely diffused, will not extinguish
crime. Many people imagine that all the evils afflicting society
spring from want, but this is only partially true. A small number of
crimes are probably due to sheer lack of food, but it has to be borne
in mind that crime would still remain an evil of enormous magnitude
even if there were no such calamities as destitution and distress. As
a matter of fact easy circumstances have less influence on conduct
than is generally believed; prosperity generates criminal inclinations
as well as adversity, and on the whole the rich are just as much
addicted to crime as the poor. The progress of civilisation will not
destroy crime. Many savage tribes living under the most primitive
forms of social life present a far more edifying spectacle of respect
for person and property than the most cultivated classes in Europe and
America. All that civilisation has hitherto done is to change the form
in which crime is perpetrated; in substance it remains the same.
Primary Schools will not accomplish much in eliminating crime. The
merely intellectual training received in these institutions has little
salutary influence upon conduct. Nothing can be mope deplorable than
that sectarian bickerings, respecting infinitesimal points in the
sanctions of morality, should result in the children of England
receiving hardly any moral instruction whatever. Conduct, as the late
Mr. Matthew Arnold has so often told us, is three fourths of life.
What are we to think of an educational system which officially ignores
this; what have we to hope in the way of improvement from a people
which consents to its being ignored?

But even a course of systematic instruction in the principles of
conduct, no matter by what sanctions these principles are inculcated,
will not avail much unless they are to some extent practised in the
home. And this will never be the case so long as women are demoralised
by the hard conditions of industrial life, and unfitted for the duties
of motherhood before beginning to undertake them.

In addition to this, no State will ever get rid of the criminal
problem unless its population is composed of healthy and vigorous
citizens. Very often crime is but the offspring of degeneracy and
disease. A diseased and degenerate population, no matter how
favourably circumstanced in other respects, will always produce a
plentiful crop of criminals. Stunted and decrepit faculties, whether
physical or mental, either vitiate the character, or unfit the
combatant for the battle of life. In both cases the result is in
general the same, namely, a career of crime.

As to the best method of dealing with the actual criminal, the first
thing to be done is to know what sort of a person you are dealing
with. He must be carefully studied at first hand. At present too much
attention is bestowed on theoretical discussions respecting the
various kinds of crime and punishment, while hardly any account is
taken of the persons who commit the crime and require the punishment.
Yet this is the most important point of all; the other is trivial in
comparison with it. If crime is to be dealt with in a rational manner
and not on mere _a priori_ grounds, our minds must be enlightened on
such questions as the following: What is the Criminal? What are the
chief causes which have made him such? How are these causes to be got
rid of or neutralised? What is the effect of this or that kind of
punishment? These are the momentous problems; in comparison with
these, all fine-spun definitions respecting the difference between one
crime and another are mere dust in the balance. There can be little
doubt that a neglect of those considerations on the part of many
magistrates and judges, is at the root of the capricious sentences so
often passed upon criminals. The effects of this neglect result in the
passing of sentences of too great severity on first offenders and the
young; and of too much leniency on hardened and habitual criminals.
Leniency, says Grotius, should be exercised with discernment,
otherwise it is not a virtue, but a weakness and a scandal.

When imprisonment has to be resorted to, it must be made a genuine
punishment if it is to exercise any effect as a deterrent. The moment
a prison is made a comfortable place to live in, it becomes useless as
a safeguard against the criminal classes. This is a fundamental
principle. But punishment, although an essential part of imprisonment,
is not its only purpose. Imprisonment should also be a preparation for
liberty. If a convicted man is as unfit for social life at the
expiration of his sentence as he was at the commencement of it, the
prison has only accomplished half its work; it has satisfied the
feeling of public vengeance, but it has failed to transform the
offender into a useful citizen. How to prepare the offender for
liberty is, I admit, a task of supreme difficulty; in some oases,
probably, an impossible task. For work of this character what is
wanted above all is an enlightened staff. Mere machines are useless;
men unacquainted with civil life and its conditions are useless. It is
from civil life the prisoner is taken; it is to civil life he has to
return, and unless he is under the care of men who have an intimate
knowledge of civil life, he will not have the same prospect of being
fitted into it when he has once more to face the world.

In the preparation of this volume I have carefully examined the most
recent ideas of English and Continental writers (especially the
Italians) on the subject of crime. The opinions it contains are based
on an experience of fourteen years in Orders most of which have been
spent in prison work. In revising the proofs I have received valuable
assistance from Mr. J. Morrison.

W.D.M.




CRIME AND ITS CAUSES




CHAPTER I.

THE STATISTICS OF CRIME.


It is only within the present century, and in some countries it is
only within the present generation, that the possibility has arisen of
conducting the study of criminal problems on anything approaching an
exact and scientific basis. Before the introduction of a system of
criminal statistics--a step taken by most peoples within the memory of
men still living--it was impossible for civilised communities to
ascertain with absolute accuracy whether crime was increasing or
decreasing, or what transformation it was passing through in
consequence of the social, political, and economic changes constantly
taking place in all highly organised societies. It was also equally
impossible to appreciate the effect of punishment for good or evil on
the criminal population. Justice had little or no data to go upon;
prisoners were sentenced in batches to the gallows, to transportation,
to the hulks, or to the county gaol, but no inquiry was made as to the
result of these punishments on the criminal classes or on the progress
of crime. It was deemed sufficient to catch and punish the offender;
the more offences seemed to increase--there was no sure method of
knowing whether they did increase or not--the more severe the
punishment became. Justice worked in the dark, and was surrounded by
the terrors of darkness. What followed is easy to imagine; the
criminal law of England reached a pitch of unparalleled barbarity, and
within living memory laws were on the statute book by which a man
might be hanged for stealing property above the value of a shilling.

Had a fairly accurate system of criminal statistics existed, it is
very likely that the data contained in them would have reassured the
nation and tempered the severity of the law.

Of Criminal Statistics it may be said in the first place, that they
act as an annual register for tabulating the amount of danger to which
society is exposed by the nefarious operations of lawless persons. By
these statistics we are informed of the number of crimes committed
during the course of the year so far as they are reported to the
police. We are informed of the number of persons brought to trial for
the perpetration of these crimes; of the nature of the offences with
which incriminated persons are charged, and of the length of sentence
imposed on those who are sent to prison. The age, the degree of
instruction, and the occupations of prisoners are also tabulated. A
record is also kept of the number of times a man has been committed to
prison, and of the manner in which he has conducted himself while in
confinement.

One important point must be mentioned on which criminal statistics are
almost entirely silent. The great sources of crime are the personal,
the social, and the economic conditions of the individuals who commit
it. Criminal statistics, to be exhaustive, ought to include not only
the amount of crime and the degrees of punishment awarded to
offenders; these statistics should also, as far as practicable, take
cognisance of the sources from which crime undoubtedly springs. In
this respect, our information, so far as it comes to us through
ordinary channels, is lamentably deficient. It is confined to data
respecting the age, sex, and occupation of the offender. These data
are very interesting, and very useful, as affording a glimpse of the
sources from which the dark river of delinquency takes its rise. But
they are too meagre and fragmentary. They require to be completed by
the personal and social history of the criminal. Crime is not
necessarily a disease, but it resembles disease in this respect, that
it will be impossible to wipe it out till an accurate diagnosis has
been made of the causes which produce it. To punish crime is all very
well; but punishment is not an absolute remedy; its deterrent action
is limited, and other methods besides punishment must be adopted if
society wishes to gain the mastery over the criminal population. What
those methods should be can only be ascertained after the most
searching preliminary inquiries into the main factors of crime. It
ought, therefore, to be a weighty part of the business of criminal
statistics to offer as full information as possible, not only
respecting crimes and punishments, but much more respecting criminals.
Every criminal has a life history; that history is very frequently the
explanation of his sinister career; it ought, therefore, to be
tabulated, so that it may be seen how far his descent and his
surroundings have contributed to make him what he is. In the case of
children sent to Reformatory Schools, the previous history of the
child is always tabulated. Enquiries are made and registered
respecting the parents of the child; what country they belong to, what
sort of character they bear, whether they are honest and sober,
whether they have ever been in prison, what wages they earn, and
whether the child is legitimate or not. A similar method to the one
adopted with Reformatory children ought to be instituted, with
suitable modifications, in European prisons and convict
establishments. It is, at the present time, being advocated by almost
all the most eminent criminal authorities,[1] and more than one scheme
has been drawn up to show the scope of its operation.

    [1] See Appendix I.

In addition to the service which a complete personal and family record
of convicted prisoners would render as to the causes of crime, such a
record would be of immense advantage to the judges. At the present
time a judge is only made acquainted with the previous convictions of
a prisoner; he knows nothing more about him except through the
evidence which is sometimes adduced as to character. An accurate
record of the prisoner's past would enable the judge to see at once
with what sort of offender he was dealing, and might, perhaps, help to
put a stop to the unequal and capricious sentences which, not
infrequently, disgrace the name of justice.[2]

    [2] In his interesting work, "Die Beziehungen zwischen
    Geistesstörung und Verbrechen," Dr. Sander shows that out of a
    hundred insane persons brought up for trial, the judges only
    discovered the mental state of from twenty-six to twenty-eight
    per cent. of them.

Passing from this point, we shall now inquire into the possibility of
establishing some system of International Statistics, whereby the
volume of crime in one country may be compared with the volume of
crime in another. At the present time it is extremely difficult to
institute any such comparison, and it is questionable if it can ever
be properly done. In no two countries is the criminal law the same,
and an act which is perfectly harmless when committed in one part of
Europe, is considered in another as a contravention of the law. Each
country has also a nomenclature of crime and methods of criminal
procedure peculiar to itself. In each country the police are organised
on a different principle, and act in the execution of their duty on a
different code of rules. In all cases, for instance, of mendicancy,
drunkenness, brawling, and disorder, the initiative rests practically
with the police, and it depends almost entirely on the instructions
issued to the police whether such offences shall figure largely or not
in the statistics of crime. A proof of this fact may be seen in the
Report of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, for the year
1888. In the year 1886, the number of persons convicted in the
Metropolis of "Annoying male persons for the purpose of prostitution"
was 3,233; in 1888, the number was only 1,475. This enormous decrease
in the course of two years is not due to a diminution of the offence,
but to a change in the attitude of the police. Again, in the year
1887, the Metropolitan police arrested 4,556 persons under the
provisions of the Vagrant and Poor Law Acts; but in the year 1888, the
number arrested by the same body under the same acts amounted to
7,052. It is perfectly obvious that this vast increase of apprehensions
was not owing to a corresponding increase in the number of rogues,
beggars, and vagrants; it was principally owing to the increased
stringency with which the Metropolitan police carried out the
provisions of the Vagrant and Poor Law Acts. An absolute proof of the
correctness of this statement is the fact that throughout the whole of
England there was a decrease in the number of persons proceeded
against in accordance with these acts. These examples will suffice to
show what an immense power the police have in regulating the volume of
certain classes of offences. In some countries they are called upon to
exercise this power in the direction of stringency; in other countries
it is exercised in the direction of leniency; and in the same country
its exercise, as we have just seen, varies according to the views of
whoever, for the time being, happens to have a voice in controlling
the action of the police. In these circumstances it is obviously
impossible to draw any accurate comparison between the lighter kinds
of offences in one country and the same class of offences in another.

In the case of the more serious offences against person and property,
the initiative of putting the law in motion rests chiefly with the
injured individual. The action of the individual in this respect
depends to a large extent on the customs of the country. In some
countries the injured person, instead of putting the law in motion
against an offender, takes the matter in his own hands, and
administers the wild justice of revenge. Great differences of opinion
also exist among different nations as to the gravity of certain
offences. Among some peoples there is a far greater reluctance than
there is among others to appeal to the law. Murder is perhaps the only
crime on which there exists a fair consensus of opinion among
civilised communities; and even with regard to this offence it is
impossible to overcome all the judicial and statistical difficulties
which stand in the way of an international comparison.

In spite, however, of the fact that the amount of crime committed in
civilised countries cannot be subjected to exact comparison, there are
various points on which the international statistics of crime are able
to render valuable service. It is important, for instance, to see in
what relation crime in different communities stands to age, sex,
climate, temperature, race, education, religion, occupation, home and
social surroundings. If we find, for example, an abnormal development
of crime taking place in a given country at a certain period of life,
or in certain social circumstances, and if we do not discover the same
abnormal development taking place in other countries at a similar
period of life, or in a similar social stratum, we ought at once to
come to the conclusion that there is some extraordinary cause at work
peculiar to the country which is producing an unusually high total of
crime. If, on the other hand, we find that certain kinds of crime are
increasing or decreasing in all countries at the same time, we may be
perfectly sure that the increase or decrease is brought about by the
same set of causes. And whether those causes are war, political
movements, commercial prosperity, or depression, the community which
first escapes from them will also be the first to show it in the
annual statistics of crime. In these and many other ways international
statistics are of the greatest utility.

From what has already been said as to the immense difficulty of
comparing the criminal statistics of various countries, it follows as
a matter of course that the figures contained in them cannot be used
as a means of ascertaining the position which belongs to each nation
respectively in the scale of morality. Nor is the moral progress of a
nation to be measured solely by an apparent decay of crime. On the
contrary, an increase in the amount of crime may be the direct result
of a moral advance in the average sentiments of the community. The
passing of the Elementary Education Act of 1870 and of the Criminal
Law Amendment Act of 1885 have added considerably to the number of
persons brought before the criminal courts and eventually committed to
prison. But an increase of the prison population due to these causes
is no proof that the country is deteriorating morally. It will be
regarded by many persons as a proof that the country has improved, for
it is now demanding a higher standard of conduct from the ordinary
citizen than it demanded twenty years ago.[3]

    [3] Before the passing of the Elementary Education Act, no one
    was tried for not sending his child to school; it was not a legal
    offence; in 1888-9 no less than 80,519 persons were tried under
    this Act, in England and Wales.

On the other hand, a decrease in the official statistics of crime may
be a proof that the moral sentiments of a nation are degenerating. It
may be a proof that the laws are ceasing to be an effective protection
to the citizen, and that society is falling a victim to the forces of
anarchy and crime. It is, therefore, impossible by looking only at the
bare figures contained in criminal statistics, to say whether a
community is growing better or worse. Before any conclusions can be
formed on these matters, either one way or the other, we must go
behind the figures, and look at them in the light of the social,
political and industrial developments taking place in the society to
which these figures refer.

In this connection, it may not be amiss to point out that the present
tendency of legislation is bound to produce more crime. All law is by
its nature coercive, but so long as the coercion is confined within a
limited area, or can only come into operation at rare intervals, it
produces comparatively little effect on the whole volume of crime.
When, however, a law is passed affecting every member of the community
every day of his life, such a law is certain to increase the
population of our gaols. A marked characteristic of the present time
is that legislative assemblies are becoming more and more inclined to
pass such laws; so long as this is the case it is vain to hope for a
decrease in the annual amount of crime. Whether these new coercive
laws are beneficial or the reverse is a matter which it does not at
this moment concern me to discuss; what I am anxious to point out is,
that the more they are multiplied, the greater will be the number of
persons annually committed to prison. In initiating legislation of a
far-reaching coercive character, politicians should remember far more
than they do at present that the effect of these Acts of Parliament
will be to fill the gaols, and to put the prison taint upon a greater
number of the population. This is a responsibility which no body of
men ought lightly to incur, and in considering the advantages to be
derived from some new legislative enactment, an equal amount of
consideration should be bestowed upon the fact that the new enactment
will also be the means of providing a fresh recruiting ground for the
permanent army of crime.

A man, for instance, goes to prison for contravening some municipal
bye-law; he comes out of it the friend and associate of habitual
criminals; and the ultimate result of the bye-law is to transform a
comparatively harmless member of society into a dangerous thief or
house-breaker. One person of this character is a greater menace to
society than a hundred offenders against municipal regulations, and
the present system of law-making undoubtedly helps to multiply this
class of men. One of the leading principles of all wise legislation
should be to keep the population out of gaol; but the direct result of
many recent enactments, both in this country and abroad, is to drive
them into it; and it may be taken as an axiom that the more the
functions of Government are extended, the greater will be the amount
of crime.

These remarks lead me to approach the question of what is called "the
movement" of crime. Is its total volume increasing or decreasing in
the principal civilised countries of the world? On this point there is
some diversity of view, but most of the principal authorities in
Europe and America are emphatically of opinion that crime is on the
increase. In the United States, we are told by Mr. D.A. Wells,[4] and
by Mr. Howard Wines, an eminent specialist in criminal matters, that
crime is steadily increasing, and it is increasing faster than the
growth of the population.

    [4] _Recent Economic Changes_, p. 345.

Nearly all the chief statisticians abroad tell the same tale with
respect to the growth of crime on the Continent. Dr. Mischler of
Vienna, and Professor von Liszt of Marburg draw a deplorable picture
of the increase of crime in Germany. Professor von Liszt, in a recent
article,[5] says, that fifteen million persons have been convicted by
the German criminal courts within the last ten years; and, according
to him, the outlook for the future is sombre in the last degree. In
France, the criminal problem is just as formidable and perplexing as
it is in Germany; M. Henri Joly estimates that crime has increased in
the former country 133 per cent. within the last half century, and is
still steadily rising. Taking Victoria as a typical Australasian
colony, we find that even in the Antipodes, which are not vexed to the
same extent as Europe with social and economic difficulties, crime is
persistently raising its head, and although it does not increase quite
as rapidly as the population, it is nevertheless a more menacing
danger among the Victorian colonists than it is at home.[6]

    [5] _Zeitschrift für die gesamte Strafrechtswissenschaft_ ix.
    472, sg.

    [6] See _Statistical Register for Victoria_, Part viii.

Is England an exception to the rest of the world with respect to
crime? Many people are of opinion that it is, and the idea is at
present diligently fostered on the platform and in the press that we
have at last found out the secret of dealing successfully with the
criminal population. As far as I can ascertain, this belief is based
upon the statement that the daily average of persons in prison is
constantly going down. Inasmuch, as there was a daily average of over
20,000 persons in prison in 1878, and a daily average of about 15,000
in 1888, many people immediately jump at the conclusion that crime is
diminishing. But the daily average is no criterion whatever of the
rise and fall of crime. Calculated on the principle of daily average,
twelve men sentenced to prison for one month each, will not figure so
largely in criminal statistics as one man sentenced to a term of
eighteen months. The daily average, in other words, depends upon the
length of sentence prisoners receive, and not upon the number of
persons committed to prison, or upon the number of crimes committed
during the year. Let us look then at the number of persons committed
to Local Prisons, and we shall be in a position to judge if crime is
decreasing in England or not. We shall go back twenty years and take
the quinquennial totals as they are recorded in the judicial
statistics:--

  Total of the 5 years, 1868 to 1872,    774,667.
  Total of the 5 years, 1873 to 1877,    866,041.
  Total of the 5 years, 1884 to 1888,    898,486.

If statistics are to be allowed any weight at all, these figures
incontestably mean that the total volume of crime is on the increase
in England as well as everywhere else. It is fallacious to suppose
that the authorities here are gaining the mastery over the delinquent
population. Such a supposition is at once refuted by the statistics
which have just been tabulated, and these are the only statistics
which can be implicitly relied upon for testing the position of the
country with regard to crime.

Seeing, then, that the total amount of crime is regularly growing,
how is the decrease in the daily average of persons in prison to be
accounted for?

This decrease may be accounted for in two ways. It may be shown that
although the number of people committed to prison is on the increase,
the nature of the offences for which these people are convicted is not
so grave. Or, in the second place, it may be shown that, although the
crimes committed now are equally serious with those committed twenty
years ago, the magistrates and judges are adopting a more lenient line
of action, and are inflicting shorter sentences after a conviction.
Let us for a moment consider the proposition that crime is not so
grave now as it was twenty years ago. In order to arrive at a fairly
accurate conclusion on this matter, we have only to look at the number
of offences of a serious nature reported to the police. Comparing the
number of cases of murder, attempts to murder, manslaughter, shooting
at, stabbing and wounding, and adding to these offences the crimes of
burglary, housebreaking, robbery, and arson--comparing all these cases
reported to the police for the five years 1870-1874, with offences of
a like character reported in the five years 1884-1888, we find that
the proportion of grave offences to the population was, in many cases,
as great in the latter period as in the former.[7] This shows clearly
that crime, while it is increasing in extent, is not materially
decreasing in seriousness; and the chief reason the prison population
exhibits a smaller daily average is to be found in the fact that
judges are now pronouncing shorter sentences than was the custom
twenty years ago. We are not left in the dark upon this point; the
judges themselves frequently inform the public that they have taken to
shortening the terms of imprisonment. The extent to which sentences
have been shortened within the last twenty years can easily be
ascertained by comparing the committals to prison and the daily
average of the quinquenniad 1868-72 with the committals and the daily
average of the quinquenniad 1884-88. A comparison between these two
periods shows that the length of imprisonment has decreased twenty-six
per cent. In other words, whereas a man used to receive a sentence of
twelve months' imprisonment, he now receives a sentence of nine
months; and whereas he used to get a sentence of one month, he now
gets twenty-one days. If it he a serious offence, or if the criminal
be a habitual offender, he now receives eighteen months' imprisonment,
whereas he used to receive five years' penal servitude. As far as most
judges and stipendiary magistrates are concerned, sentences of
imprisonment have decreased in recent years more than twenty-six per
cent.; and if there was a corresponding movement on the part of
Chairmen of Quarter Sessions, the average decrease in the length of
sentences would amount to fifty per cent. But it is a notorious fact
that amateur judges are, with few exceptions, more inclined to
pronounce heavy sentences than professional men.

    [7] SERIOUS CASES REPORTED TO THE POLICE IN PROPORTION TO THE
    POPULATION. ANNUAL AVERAGE FOR FIVE YEARS:--

                 Murder.      Attempts to Murder.   Manslaughter
    1870-74   1 to 196,946       1 to 441,158       1 to 92,756
    1884-88   1 to 168,897       1 to 418,923       1 to 116,463

              Shooting, Stabbing, &c.    Burglary.    Housebreaking.
    1870-74      1 to 35,033           1 to 10,188     1 to 17,538
    1884-88      1 to 38,007           1 to  7,892     1 to 11,911

                   Robbery.               Arson.
    1870-74      1 to 43,247           1 to 54,075
    1884-88      1 to 70,767           1 to 77,018

    This table shows that since 1870-74 there has been an increase in
    murder, attempts to murder, burglary, and housebreaking, and a
    decrease in manslaughter, robbery, and arson. The decrease in
    shooting, stabbing, wounding, &c., is very small. (Cf. _Judicial
    Statistics_ for 1874 and 1888, p. xvi.)

We have now arrived at the conclusion that crime is just as serious in
its character as it was twenty years ago, and that it is growing in
dimensions year by year; the next point to be considered is, the
relation in which crime stands to the population. Crime may be
increasing, but the population may be multiplying faster than the
growth of crime. Is this the condition of things in England at the
present day? We have seen that the criminal classes are increasing
much faster than the growth of population in France and the United
States. Is England in a better position in this respect than these two
countries? At the present time there is one conviction to about every
fifty inhabitants, and the proportion of convictions to the population
was very much the same twenty years ago. If we remember the immense
development that has taken place in the industrial school system
within the last twenty years--a development that has undoubtedly had a
great deal to do with keeping down crime--we arrive at the conclusion
that, notwithstanding the beneficent effects of Industrial Schools,
the criminal classes in this country still keep pace with the annual
growth of population. If we had no Industrial and Reformatory
institutions for the detention of criminal and quasi-criminal
offenders among the young, there can be no doubt that England, as well
as other countries, would have to make the lamentable admission that
crime was not only increasing in her midst, but that it was increasing
faster than the growth of population. The number of juveniles in these
institutions has more than trebled since 1868,[8] and it is
unquestionable that if these youthful offenders were not confined
there, a large proportion of them would immediately begin to swell the
ranks of crime. That crime in England is not making more rapid strides
than the growth of population, is almost entirely to be attributed to
the action of these schools.

    [8] See Appendix II.

We shall now look at another aspect of the criminal question, and that
is its cost. Crime is not merely a danger to the community; it is
likewise a vast expense; and there is no country in Europe where it
does not constitute a tremendous drain upon the national resources.
Owing to the federal system of government in America, it is almost
impossible to estimate how much is spent in the prevention and
punishment of crime in the United States, but Mr. Wines calculates
that the police force alone costs the country fifteen million dollars
annually.[9] In the United Kingdom the cost of criminal justice and
administration is continually on the increase, and it has never been
so high as it is at the present time. In the Estimates for the year
1891 the cost of Prisons and of the Asylum for criminal lunatics falls
little short of a million sterling. Reformatory and Industrial Schools
for juvenile offenders cost considerably over half-a-million, and the
expenditure on the Police force is over five and a half millions
annually. Add to these figures the cost of criminal prosecutions, the
salaries of stipendiary and other paid magistrates, a portion of the
salaries of judges, and all other expenses connected with the trial
and prosecution of delinquents, and an annual total of expenditure is
reached for the United Kingdom of more than seven and a half millions
sterling. In addition to this enormous sum, it has also to he
remembered that a great loss of property is annually entailed on the
inhabitants of the three kingdoms by the depredations of the criminal
classes. The exact amount of this loss it is impossible to estimate,
but, according to the figures in the police reports, it cannot fall
short of a million sterling per annum.

    [9] _American Prisons_, 1888.

These formidable figures afford ample food for reflection. Apart from
its danger to the community, the annual loss of money which the
existence of crime entails is a most serious consideration. It is
equal to a tenth of the national expenditure, and every few years
amounts to as much as the cost of a big European war. It is tempting
to speculate on the admirable uses to which the capital consumed by
crime might be devoted, if it were free for beneficent purposes. How
easy it would be for many a scheme, which is now in the region of
dreamland, to be immediately realised. Unhappily, it is almost as vain
to look forward to the abolition of crime as it is to look forward to
the cessation of war. At the present moment the latter event, however
improbable, is more likely to happen than the former. War has ceased
to be a normal condition of things in the comity of nations; it has
become a transitory incident; but crime, which means war within the
nation, is still far from being a passing incident; on the contrary, a
conflict between the forces of moral order and social anarchy is going
on continually; and, at present, there is not the faintest prospect of
its coming to an end.

What is the cause of this state of warfare within society? Which of the
combatants is to blame? Or is the blame to be laid equally on the
shoulders of both? In other words, are the conditions in which men live
together in society of such a nature that crime is certain to flow from
them; and is crime simply a reaction against the iniquity of existing
social arrangements? Or, on the other hand, does crime spring from the
individual and his cosmical surroundings; and is it the product of
forces over which society has little or no control? These are questions
which cannot be answered off-hand, they involve considerations of a
most complicated character, and it is only after a careful examination
of all the factors responsible for crime that a true solution can
possibly be arrived at. These factors are divisible into three great
categories--cosmical, social, and individual.[10] The cosmical factors
of crime are climate and the variations of temperature; the social
factors are the political, economic and moral conditions in the midst
of which man lives as a member of society; the individual factors are a
class of attributes inherent in the individual, such as descent, sex,
age, bodily and mental characteristics. These factors, it will be seen,
can easily be reduced to two, the organism and its environment; but it
will be more convenient to consider them under the three-fold division
which has just been mentioned. Before proceeding to do so, it may be as
well to remark that in each case the several factors operate with
different degrees of intensity. It is often extremely difficult to
disentangle them; and the more complex the society is in which a crime
takes place, the greater is the combination and intricacy of the causes
leading up to it.

    [10] Cf. E. Ferri. I _Nuovi Orizzonti del Diritto e della Procedura
    Penale_.




CHAPTER II.

CLIMATE AND CRIME.


Man's existence depends upon physical surroundings; these surroundings
have exercised an immense influence in modifying his organism, in
shaping his social development, in moulding his character. To enumerate
all the external factors operating upon individual and social life is
outside our present purpose, but they may be briefly summed up as
climate, moisture, soil, the configuration of the earth's surface, and
the nature of its products. These natural phenomena, either singly or
in varying degrees of combination, have unquestionably played a most
prominent part in making the different races of mankind what they at
present are. We have only to look at the low type of life exhibited by
the primitive inhabitants of certain inhospitable regions of the globe
to see how profoundly the physical structure of man is affected by his
natural surroundings. Even a comparatively slight difference of
environment is not without effect upon the population subjected to its
influence. According to M. de Quatrefages, the bodily structure of the
English race has been distinctly modified by residence in the United
States of America. It is not more than two and a half centuries since
Englishmen began to emigrate in any considerable numbers to the
American Continent, but in that comparatively short period the
Anglo-American has ceased to resemble his ancestors in physical
appearance. Alterations have taken place in the skin, the hair, the
neck, and the head; the lower jaw has become bigger; the bones of the
arms and legs have lengthened, and the American of to-day requires a
different kind of glove from the Englishman. Structural changes of a
similar character have taken place in the negroes transplanted to
America. M. Elisée Reclus considers that in a century and a half they
have traversed a good quarter of the distance which separates them from
the whites. Another important point, as showing the influence of
habitat upon race, is the fact that the modifications of human
structure resulting from residence in America are in the direction of
assimilating the European type to that of the red man.[11] In short, it
may be taken as a well-established principle that external nature
destroys all organisms that cannot adapt themselves to its action, and
physiologically modifies all organisms that can.

    [11] The various types of Jews also afford a striking instance of
    the effect of natural surroundings on bodily structure.

The social condition of mankind is also profoundly affected by climatic
and other external circumstances. The intense cold of the Arctic and
Antarctic regions is fatal to anything approaching a developed form of
civilisation. Intense heat, on the other hand, although not
incompatible with a certain degree of progress, is unfavourable to its
permanence;[12] the extinct societies of the tropics, such as Cambodia,
Mexico and Peru, affording instances of the operation of this law. It
is impossible for man to get beyond the nomad state in the vast deserts
of Northern Africa; and the extreme moisture of the atmosphere in other
portions of the same continent puts an effectual check on anything like
social advance. In some parts of the world social development has been
hindered by external circumstances of another character, such as the
want of wood, the scarcity of animals, the absence of edible fruits. In
fact, it is only within a comparatively temperate zone that human
society has been able permanently to assume highly complex forms and to
build itself up on an extensive scale. In this zone, climate, while
favouring man up to a certain point, has at the same time compelled him
to eat bread in the sweat of his brow. It has compelled him to enter
into conflict with natural obstacles, the result of which has been to
call forth his powers of industry, of energy, of self-reliance, and to
sharpen his intellectual faculties generally. In addition to exercising
and strengthening these personal attributes, the climatic influences of
what has been called the zone of civilisation have brought man's social
characteristics more fully and elaborately into play. The nature of
these influences has forced him to cooperate more or less closely with
his fellows; while each step in the path of cooperation has involved
him in another of a more complex kind. The growth of social cooperation
is not necessarily accompanied by a corresponding development of the
moral sentiments; increased cooperation in some cases involving a
distinct ethical loss. In many directions, however, highly organised
societies tend to evolve loftier types of morality; and it is in
harmony with the facts to say that the highest moral types are not to
be found where nature does most or where it does least in the way of
providing food and shelter for man.

    [12] Ratzel. _Völkerkunde_, i. 20.

It is also interesting to observe the effect which climate, through the
agency of religion, has had upon human conduct. One of the main factors
in the origin of religion is the feeling of dependence upon nature so
strongly manifested in all primitive forms of faith. The outcome of
this feeling of dependence was to exalt the forces of nature into
divinities, and man's conception of these divinities, shaped as it was
by the attitude of nature around him, had an incalculable influence on
his life and actions. The remains of this influence are still visible
in the aesthetic effects which the forces and operations of nature
produce on civilised man; in all other respects it has to a large
extent passed away.[13]

    [13] Darwin says that in elaborating his theory of Natural
    Selection he attributed too little to external surroundings.
    _Life and Letters_.

We have now touched upon most of the ways in which external
surroundings have had a hand in shaping the course of human life in the
past; it will be our next business to inquire whether these
surroundings have any effect upon human conduct at the present day, and
especially upon those manifestations of conduct which are known as
crimes. That they still have an effect is an opinion which has long
been entertained.

Going back to the ancient Greeks, we find Hippocrates holding that all
regions liable to violent changes of climate produced men of fierce,
impetuous and stubborn disposition. "In approaching southern
countries," says Montesquieu, "one would believe that morality was
being left behind; more ardent passions multiply crimes; each tries to
gain from others all the advantages which can minister to these
passions." Buckle believes that the interruption of work caused by
instability of climate leads to instability of character. In analysing
the contents of French statistics, Quetelet,[14] while admitting that
other causes may neutralise the action of climate, proceeds to say that
the "number of crimes against property relatively to the number of
crimes against the person increases considerably as we advance towards
the north." Another eminent student of French criminal statistics, M.
Tarde, comes to very much the same conclusions as Quetelet; he admits
that a high temperature does exercise an indirect influence on the
criminal passions. But the most exhaustive investigations in this
problem have been undertaken in Italy, by Signor Enrico Ferri. After a
thorough examination of French judicial statistics for a series of
years, Ferri arrives at the conclusion that a maximum of crimes against
the person is reached in the hot months, while, on the other hand,
crimes against property come to a climax in the winter.[15]

    [14] _Physique Sociale_, ii. 282.

    [15] _Zeitschrift für Strafrechtswissenschaft_, ii., 486.

In testing these opinions respecting the influence of climate upon
crime, we are obliged, to some extent, to have recourse to
international statistics. But these statistics, as has already been
pointed out, owing to the diversity of customs, laws, criminal
procedure, and so on, do not easily admit of comparison. So much is
this the case that we shall not make the attempt as far as these
statistics have reference to crimes against property. In this field no
satisfactory result can, at present be obtained. The same remark holds
good in relation to all offences against the person, with the exception
of homicide. This, undoubtedly, in an important exception; and it
arises from the fact that there is a greater consensus of opinion among
civilised communities respecting the gravity of homicide than exists
with regard to any other form of crime. Murder in all its degrees is a
crime which immediately causes a profound commotion; it is easy to
recognise; it is more likely than any other offence to come to the ears
of the authorities. For these reasons this crime lends itself most
readily to international comparison; nevertheless, differences of
judicial procedure, legal nomenclature, and different methods of
classification stand in the way of making the comparison absolutely
accurate. These differences, however, are not so great as to render
comparison impossible or worthless; on the contrary, the results of
such a comparison are of exceptional value, and go a long way to
determine the question of the effect of climate upon crimes of blood.

Assuming, then, with these reservations, that such a comparison can be
instituted, let us see to what extent murder, in the widest sense of
the word, including wilful murder, manslaughter, and infanticide,
prevails in the various countries of Europe. In ordinary circumstances
this task would be a laborious one, entailing a minute and careful
examination of the criminal statistics and procedure of many nations.
Fortunately, it has recently been accomplished by Dr. Bosco in an
admirable monograph communicated in the first instance to the Journal
of the International Statistical Institute, but now published in a
separate form. Bosco's figures have all been taken from official
sources, and may, therefore, be accepted as accurate; but, before
tabulating-them, it may be useful to make an extract from the
explanatory note by which they are accompanied. "As the composition of
the population, with respect to age, varies in different countries, and
as it has to be remembered that all the population under ten years of
age has no share, at least under normal conditions, in the crime of
murder, it has seemed to me a more exact method to calculate the
proportion of murders to the inhabitants who are over ten years of age,
than to include the total population. For those States where a census
has been recently taken, such, for instance, as France and Germany, the
results of that census have been used; that is to say, the French
census of May, 1886, and the German census of December, 1885. For the
other States the population has been calculated (adding the excess of
births over deaths to the results of the last census) to the end of the
intermediate year for each period of years to which the information
relates; that is to say, to the end of 1883 for Belgium, and to the end
of 1884 for Austria, Hungary, Spain, England, Scotland and Ireland. As
the information respecting Italy refers to 1887 only, the population
has been estimated up to the end of that year. The division of the
population according to age (above and below ten) has been obtained by
means of proportional calculations based on the results of the census
for each State. In the case of France and Germany, however, it has been
taken directly from the census returns."[16]

Homicides of all kinds in the following European States:--

---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Tried.            Convicted.
            Population        Annual    Per         Annual    Per
  Countries. over ten. Years. average 100,000       average 100,000
                                    inhabitants.          inhabitants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Italy    23,408,277   1887    3,606   15.40       2,805   11.98
  Austria  17,199,237   1883-6    689    4.01         499    2.90
  France   31,044,370   1882-6    847    2.73         580    1.87
  Belgium   4,377,813   1881-5    132    3.02         101    2.31
  England  19,898,053   1882-6    318    1.60         151    0.76
  Ireland   3,854,588   1882-6    129    3.35          54    1.40
  Scotland  2,841,941   1882-6     60    2.11          21    0.74
  Spain    13,300,839   1883-6  1,584   11.91       1,085    8.18
  Hungary  10,821,558   1882-6                        625    5.78
  Holland   3,172,464   1882-6     35    1.10          28    0.88
  Germany  35,278,742   1882-6    567    1.61         476    1.35
---------------------------------------------------------------------

    [16] _Gli omicidii in alcuni stati d'Europa. Appunti di statistica
    comparata del Dr A. Bosco_, 1889.

What is the import of these statistics? We perceive at once that
Italy, Spain and Hungary head the list in the proportion of murders to
the population. In Italy, out of every 100,000 persons over ten years
of age, eleven in round numbers are annually convicted of murder in
one or other of its forms; in Spain eight are convicted of the same
offence, and in Hungary five are convicted. These three countries are
conspicuously ahead of all the others to which our table refers.
Austria and Belgium follow at a long distance with two convictions in
round numbers to every 100,000 inhabitants over ten. France, Ireland
and Germany come next with one conviction and a considerable fraction
to every 100,000 persons over ten; England, Scotland and Holland stand
at the bottom of the list with between seven and eight persons
convicted of murder to every one million of inhabitants over ten.

In order to understand the full meaning of these figures we must take
one more stop and compare the numbers convicted with the numbers
tried. In some countries very few convictions may take place in
proportion to the number accused, while in other countries the
proportion may be very considerable. In other words, in order to
arrive at an approximate estimate of the amount of murders perpetrated
in a country, we must consider how many cases of murder have been
tried in the course of the year. It very seldom happens that a person
is tried for this offence when no murder has been committed; and it
may, therefore, be assumed that the crime has taken place when a man
haw to stand his trial for it. Estimating then the prevalence of
murder in the various countries by trials, rather than convictions,
it will be found that Germany, with a much larger percentage of
convictions than England, has just as few cases of murder for trial.
And the reason the number of convictions, as between the two nations,
differs, arises from the fact that a prisoner's chance of acquittal in
England is a hundred per cent. greater than it is in Germany. It is
not, therefore, accurate to assume that a greater number of murders
are committed in Germany than in England because a greater number
of persons are annually convicted of this crime; all that these
convictions absolutely prove is, that the machinery of the criminal
law is more effective in the one country than in the other. To take
another instance, more persons are annually tried for murder in
Ireland than in France; but more cases of conviction are recorded in
France than in Ireland. These contrasts show that, while the French
are less addicted to this grave offence than the Irish, they are more
anxious to secure its detection, and that a greater body of public
opinion is on the side of law in France than in Ireland. All these
instances (and more could easily be added to them) are intended to
call attention to the importance of looking at the number of persons
tried, as well as the percentage of persons convicted, if we desire to
form an accurate estimate of the comparative prevalence of crime.

While thus showing that the number of trials for murder is the best
test of the prevalence of this offence, it is not meant that the test
is in all respects indisputable. At most it is merely approximate. One
obstacle in the way of its entire accuracy consists in the circumstance
that the proportion of persons tried, as compared with the amount of
crime committed, is in no two countries precisely the same. In France,
for instance, more murders are perpetrated, for which no one is
ultimately tried, than in Italy or in England; that is to say, a
murderer runs more risk of being placed in the dock in this country
than in France. But the difference between the two countries is again
to a great extent adjusted by the fact that once a man is placed in
the dock in France he has far less chance of being acquitted than if
he were tried according to English law. On the whole, therefore, it
may be assumed that the international statistics of trials, corrected
when necessary by the international statistics of convictions, present
a tolerably accurate idea of the extent to which the crime of murder
prevails among the nationalities of Europe. In any case these figures
will go some way towards helping us to see whether climatic conditions
have any influence upon the amount of crime. This we shall now inquire
into.

On looking at the isotherms for the year it will be observed that the
average temperature of Italy and Spain is ten degrees higher than
the average temperature of England. On the other hand, the average
temperature of Hungary is very much the same as the average temperature
of this country; but Hungary is at the same time exposed to much
greater extremes of climate than England. In winter it is nearly ten
degrees colder than England, while in summer it is as hot as Spain.
The advocates of the direct effect of climate upon crime contend that
account must be taken not merely of the degree of temperature, but
also of the variations of temperature to which a region is exposed.
According to this theory one of the principal reasons the crime of
murder is, at least, fourfold higher in Hungary than in England, is to
be found in the violent oscillations of temperature in Hungary as
compared with England. In Italy murders are, at least, ten times as
numerous as in England; in Spain they are seven times as numerous; the
chief cause of this condition of things is said to be the serious
difference of temperature. In the United States of America there are
more crimes of blood in the South than in the North; the main
explanation of this difference is said to be that the climate of the
South is much hotter than the climate of the North.

In opposition to this theory of the intimate relation between
temperature and crime, it may be urged that the greater prevalence of
crimes of blood in hot latitudes is a mere coincidence and not a
causal connection. This is the view taken by Dr. Mischler in Baron von
Holtzendorff's "Handbuch des Gefängnisswesens." He says the real
reason crimes of blood are more common in the South of Europe than in
the North is to be attributed to the more backward state of
civilisation in the South, and to the wild and mountainous character
of the country. To the latter part of this argument it is easy to
reply that Scotland is quite as mountainous as Italy, and yet its
inhabitants are far less addicted to crimes against the person. But it
is more civilised, for, as M. Tarde ingeniously contends, the bent of
civilisation at present is to travel northward. Admitting for a moment
that Scotland is more civilised than Spain or Italy, all savage
tribes, on the other hand, are confessedly less advanced in the arts
of life than these two peninsulas. But, for all that, many of these
savage peoples are much less criminal. "I have lived," says Mr.
Russell Wallace, "with communities of savages in South America and in
the East who have no laws or law courts, but the public opinion of the
village freely expressed. Each man scrupulously respects the rights of
his fellows, and any infraction of these rights rarely or never takes
place." Mr. Herbert Spencer also quotes innumerable instances of the
kindness, mildness, honesty, and respect for person and property of
uncivilised peoples. M. de Quatrefages, in summing up the ethical
characteristics of the various races of mankind, comes to the
conclusion that from a moral point of view the white man is hardly any
better than the black. Civilisation so far has unfortunately generated
almost as many vices as it has virtues, and he is a bold man who will
say that its growth has diminished the amount of crime. It is very
difficult then to accept the view that the frequency of murder in
Spain and Italy is entirely due to a lack of civilisation.

Nor can it be said to be entirely due to economic distress. A
condition of social misery has undoubtedly something to do with the
production of crime. In countries where there is much wealth side by
side with much misery, as in France and England, adverse social
circumstances drive a certain portion of the community into criminal
courses. But where this great inequality of social conditions does not
exist--where all are poor as in Ireland or Italy--poverty alone is not
a weighty factor in ordinary crime. In Ireland, for example, there in
almost as much poverty as exists in Italy, and if the amount of crime
were determined by economic circumstances alone, Ireland ought to have
as black a record as her southern sister. Instead of that she is on
the whole as free from crime as the most prosperous countries of
Europe. In the face of these facts it is impossible to say that the
high rate of crime in Italy and Spain is to be wholly accounted for by
the pressure of economic adversity.

Will not difference of race suffice to account for it? Is it not the
case that some races are inherently more prone to crime than others?
In India, for instance, where the great mass of the population is
singularly law-abiding, a portion of the aboriginal inhabitants have
from time immemorial lived by plunder and crime. "When a man tells
you," says an official report, quoted by Sir John Strachey, "that he
is a Badhak, or a Kanjar, or a Sonoria, he tells you what few
Europeans ever thoroughly realise, that he, an offender against the
law, has been so from the beginning and will be so to the end; that
reform is impossible, for it is his trade, his caste--I may almost say
his religion--to commit crime." It is not poverty which makes many of
these predatory races criminals. Speaking of the Mina tribe inhabiting
one of the frontier districts of the Punjab, Sir John Strachey says:
"Their sole occupation is, and always has been, plunder in the native
States and in distant parts of British India; they give no trouble at
home, and, judging from criminal statistics, it would be supposed that
they were an honest community. They live amid abundance, in
substantial houses with numerous cattle, fine clothes and jewels, and
fleet camels to carry off their plunder." Special laws have been made
for dealing with these tribes; a register of their numbers is kept;
they can be compelled to live within certain local limits, but in
spite of these coercive measures crime is not suppressed, and "a long
time must elapse before we see the end of the criminal tribes of
India."

Coming back to European peoples, it is worthy of note that both
Hungary and Finland are inhabited by the same race. These two
countries are separated by about fifteen degrees of latitude, but in
the matter of murder the people of Finland are much more nearly allied
to the Hungarians than to their immediate neighbours, the Swedes and
Norwegians. The Finns commit about twice as many murders in proportion
to the population as the Teutons of Scandinavia, but only about half
as many as the Hungarians; and it is not improbable to suppose that
while the effect of race makes them more murderous than the
Scandinavians, the effect of climate makes them less murderous than
the inhabitants of Hungary.

Before bringing forward any additional material on one side or the
other, let us pause for a moment to consider the results which have
just been obtained as to the effect of race as compared with climate
upon crime. In India we have found an Aryan and a non-Aryan population
living together under the same climatic influences, and very much the
same social conditions, and we have seen that the Aborigines are more
criminally disposed than the Aryan invaders. Again we have a Mongolian
race living in the far North of Europe, and we find that they show a
larger percentage of homicidal crime than the Teutonic inhabitants
who live in the same latitudes. In Hungary, where the Mongoloid type
is once more met with, the same facts are substantially reproduced;
this type is more homicidal than the Austrian Teutons living under a
similar climate. While these facts point to the conclusion that race
has apparently some influence on the amount of crime, they fail to
show that race characteristics alone are sufficient to explain the
differences in criminality between the same peoples when settled in
different quarters of the globe. The Mongoloid type in Finland is
less criminal than the same type in Hungary, and the Teutonic type
in Scandinavia is less murderously disposed than the same type in
the empire of Austria. It has also been pointed out that the
Anglo-American of the Northern States is more law abiding than his
brother by race in the South, while both are more murderous than the
inhabitants of the United Kingdom; where extremes of climate are not
so great.

With these facts before us we shall now institute another comparison
between two widely separated branches of the Anglo-Saxon race, namely,
the colonists of Australia and the people of the motherland. Of the
Australian colonists it is not incorrect to say that they are, on the
whole, the pick of the home population. It is perfectly true that a
certain proportion of the ne'er-do-wells have emigrated to Australia,
and some of them, no doubt, help to swell the normal criminal
population of the colonies. But, on the other hand, Australia has this
advantage, that the average colonist who seeks a home beyond our
shores is generally a superior man to the average citizen who remains
at home; he is more steady, more enterprising, more industrious. In
this way the balance is adjusted in favour of the colonies. It is a
great deal more than redressed if the superior, social, and economic
conditions, under which the colonists live, are also placed in the
scale. In his "Problems of Greater Britain," Sir Charles Dilke has
shown, with admirable clearness, what immense advantages are enjoyed
by the working population of Australia as compared with the same class
at home; so much is this the case that the Australian colonies have
been not inaptly called the paradise of the working man. Here then is
an excellent opportunity for comparing the effects of climate upon
crime. In Australia we have a people of the same race as ourselves,
better off economically, living under essentially the same laws and
governed in practically the same spirit. Almost the only difference
between the inhabitants of the United Kingdom and the communities of
Australia is a difference of climate. Does this difference manifest
itself in the statistics of crime? In order to test the matter we
shall exclude the colony of New South Wales from our calculations. For
its size New South Wales is the richest community in the world, and
its riches are well distributed among all classes of the population.
But it was at one time a penal settlement, and it is possible that the
criminal statistics of the colony are still inflated by that remote
cause. The sister colony of Victoria stands upon a different footing
and is free from that disturbing factor; we shall therefore select
that colony as a normal type of the Australian group. In Part V.I.I.
of the Statistical Register of the colony of Victoria for 1887, there
is an excellent summary of the position of the colony with respect to
crime. The admirable manner in which these judicial statistics are
arranged, reflects the highest credit on the colonial authorities; for
fulness of information and clearness of arrangement they are not
surpassed by any similar statistics in the world. As homicide is the
crime on which we have hitherto based our international comparisons,
we shall, for the present, confine our attention to the Victorian
statistics of this offence.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Countries|Population|Years.|       Tried        |   Convicted
           | over Ten.|      | Annual     Per     | Annual     Per
           |          |      |Average 100,000     |Average   100,000
           |          |      |        Inhabitants.|        Inhabitants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Victoria |   581,838|1882-6|   22       3.2     |   14       2.5
  United
  Kingdom  |26,594,582|1882-6|  505       2.35    |  226       .96
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Before proceeding to analysis the contents of this table, it will be
as well to explain the method on which it has been constructed, and
the sources from which it is derived. The population of Victoria, over
ten years of age, has been calculated according to the Victorian
census for 1881, as contained in Part II. of the Victorian Statistical
Register. In order to make the Victorian table harmonise in all
particulars with Dr. Bosco's table for England, Scotland, and Ireland,
the excess of births over deaths has been calculated up to the end of
1884. The United Kingdom, it will be seen, has been selected as the
measure of comparison with the colony of Victoria. This selection has
been made on the ground that the colony of Victoria is not composed of
the inhabitants of any one of the three kingdoms, but contains a
mixture of them all. It will also be observed that the homicidal crime
of each of the three kingdoms differs from the other, but this is a
consideration which we shall not further comment upon at present.

After these preliminary explanations we are now in a position to
examine the contents of our statistical table in its bearing upon
crimes of blood. It will now be possible to see what light the criminal
statistics of Victoria, as compared with the criminal statistics of the
United Kingdom, throw upon these crimes; and the disturbing factor of
race being eliminated, what is the influence of climate pure and simple
upon them. According to the isotherms for the year the Victorians live
in an atmosphere between eight and ten degrees hotter than our own.
Side by side with this additional heat, there is, as compared with
the United Kingdom, an additional amount of crime. In the colony of
Victoria, in proportion to every 100,000 inhabitants over ten years of
age, there are nearly one-third more murders annually than in the
United Kingdom. On what ground is this considerable increase of
homicide to be accounted for, except on the ground of climate? The
higher percentage is not caused by difference of race; it is not
caused by worse economic conditions--these conditions are much
superior to our own--the meaning of the figures is not obscured by any
material differences of legal procedure or legal nomenclature. It
cannot be urged that the Victorian population are the dregs of the
home population; the very opposite is the fact. The bad characters who
emigrate are the only disturbing element; but, after all, these men
are not so numerous, and the evil effects of their presence is
counterbalanced by the superiority of the average colonist to the
average citizen who remains at home. It may be said that there is
greater difficulty in detecting crime in a new colony than in an old
and settled country. As applied to some colonies it is possible this
objection may be sound, but, as applied to Victoria, it will not hold
good. In Victoria the police are much more effective than they are at
home, and a criminal has much less chance of going unpunished there
than he has in England. In Victoria in the year 1887, out of a total
of 40,693 cases reported to the police, 34,473 were brought up for
trial. In England, on the other hand, out of a total of 42,391
indictable offences reported to the police in 1886-7, only 19,045
persons were apprehended. The Victorian figures include offences of
all kinds, petty as well as indictable, whereas the English figures
deal with indictable offences only. But admitting this, and admitting
that it is more difficult to arrest indictable offenders, this
difficulty is not so great as to explain away the vast difference in
the numbers apprehended in Victoria as compared with the numbers
apprehended in England. Only one conclusion can be drawn from these
figures, and it is that the Victorian constabulary are more efficient
than our own, and that it is a more dangerous thing for a person to
break the law in the young colony of Victoria than in the old
community at home.

It seems to me that the points of comparison between the United
Kingdom and Victoria, in so far as they have any bearing upon crime,
have now been exhausted; on almost every one of these points Victoria
stands in a more favourable position than ourselves. The colony has,
on the whole, a better kind of citizen; it has superior social and
economic conditions; it has a far more effective system of police. On
what possible ground, then, is it, except the ground of climate, that
the Victorians are more addicted to homicide than the people of the
United Kingdom? I admit it would be rash to assert that climate is the
cause if our own and the Victorian statistics were the only documents
to which we could appeal; it would be rash to draw such a sweeping
conclusion from so isolated a basis. But when we know that the
Victorian statistics are only one set of documents among many, and
that all these sets of documents point to the operation of the same
law, the case assumes an entirely different complexion. The results of
the Victorian statistics harmonise with the conclusions already
reached from a comparison of the criminal statistics of Europe and
America. These conclusions in turn are powerfully reinforced by the
experience of Australia. In fact, the whole body of evidence, from
whatever quarter it is collected, points with remarkable unanimity to
the conviction that, as far as European peoples and their offshoots
are concerned, climate alone is no inconsiderable factor in
determining the course of human conduct.

Yet the evil influence of climate, mischievous as it is at present, is
not to be looked upon and acquiesced in as an irrevocable fatality. At
first sight it would seem as if the human race could not possibly
escape the malevolent action of cosmical influences over which it has
little or no control. The rise and fall of temperature, its rage and
intensity, is one of these influences, and yet its pernicious offsets
are capable of being held to a large extent in check. As far as bodily
comfort is concerned, it is marvellous to consider the innumerable
methods and devices the progressive races of mankind have invented to
protect themselves against the hostility of the elements by which they
are surrounded. In fact, an important part of the history of the race
consists in the ceaseless efforts it has been making to improve upon
and perfect these methods and devices. We have only to compare the
rude hut of the savage with the modern dwelling of the civilised man
in order to see to what extent we can shield ourselves from the
elemental forces in the midst of which we have to live. We have only
to mark the difference between the miserable and scanty garments of
the natives of Terra del Fuego and the attire of the Englishman of
to-day to see what can be done by man in the way of rescuing himself
from the inclemencies of Nature. If these conquests can be achieved
where our physical existence is in peril, there can be little reason
to doubt that advances of a similar nature can be made in the moral
order as soon as man comes to feel equally conscious of their
necessity. As a matter of fact, in some quarters of the world these
advances have already in some measure been made. In the vast peninsula
of India the structure of society is so constituted that the evil
effect of climate in producing crimes of blood has been marvellously
neutralised. It hardly admits of dispute that the caste system on
which Indian society is based is, on the whole, one of the most
wonderful instruments for the prevention of crimes of violence the
world has ever seen. The average temperature of the Indian peninsula
is about thirty degrees higher than the average temperature of the
British Isles, and if there were no counteracting forces at work,
crimes of violence in India should be much more numerous than they are
with us. But the counteracting forces acting upon Indian society are
of such immense potency that the malign influences of climate are very
nearly annihilated as far as the crimes we are now discussing are
concerned; and India stands to-day in the proud position of being more
free from crimes against the person than the most highly civilised
countries of Europe. In proof of this fact we have only to look at the
official documents annually issued respecting the condition of British
India. According to the returns contained in the Statistical Abstract
relating to British India and the Parliamentary paper exhibiting its
moral and material progress, the number of murders reported to the
police of India is smaller than the number reported in any European
State. The Indian Government issue no statistics, so far as I am
aware, of the numbers tried; it is, therefore, impossible to institute
any comparison between Europe and India upon this important point. But
when we come to the number convicted it is again found that India
presents a lower percentage of convictions for murder than is to be
met with among any other people. It may, however, be urged that the
statistical records respecting Indian crime are not so carefully kept
as the statistics of a like character relating to England and the
Continent. Sir John Strachey assures us that this is not the case; he
says that these statistics are as carefully collected and tabulated in
India as they are at home, and we may accept them as worthy of the
utmost confidence. The following table, which I have prepared from the
official documents already mentioned, may, therefore, be taken as
giving an accurate account of the condition of India between 1882-6,
as far as the most serious of all crimes is concerned. In order to
facilitate comparison I have drawn it up as far as possible on the
same lines as the other tables in this chapter.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
     |Population |Years.|          Cases of Homicide.
     | over Ten. |      |    Reported.            Convicted.
     |                      -----------------------------------------
     |           |      |Annual  |Per         |Annual  |Per
     |           |      |Average.|100,000     |Average.|100,000
     |           |      |        |Inhabitants.|        |Inhabitants.
India|148,543,223|1882-6| 1,930  |   1.31     |  690   |   .46
---------------------------------------------------------------------

According to this table, the remarkable fact is established that the
number of cases of homicide in India committed by persons over ten
years of age and reported to the police is smaller per 100,000
inhabitants than the number of cases of the same nature brought up for
trial in England. In order to appreciate the full importance of this
difference it has to be remembered that in England a great number of
cases of homicide are reported to the police, for which no one is
apprehended or brought to trial. In the case of the notorious
Whitechapel murders which horrified the country a year or two ago no
one was ever brought to trial, hardly any one was arrested or
seriously suspected. These crimes and many others like them materially
augment the number of homicides reported to the police, but they never
figure among the cases annually brought for trial before assizes. As a
matter of fact, no one is ever tried in more than one half of the
cases of homicide reported to the police in the course of the year. In
the year 1888, for instance, 403 cases of homicide were reported to
the police in England and Wales; but in connection with all these
cases only 196 persons were committed for trial. In short, double the
number of homicides are committed as compared with the number of
persons tried; and if a comparison is established between India and
England on the basis of homicides reported to the police, the outcome
of such a comparison will be to show that there are annually more than
twice as many murders committed per one hundred thousand inhabitants
over the age of ten in England than there are in India.

An objection may be taken to these figures on the ground that the
crime of infanticide is much more prevalent to India than it is in
England, and that the perpetrators of this crime are much less
frequently brought to justice in the former country than with us. That
objection is to some extent valid; at the same time it is well to
remember that infanticide in India is an offence of a very special and
peculiar character; the motives from which it springs are not what is
usually understood as criminal; these motives arise from religious
usage and immemorial custom; in short, it is English law and not the
Indian conscience which makes infanticide a crime. Of course, the
practice of infanticide is a proof that the Hindu mind has not the
same high conception of the value of infant life as one finds in the
western world, and in that respect India stands on an inferior moral
level to ourselves. But with the exception of infanticide (and it is
necessary to except it for the reasons I have just alleged) India has
not half as many homicides annually as England.[17]

    [17] For the high percentage of infanticide in England see the
    evidence given before the House of Lords last July (1890) by
    Judges Day and Wills.

To what cause is this vast difference in favour of India to be
attributed? It is hardly probable that the difference is produced to
any appreciable extent, if at all, by the nature of the food used by
the people of India. If it were correct that a vegetable diet, such as
is almost exclusively used by the inhabitants of India, had a salutary
effect on the conduct of the population, we should witness the results
of it, not only in the Indian peninsula, but also in other quarters of
the world. The nature of the food consumed by the Italians bears a
very close resemblance in its essential constituents to the dietary of
the inhabitants of India; in both cases it is almost entirely composed
of vegetable products. If vegetable, as contrasted with animal food,
exercised a beneficial influence on human conduct; if it tended, for
example, to restrain the passions, to minimise the brute instincts,
some indisputable proof of this would be certain to show itself in the
criminal statistics of Italy. As a matter of fact, no such proof
exists. On the contrary, Italy is, of all countries within the pale of
civilisation, the one most notorious for crimes of blood. In the face
of this truth, it is impossible to believe that a vegetable diet has
anything to do either with producing or preventing crime, and the
contention that the wonderful immunity of India from offences against
the person is owing to the food used by the inhabitants must be looked
upon as without foundation.

The peculiar structure of society is unquestionably the most satisfactory
explanation of the high position occupied by the inhabitants of India
with respect to crime. The social edifice which a people builds for
itself is among all civilised communities a highly complex product, and
consists of a great agglomeration of diverse materials. These materials
are partly drawn from the primitive characteristics of the race; they
are partly borrowings from other and contiguous races; they are to a
considerable extent derived from natural surroundings of all kinds;
and in all circumstances they are supplemented by the genius of
individuals. In short, all social structures, when looked at minutely,
are found to be composed of two main ingredients--race and environment;
but these two ingredients are so indissolubly interfused that it is
impossible to say how much is to be attributed to the one, and how much
to the other, in the building up of a society. But if, it is impossible
to estimate the value of the several elements composing the fabric
of society, it is easy to ascertain the dominating idea on which all
forms of society are based. That dominating idea, if it may for the
moment be called such, is the instinct of self-preservation, and it
exercises just as great a power in determining the formation and play
of the social organism as it exercises in determining the attitude of
the individual to the world around him. In working out the idea of
self-preservation into practical forms, the social system of most
peoples has hitherto been built up with a view to protection against
external enemies in the shape of hostile tribes and nations; the
internal enemies of the commonwealth--the thieves, the housebreakers,
the disturbers of public order, the shedders of blood, the perpetrators
of violence--have been treated as only worthy of secondary consideration.
Such are the lines on which social structure has, in most cases,
proceeded, with the result that while external security was for long
periods assured, internal security remained as imperfect and defective
as ever.

The structure of society in India is, however, an exception to the
general rule. External security, or, in other words, the desire for
political freedom has, to a great extent, become extinct wherever the
principles of Brahmanism have succeeded in taking root.

These principles have been operating upon the Indian mind for thousands
of years; their effect in the sphere of politics excited the wonder of
the ancient Greeks, who tell us that the Indian peasant might be seen
tilling his field in peace between hostile armies preparing for battle.
A similar spectacle has been seen on the plains of India in modern
times. But Brahmanism, while extinguishing the principle of liberty in
all its branches, and exposing its adherents to the mercy of every
conqueror, has succeeded, through the caste system, in bringing
internal order, security, and peace to a high pitch of excellence. This
end, the caste system, like most other religious institutions, did not
and does not have directly in view; but the human race often takes
circuitous routes to attain its ends, and while apparently aiming at
one object, is in reality securing another. The permanent forces
operating in society often possess a very different character from
those on the surface, and when the complicated network in which they
are always wrapped up is stripped from off them, we find that they are
some fundamental human instincts at work in disguise.

These observations are applicable to the caste system. This system,
when divested of its externals, besides being an attempt to satisfy
the mystic and emotional elements in the Indian heart, also represents
the genius of the race engaged in the task of self-preservation. The
manner in which caste exercises this function in thus described by Sir
William Hunter in His volume on the Indian Empire. "Caste or guild,"
he says, "exercises a surveillance over each of its members from the
close of childhood until death. If a man behaves well, he will rise to
an honoured place in his caste; and the desire for such local
distinctions exercises an important influence in the life of a Hindu.
But the caste has its punishments as well as its rewards. Those
punishments consist of fine and excommunication. The fine usually
takes the form of a compulsory feast to the male members of the caste.
This is the ordinary means of purification, or of making amends for
breaches of the caste code. Excommunication inflicts three penalties:
First, an interdict against eating with the fellow members of the
caste; second, an interdict against marriage within the caste. This
practically amounts to debarring the delinquent and his family from
respectable marriages of any sort; third, cutting off the delinquent
from the general community by forbidding him the use of the village
barber and washerman, and of the priestly adviser. Except in very
serious cases, excommunication is withdrawn upon the submission of the
offender, and his payment of a fine. Anglo-Indian law does not enforce
caste decrees. But caste punishments exercise an efficacious restraint
upon unworthy members of the community, precisely as caste rewards
supply a powerful motive of action to good ones. A member who cannot
be controlled by this mixed discipline of punishment and reward is
eventually expelled; and, as a rule, 'an out-caste' is really a bad
man. Imprisonment in jail carries with it that penalty, but may be
condoned after release by heavy expiations."

Those remarks of Sir William Hunter afford an insight into the
coercive power exercised by the caste system on the Indian population.
Without that system it is probable that the criminal statistics of
India would present as high a proportion of crimes of violence and
blood as now exists among the peoples of Southern Europe. But with
that system in active operation, the evil influence of climate is
completely neutralised and India at the present moment enjoys a
remarkable immunity from violent crime. With the example of India
before us we are justified in coming to the conclusion that homicide
and crimes of a kindred nature need not necessarily be the malign
products of climate. Whatever climate has to do with fostering these
offences may be obviated by a better form of social organisation. It
would be ridiculous to dream of basing western society upon Indian
models; but at the same time India teaches us a lesson on the
construction of the social fabric which it would be well to learn. The
tendency of western civilisation at the present time is to herd vast
masses of men into huge industrial centres. It is useless discussing
the abstract question whether this is a good thing or a bad; we must
reconcile ourselves to the fact that it is a process forced upon
communities by the necessities of modern industrialism; and we must
accordingly make the best of it. In our efforts to make the best of
present tendencies, and to render them as innocuous as possible to
social welfare, there is one point at least where India is able to
teach us an instructive lesson. In India a man seldom becomes, what he
too often is, in all our large cities, a mere lonely, isolated unit,
left entirely to the mercy of his own impulses, constrained by no
social circle of any description, and unsustained by the pressure of
any public opinion for which he has the least regard. In India he is
always a member of some fraternity within the community; in that
fraternity or caste he feels at home; he is never isolated; he belongs
to a circle which is not too big for his individuality to be lost; he
is known; he has a reputation and a status to maintain; his life
within the caste is shaped for him by caste usages and traditions, and
for these he is taught to entertain the deepest reverence. Caste is in
many of its aspects a state in miniature within the state; in this
capacity it performs a variety of admirable functions of which the
state itself is and must always remain incapable.

Before the era of great cities the township in the West used to
exorcise some of the functions at present discharged in India by the
system of caste. But the township in the old sense of the word, with
its settled population and the common eye upon all its members, has
to a large extent disappeared. The influence of the family is at the
same time being constantly weakened by the migratory habits modern
industrialism entails on the population; in a word, the old
constraining force, which used to hold society together, are almost
gone, and nothing effective has sprung up to replace them.

In these circumstances what is to be done? It is useless attempting to
restore the past. That never has been accomplished successfully; all
attempts in that direction look as if they were opposed to the nature
of things. It is among the living and vigorous forces of the present
that we must look for help. I shall content myself by mentioning one
of these forces, namely Trade Societies. It seems a pity that these
societies should confine their operations merely to the limited object
of forcing up wages. That object is, of course, a perfectly laudable
and legitimate one, but it is surely not the supreme and only end for
which a Trade Society should exist. A Trade Society would do well to
teach its members how to spend as well as how to earn. What, indeed,
is the use of higher wages to a certain section of the members of
Trades-Unions? The increased pay, instead of being a blessing, becomes
a curse; it leads to drunkenness, to wife-beating, to disorder in the
public streets, to assaults on the police, to crimes of violence and
blood. It is a melancholy fact that the moment wages begin to rise,
the statistics of crime almost immediately follow suit, and at no
period are there more offences of all kinds against the person than
when material prosperity is at its height.

It lies well within the functions of such Trades-Unions as possess an
enlightened regard for the welfare of their members, to introduce a
code of regulations which would tend to minimise some of the evils
which have just been mentioned. It would immeasurably raise the status
of the Union, if certain disciplinary measures could be adopted
against members convicted of offences against the law. In the
professions of law and medicine it is the custom at the present time
to expel members who are proved guilty of serious offences of this
description, and unquestionably the dread of expulsion exercises a
most salutary influence on the conduct of all persons belonging to
these professions. It would be possible for Trade organisations to
accomplish much without resorting to this rigorous treatment; and the
real object for which such societies exist--the well-being of the
members--would be attained much more effectively than is the case at
present. Wages are but the means to an end; the end is individual,
domestic and social welfare, and it is only a half measure to supply
the means unless something is also done to secure the end.




CHAPTER III.

THE SEASONS AND CRIME.


Let us now approach the question of temperature and crime from another
point of view. International statistics indicate pretty clearly that
warm regions exercise an injurious effect on the conduct of European
peoples. Does the information furnished by these statistics stand
alone, or is it supported by the result of investigations conducted in
a different field? To this vital question it will be our endeavour to
supply an answer. In the annual reports of the Prison Commissioners
there is an instructive diagram showing the mean number of prisoners
in the local prisons of England and Wales on the first Tuesday of each
month. This diagram has been published for a considerable number of
years, and if we take any period of six years it is remarkable to
observe the unfailing regularity with which crime begins to decrease
as soon as the summer is over and the temperature begins to fall. From
the month of October till the month of February in the following year,
the prison population continues almost steadily to diminish; from the
month of February till the month of October, the same population,
allowing for pauses in its progress and occasional deflections in its
course, mounts upwards with the rising temperature. According to the
last sextennial diagram of the Prison Commissioners, which embraces
the six years ended March, 1884, the mean number of prisoners in the
local prisons of England and Wales was, on the first Tuesday in
February, 17,600; on the first Tuesday in April it had risen to
18,400; on the first Tuesday in July it had reached nearly 19,000; on
the first Tuesday in October it culminated in 19,200. From this date
onwards the numbers decreased just as steadily as they had previously
risen, reaching their lowest point in February, when the upward
movement again commenced. The steadiness and regularity of this rise
and fall of the prison population, according to the season of the
year, goes on with such wonderful precision that it must proceed from
the operation of some permanent cause. What is this permanent cause?
Is it economic, social, or climatic?

Is it economic? It is sometimes asserted that the increase of crime in
the summer months is due to the large number of tramps who leave the
workhouses after the winter is over and roam the country in search of
employment. Many of these wanderers, it is said, are arrested for
vagrancy; in summer they swell the prison population just as they
swell the workhouse population in winter. This explanation of the
increase of crime in summer contains so many elements of probability,
that it has come to be rather widely accepted by students of criminal
phenomena. It has not, however, been my good fortune to meet with any
facts or statistics of sufficient weight to establish the validity of
this explanation. As far as I can ascertain it is an explanation which
has obtained currency almost entirely through its own intrinsic
probability; it is believed, but it has not been proved. Let us
proceed to put it to the test. For this purpose we shall select the
county of Surrey--a fairly typical English county, composed partly of
town and partly of country. In the county of Surrey during the month
of July, 1888, sixty per cent. fewer persons were imprisoned for
vagrancy than in the following month of January, 1889. As far as
Surrey is concerned, these figures effectually dispose of the idea
that vagrancy is more common in summer than in winter; as a matter of
fact they demonstrate that the very opposite is the case. Surrey is
the only county for which I have been able to obtain trustworthy
statistics, but there is every reason to believe that the statistics
of Surrey reveal on a limited scale what the whole of England, if
figures were procurable, would reveal on a large scale. Assuming,
then, that what holds good for Surrey is equally valid for the rest of
England, the conclusion is forced upon us that the augmentation of
crime in summer does not arise from an increase of vagrants and others
arrested and convicted under the Vagrancy Acts while in search of work
or pretending to be in search of it. The assumption that such is the
case is quite unwarranted by the facts so far as they are obtainable,
and another explanation must be sought of the greater prevalence of
crime in summer as compared with winter.

An economic cause of an opposite character to vagrancy has by some
been considered as accounting for the facts now under consideration.
In the summer months, work as a rule is more easily procured; people
in consequence have more money to spend; drunkenness becomes more
common, and the high prison population of summer is to be attributed
to drink. That there is a greater consumption of drink when work
becomes more plentiful is a perfectly correct statement which has been
verified over and over again, and it is also equally correct to say
that drinking leads its victims to the police court. But it has to be
remembered that in almost all cases of drunkenness the magistrate
allows the alternative of a fine. A much larger percentage of fines
is paid in summer than in winter, the result being that the increase
of drunkenness in summer does not disproportionally increase the size
of the prison population. In July, 1888, as compared with January,
1889, cases of felony and assault, followed by imprisonment, increased
in the county of Surrey 20 and 28 per cent. respectively, while
drunkenness on the other hand only increased 18 per cent. The reason
of this relatively small increase of imprisonment for drunkenness does
not arise from the fact that there is less drunkenness in proportion
to the other forms of crime; it is owing to the greater facility with
which this offence can be purged by the payment of a fine. It is
more easily purged in this fashion in summer than in winter, because
people have more money in their pockets. Money, in short, acts in two
capacities which neutralise each other; on the one hand it brings more
persons before the magistrates on charges of drunkenness; on the other
hand, it enables more persons to escape with the simple penalty of a
fine. The prison population is, therefore, not unduly swollen in
summer by the undoubted increase in drinking during that season of the
year; drinking has, in fact, less to do with that increase than any
other cause.

The preceding observations on vagrancy and drinking will suffice to
show that as far as these two factors are concerned, the rise of the
prison population in the warm weather cannot be explained on economic
grounds. Are there any social habits which will account for it? Change
of seasons has a notable effect on social habits. In the cold days of
winter, the great mass of the population live as much as possible
within the shelter of their own home; as long as the short days and
the cheerless and dismal weather continue, there is little to tempt
them out of doors and to bring them into contact with each other. But
with the advance of spring this condition of things is changed; the
lengthening days, the milder atmosphere, the more abundant sunshine
offer increased facilities for social intercourse. Crowds of people
are thrown together, quarrelling and disorders arise, which call for
the interference of the police to be followed shortly after by a
sentence of imprisonment. The growth of international intercourse is
said to make for peace; the growth of social intercourse, admirable as
it is in many respects, has the unfortunate drawback of mating for
black eyes and broken heads. Admitting the truth of this serious
indictment against our social instincts, and no one can deny that it
does contain a considerable amount of truth, the fact still remains
that weather is indirectly if not directly the source from which the
increase of crime in summer proceeds. It is the good weather that
multiplies occasions for human intercourse; the multiplication of
these facilities augments the volume of crime; and thus it comes to
pass, that the conduct of society is, at least, indirectly affected by
changes of season and the oscillations of temperature.

But it is also directly affected by these causes, as I shall now
proceed to show. In one of the principal London prisons the average
prison population during the months of June, July and August for the
five years ended August, 1889 was 1,061, and the daily average number
of punishments amounted to 9 and a fraction per thousand. The average
population during the winter months of December, January, February,
for the five years ended February, 1890, was 1009, and the daily
average number of punishments amounted to 7 and a fraction per
thousand. According to these statistics, we have an increase of 2
punishments per day, or 12 per week (omitting Sundays) to every
thousand prisoners in the three summer months as compared with the
three winter months. In other words, there is a greater tendency among
the inmates of prisons to commit offences against prison regulations
in summer than in winter. In what way is this manifest tendency to be
accounted for? If prisoners were free men living under a variety of
conditions, and subject to a host of complex influences, it would be
possible to adduce all sorts of causes for the existence of such a
phenomenon, and it would be by no means a difficult matter to find
plausible arguments in support of each and all of them. But the almost
absolute similarity of conditions under which imprisoned men live
excludes at one stroke an enormous mass of complicating factors, and
reduces the question to its simplest elements. Here are a thousand men
living in the same place under the same rules of discipline, occupied
in the same way, fed on the same materials, with the same amount of
exercise, the same hours of sleep; in fact, with similarity of life
brought almost to the point of absolute identity; no alteration takes
place in these conditions in summer as compared with winter, yet we
find that there are more offences committed by them in the hotter
season than in the colder. In what way, except on the ground of
temperature, is this difference to be explained. The economic and
social factors discussed by us in connection with the increase of
crime do not here come into play. All persons in prison are living
under the same social and economic conditions in hot weather as well
as in cold. The only changes to which they are subjected are cosmical;
cosmical causes are accordingly the only ones which will account
adequately for the facts. Of these cosmical causes, temperature is by
far the most conspicuous, and it may therefore be concluded that the
increase of prison offences in summer is attributable to the greater
heat.

Seeing, then, that temperature produces these effects inside prison
walls, it is only reasonable to infer that it produces similar effects
on the outside world. The larger number of offences against prison
discipline which take place in the hot weather have their counterpart
in the larger number of offences committed against the criminal law
during the same season of the year. The conclusions arrived at with
respect to the action of season are supported by the conclusions
already reached with respect to the action of climate. In fact, both
sets of conclusions support each other; both of them point to the
operation of the same cause.

To any one who may still feel reluctant to admit the intimate relation
between cosmical conditions and crime I would point out that
suicide--a somewhat similar disorder in the social organism--likewise
increases and diminishes under the influences of temperature. "We
cannot help acknowledging," says Dr. Morselli, in his work on
"Suicide," "that through the whole of Europe the greater number of
suicides happen in the two warm seasons. This regularity in the annual
distribution of suicide is too great to be attributed to chance or to
the human will. As the number of violent deaths can be predicted from
year to year with extreme probability in any particular country, so
can the average of every season also be foreseen; in fact, these
averages are so constant from one period to another as to have almost
the specific character of a given statistical series." Professor von
Oettingen in his valuable work, "Die Moralstatistik," comes to the
very same conclusions as Morselli, although his point of view is
entirely different. After mentioning several of the principal States
of Europe, the statistics of which he had examined, Von Oettingen goes
on to say that it may be accepted as a general law that the prevalence
of suicide in the different months of the year rises and falls with
the sun--in June and July it is most rampant; in November, December
and January it descends to a minimum. In London there are many more
suicides in the sunny month of June than in the gloomy month of
November, and throughout the whole of England the cold months do not
demand nearly so many victims as the hot. In the face of these
indisputable facts Von Oettingen, while rejecting the idea that there
is any inexorable fatality, as Buckle believed, connected with their
recurrence, is obliged to admit that the hot weather exercises a
propelling influence on suicidal tendencies, and that the cold weather
on the other hand acts in an opposite direction[18].

    [18] DISTRIBUTION OF SUICIDES IN LONDON BY MONTHS OF EQUAL
    LENGTH PER 10,000, 1865-84:--

    January,   732.              July,      905.
    February,  714.              August,    891.
    March,     840.              September, 705.
    April,     933.              October,   772.
    May,      1003.              November,  726.
    June,     1022.              December,  697.

    Dr. Ogle, vol. xlix., 117. _Statistical Society's Journal_.

The influence of temperature is, however, much less powerful on crime
than it is on suicide. It has the effect of raising by one third the
number of persons to whom life becomes an intolerable burden, but
according to the diagram in the Prison Commissioners' Reports the
highest increase in crime between summer and winter does not amount to
more than one twelfth. In other words, between six and eight per cent.
of the crime committed in this country in summer may with reasonable
certainty be attributed to the direct action of temperature. This is
a most important result and I should almost hesitate to state it if
it were supported by my investigations only. But this is far from
being the case. In an important paper contributed to the Revista di
Discipline Carcerarie for 1886, Dr. Marro, one of the most
distinguished students of crime in Italy, has arrived at similar
conclusions. He has shown that in the Italian prisons in the four
hottest months of the Italian summer--May, June, July and
August--there are also the greatest number of offences against prison
discipline. This is a result which coincides in every particular with
what has already been pointed out as holding good in English prisons,
and the attempts of Dr. Colajanni in the second volume of his work,
"La Sociologia Criminale," to explain it away are not by any means
successful. It is hardly possible to conceive a more suitable form of
test for estimating the effect of temperature on human action than the
one afforded by a comparison of the offences committed against prison
regulations at the different seasons of the year. Such a comparison
amply bears out the contention that the seasons are a factor which
must not be overlooked in all enquiries respecting the origin of
crime, and the best methods of dealing with it.

In what way does a rise in temperature act on the individual so as
to make him less capable of resisting the criminal impulse? This is
a question of some difficulty, deserving more attention from
physiologists than it has yet received. It is a satisfactorily
established conclusion that the higher temperature of the summer
months has a debilitating effect on the digestive functions; it is
also believed that these months have an enervating effect on the
system generally. In so far as the heat of summer produces disease, it
at the same time tends to produce crime. Persons suffering from any
kind of ailment or infirmity are far more liable to become criminals
than are healthy members of the community. The intimate connection
between disease and crime is a matter which must never be forgotten.
In the present instance, however, the closeness of this connection is
not sufficient to account for the growth of crime in summer. According
to the Registrar General's report for 1889 the death rate in the
twenty-eight large towns is less in the six months from June to
November than in the six months which follow. There is, therefore,
less disease at the very time when there is most crime. In the face of
this fact it cannot be contended that disease, generally, pushes the
population into criminal courses in summer.

But while this is so, it may yet be true that some special enfeeblement
(generated by the rise of temperature) which does not assume the acute
form usually implied in the name, disease has the effect of
stimulating impulses of a criminal character, or of weakening the
barrier which prevents these impulses from breaking out and carrying
all before them. It is a perfectly well-established fact that a high
temperature not only produces physical enfeeblement, but that it also
impairs the usual activity and energy of the brain. In other words,
a high temperature is invariably accompanied by a certain loss of
mental power. In most persons this loss is comparatively trifling, and
has hardly any perceptible effect on their mode of life and conduct;
in others, it assumes more serious proportions. In some who are
susceptible to cosmical influences, and for one reason or another are
already on the borderland of crime, the decrease of mental function
involved in a rise of temperature becomes a determining factor, and a
criminal act is the result. Through the agency of climate the mental
forces which are normally capable of holding the criminal instincts in
check, lose for a time their accustomed power, and it is whilst this
temporary loss endures that the person subject to it becomes most
liable to be plunged into disaster. It is in this manner, in my
belief, that temperature deleteriously operates upon human conduct.

The results of my investigations do not, however, bear out the
commonly accepted view that crimes against property increase in the
depth of winter. As far as this law relates to crime in France it may
be correct; the statistical inquiries of Guerry, Ferri, and Corre
point to that conclusion. On the other hand, as far as the law relates
to England, I have serious doubts as to its validity. In the county of
Surrey, in the year 1888-89, not only more crimes against the person,
but also more crimes against property were committed in July than in
January. In the former month, as compared with the latter, cases of
felony increased 20 per cent.; and if Surrey is to be taken as a fairly
typical English county--which there is every reason to believe it
is--we have before us the remarkable fact that there are more offences
against property in summer than in winter. The current opinion that
winter is the most criminal period of the year is entirely fallacious,
and it is extremely probable that it is equally fallacious to imagine
that property is less sate when the days are short and the nights
long.

But while property, on the whole, in more safe in winter than in
summer, the offences committed against it in winter are, as a rule, of
a more serious character. This, at least, is the conclusion which I
should be inclined to draw, from the fact that there are more
indictable offences--that is to say, offences not tried by a
magistrate, but by a judge and jury--in the six months between October
and March than in the summer six months. For the year ended September,
1888, which is an average year, there were fully 2000 more indictable
offences in the winter six months than in the summer six months. As a
considerable proportion of indictable offences consist in crimes
against property of the nature of housebreaking and burglary, it is
very probable that these crimes are most prevalent in winter. But if
all kinds of offences against property, petty as well as grave, are
thrown together, and calculated under one head, it comes out that
these offences are most numerous in summer.

The only kind of crime that increases in Surrey in winter is vagrancy;
the growth of this offence for the years I have mentioned in January,
as contrasted with July was 60 per cent. The development of vagrancy
in the cold months is partly owing to the fact that work is not so
easily procured in the cold weather; and a certain percentage of the
population, mainly dependent for subsistence on casual and irregular
out-door jobs, will rather resort to begging than the workhouse, when
this kind of occupation is temporarily at a standstill. This class,
however, is a comparatively small one, and constitutes a very feeble
proportion of the offenders against the Vagrancy Acts which swell the
prison statistics in winter. Most of the offenders against these acts
are people who seize the opportunity afforded by the bitter weather of
appealing to the sympathies of the public. In summer the occupation of
such persons is to some extent gone; in the hot sunshine their rags
and piteous looks do not so strongly affect our feelings of
commiseration; we know they are not suffering from cold; their
petitions and entreaties accordingly fall upon deaf ears; in short,
begging is not a paying trade in the hot months. In winter, all these
conditions are reversed; with the first fall of snow off go the
vagrant's boots, and out he runs looking the picture of misery and
destitution. In an hour or two, if he escapes the attentions of the
police, he has made as much as will keep him comfortably for a few
days; but like many better men his success often brings about his
fall; the alms of a generous public are consumed in the nearest
beer-shop; sallying forth in quest of fresh booty, and made bold and
insolent with drink, the beggar soon finds himself in the hands of the
authorities. Anyone who cares to verify this statement can easily do
so by following the reports of the police courts, and taking note of
the number of convictions for _drunkenness and begging_--a somewhat
significant combination of offences, and one which ought to make the
inconsiderate giver pause.

What are the practical conclusions to be deduced from this study of
the relations between temperature and crime? The first and most
obvious conclusion is, that any considerable rise of temperature has a
tendency, as far as Europeans and their descendants are concerned, to
diminish human responsibility. Whether there are any palliatives
against this tendency in the way of regimen, and what they are, is a
matter for the consideration of physiologists; and a most important
matter it is, for a high temperature does not merely lead to offences
against the law, it also injuriously affects the conduct of children
in schools, of soldiers in the army, of workmen in factories, and of
the public generally in their relations with one another. While it is
the task of physiologists to examine the physical aspects of the
anti-social tendencies developed by variations of temperature, it is
the duty of all persons placed in positions of authority to recognise
their existence; and to recognise their existence not merely in
others, but also in themselves. It is, unfortunately, not seldom true
that justice is not administered so wisely and patiently in the
burning summer heat as it is at other times. In adjudicating on
criminal cases in the sultry weather, magistrates and judges would do
well to remember that cosmical influences are not without their effect
on human judgments, and that precipitate decisions, or decisions based
upon momentary irritation, or decisions, the severity of which they
may afterwards regret, are to some extent the result of those
influences. The same caution is applicable to those who have to deal
with convicted men; it should be remembered by them that in summer
their tempers are more easily tried, while they have at the same time
more to try them; and the knowledge of these facts should keep them on
the alert against themselves.

While increased temperature undoubtedly decreases personal
responsibility, it is a most difficult matter to decide whether this
factor ought to be taken into consideration when passing sentence on
criminal offenders. It is much more truly an extenuating circumstance
than the majority of pleas which receive the name. In a variety of
cases, such, for instance, as threats, assaults, manslaughter, murder,
a high temperature unquestionably sometimes enters as a determining
factor into the complex set of influences which produce these crimes.
But the first difficulty confronting a judge, who endeavours to take
such a factor into account, will he the difficulty of discovering
whether it was present or not in the individual case he has before
him. In reply to this objection it may be urged, and urged too with
considerable truth, that this hindrance is not insuperable. It is
possible to overcome it by noting whether the case in question stands
alone, or whether it is only one among a group of others taking place
about the same period. Should it turn out to be a case that stands
alone, it would be fair to assume that temperature is not a cause
requiring to be taken into consideration in dealing with the offender.
Should it, on the contrary, turn out to be one in a group of cases, it
would be equally fair to assume that temperature was not without its
effect in determining the action of the offender.

Having got thus far, having isolated temperature from among the other
causes, and having fixed upon it as the most potent of them all, what
would immediately and imperatively follow? As a matter of course it
would ensue that a person whose deeds are powerfully influenced by
the action of temperature is to that extent irresponsible for them.
To arrive at such a conclusion is equivalent to saying that such a
person, if his offences are at all serious, constitutes a grave
peril to society. In a sense, he may be less criminal, but he is
certainty more dangerous; and as the supreme duty of society is
self-preservation, such a person must be dealt with solely from that
point of view. It would be ridiculous to let him off because he is
largely irresponsible; his irresponsibility is just what constitutes
his danger, and is the very reason he should be subjected to prolonged
restraint.

In all offences of a trivial character presumably springing to a large
extent from the action of temperature, it might be wise if the
offender were only punished in such a way as would keep alive in his
memory a vivid recollection of the offence. This method of punishment
is better effected by a short and sharp term of imprisonment than by
inflicting a longer sentence and making the prison treatment
comparatively mild. A short, sharp sentence of this character has also
another advantage which is well worth attention. In many cases the
offender is the bread-winner of the home. The misery which follows his
prolonged imprisonment is often heartrending; the home has to be sold
up bit by bit; the mother has to strip off most of her scanty garments
and becomes, a piteous spectacle of starvation and rags, the
childrens' things have to go to the pawnshop; and it is fortunate if
one or two of the family does not die before the husband is released.
The misery which crime brings upon the innocent is the saddest of its
features, and whatever society can do consistently with its own
welfare to shorten or mitigate that misery, ought, in the interests of
our common humanity, to be done.

One word with reference to offences which do not come within the
cognisance of the criminal law. I do not know if there are any
statistics to show that, in schools, in workshops, in the army, or,
indeed, in any industry or institution where bodies of people are
massed together under one common head--there are more cases of
insubordination and more offences against discipline when the
temperature is high than in ordinary circumstances. But, whether such
a statistical record exists or not, there can be little doubt that
cases of refractory conduct prevail most largely in the warm season.
It would therefore be well if this fact were borne in mind by all
persons whose duty it is to enforce discipline and require obedience.
Considering that there are certain cosmical influences at work, which
make it note difficult for the ordinary human being to submit to
discipline, it might not be inexpedient, in certain cases, to take
these unusual conditions into account and not to enforce in their full
rigour all the penalties involved in a breach of rules. It is a
universal experience that many things which can ordinarily be done
without fatigue or trouble, become, at times, a burden and a source of
irritation. Some physical disturbance is at the root of this change,
and a similar disturbance is also at the root of the defective
standard of conduct which a high temperature almost invariably
succeeds in producing among some sections of the community.




CHAPTER IV.

DESTITUTION AND CRIME.


Under this heading I shall discuss some of the more important social
factors which either directly or indirectly tend to produce crime. It
will be impossible to discuss them all. The action of society upon the
individual is so complex, its effects are so varied, in many instances
so impalpable, that we must content ourselves with a survey of those
social phenomena which are most generally credited with leading up to
acts of delinquency.

It is very commonly believed that destitution is a powerful factor in
the production of crime; we shall therefore start upon this inquiry by
considering the extent to which destitution is responsible for
offences against person and property. A definition of what is meant by
destitution will assist in clearing the ground. It is a definition
which is not at all difficult to formulate; one destitute person is
remarkably like another, and what applies to one applies with a
considerable degree of accuracy to all. We shall, therefore, define a
destitute person as a person who is without house or home, who has no
work, who is able and willing to work but can get none, and has
nothing but starvation staring him in the face. Is any serious amount
of crime due to the desperation of people in a position such as this?
In order to answer this question it is necessary, in the first place,
to ask what kind of crime such persons will be most likely to commit.
It is most improbable that they will be crimes against the person,
such as homicide or assault; it will not be drunkenness, because, on
the assumption of their destitution, they will possess no money to
spend. In short, the offences a person in a state of destitution is
most likely to commit are begging and theft. What proportion of the
total volume of crime is due to these two offense? This is the first
question we shall have to answer. The second is, to what extent are
begging and theft the results of destitution? An adequate elucidation
of these two points will supply a satisfactory explanation of the part
played by destitution in the production of crime.

The total number of cases tried in England and Wales either summarily
or on indictment during the year 1887-88 amounted to 726,698. Out of
this total eight per cent. were cases of offences against property
excluding cases of malicious damage, and seven per cent. consisted of
offences against the Vagrancy Acts. Putting these two classes of
offences together we arrive at the result that out of a total number
of crimes of all kinds committed in England and Wales, 15 per cent.
may conceivably be due to destitution. This is a very serious
percentage, and if it actually represented the number of persons who
commit crime from sheer want of the elementary necessaries of life,
the confession would have to be made that the economic condition of
the country was deplorable. But is it a fact that destitution in the
sense we have been using the word is the cause of all these offences?
This is the next question we have to solve, and the answer springing
from it will reveal the true position of the case.

Let us deal first with offences against property. As has just been
pointed out these constitute eight per cent. of the annual amount of
crime. But according to inquiries which I have made, one half of the
annual number of offenders against property, so far from being in a
state of destitution, were actually at work, and earning wages at the
time of their arrest. Nor in this surprising. The daily newspapers
have only to be consulted to confirm it. In a very great number of
instances the records of criminal proceedings testify to the fact that
the person charged is in some way or other defrauding his employer,
and when these cases are deducted from the total of offences against
property, it considerably lessons the percentage of persons driven by
destitution into the ranks of crime. Add to these the great bulk of
juvenile offenders convicted of theft, and that peculiar class of
people who steal, not because they are in distress, but merely from a
thievish disposition, and it will he manifest that half the cases of
theft in England and Wales are not due to the pressure of absolute
want.

But what shall be said of the other half which still represents four
per cent. of the annual amount of crime. According to the calculations
just referred to, the offenders constituting this percentage were not
in work when the crimes charged against them were committed. Was it
destitution arising from want of employment which led them to break
the law? At first sight one may easily be inclined to say that it is.
These people, it will be argued, have no work and no money. What are
they to do but beg or steal? Before jumping at this conclusion it must
not be forgotten that there is such a person as the habitual criminal.
The habitual criminal, as he will very soon tell you if you possess
his confidence absolutely, declines to work. He never has worked, he
does not want work; he prefers living by his wits. With the
recollection of imprisonment fresh upon him an offender of this
description may in rare instances take employment for a short period,
but the regularity of life which work entails is more than he can
bear, and the old occupation of thieving is again resorted to. To live
by plundering the community is the trade of the habitual criminal; it
is the only business he truly cares for, and it is wonderful how long
and how often he will succeed in eluding the suspicion and vigilance
of the police. Of course, offenders of this class, when arrested, say
they are out of work, and will very readily make an unwary person
believe that it is destitution which drives them to desperation. But
as was truly remarked a short time ago by a judge in one of the London
courts, nearly all of these very men are able to pay high fees to
experienced counsel to defend them. After these observations, it will
be seen that the habitual criminal, the man who lives by burglary,
housebreaking, shoplifting, and theft of every description, is not to
be classed among the destitute. Criminals of this character constitute
at least two per cent. of the delinquents annually brought before the
courts.

Respecting the two per cent. of offenders which remain to be accounted
for, it will not be far from the mark to say that destitution is the
immediate cause of their wrong-doing. These offenders are composed of
homeless boys, of old men unable to work, of habitual drunkards who
cannot got a steady job, or keep it when they get it, of vagrants who
divide their time between begging and petty theft, and of workmen on
the tramp, who have become terribly reduced, and will rather steal
than enter a workhouse. The percentage of these offenders varies in
different parts of the country. In the north of England, for instance,
there are comparatively few homeless boys who find their way before
the magistrates on charges of theft; in London, on the other hand, the
number is considerable, and ranges according to the season of the
year, or the state of trade, to between 1 and 3 per cent. of the
criminal population. Why does London enjoy such an evil pre-eminence
in this matter? In my opinion it often arises from the fact that
house-accommodation is so expensive in the metropolis. In London, it
is a habit with many parents, owing to the want of room at home, to
make growing lads shift for themselves at a very early age. These boys
earn just enough to enable them to secure a bare existence; out of
their scanty wages it is impossible to hire a room for themselves;
they have to be contented with the common lodging-house. In such
places these boys have to associate with all sorts of broken-down,
worthless characters, and in numbers of instances they come by degrees
to adopt the habits and modes of life of the class among which their
lot is cast. At the very time parental control is most required it is
almost entirely withdrawn; the lad is left to his own devices; and, in
too many cases, descends into the ranks of crime. The first step in
his downward career begins with the loss of employment; this sometimes
happens through no fault of his own, and is simply the result of a
temporary slackness of trade; but in most instances a job is lost for
want of punctuality or some other boyish irregularity which can only
be properly corrected at home. To lose work is to be deprived of the
means of subsistence; the only openings left are the workhouse or
crime. It is the latter alternative which is generally chosen, and
thus, the lad is launched on the troubled sea of crime.

It must not be understood that all London boys drift into crime after
the manner I have just described. In some instances these unfortunates
have lived all their life in criminal neighbourhoods, and merely
follow the footsteps of the people around them. What, for instance, is
to be expected from children living in streets such as Mr. Charles
Booth describes in his work on "Life and Labour in East London?" One
of these streets, which he calls St. Hubert Street, swarms with
children, and in hardly any case does the family occupy more than one
room. The general character of the street is thus depicted. "An awful
place; the worst street in the district. The inhabitants are mostly of
the lowest class, and seem to lack all idea of cleanliness or decency
.... The children are rarely brought up to any kind of work, but loaf
about, and, no doubt, form the nucleus for future generations of
thieves and other bad characters." In this street alone there are
between 160 and 170 children; these children do not require to go to
lodging-houses to be contaminated; they breathe a polluted moral
atmosphere from birth upwards, and it is more than probable that a
considerable proportion of them will help to recruit the army of
crime. It is not destitution which will force them into this course,
but their up-bringing and surroundings.

In addition to homeless boys who steal from destitution, there are, as
I have said, a number of decrepit old men who do the same. There is a
period in a workman's life when he becomes too feeble to do an average
day's work. When this period arrives employers of labour often
discharge him in order to make way for younger and more vigorous men.
If his home, as sometimes happens, is broken up by the death of his
wife, his existence becomes a very lonely and precarious one. An odd
job now and again is all he can get to do, and even these jobs are
often hard to find. His sons and daughters are too heavily encumbered
with large families to be capable of rendering any effective
assistance, and the Union looms gloomily in the distance as the only
prospect before the worn-out worker. But it sometimes happens that he
will not face that prospect. He will rather steal and run the risk of
imprisonment. And so it comes to pass that for a year or two before
finally reconciling himself to the Union, the aged workman will lead a
wandering, criminal life on a petty scale; he becomes an item in the
statistics of offenders against property.

Habitual drunkards form another class who sometimes steal from
destitution. The well-known irregularity of these men's habits
prevents them, in a multitude of cases, from getting work, and
unfortunately, they cannot keep it when they do get it. Employers
cannot depend on them; as soon as they earn a few shillings they
disappear from the workshop till the money is spent on drink. It is at
such times that they are arrested for being drunk and disorderly. As
they can never pay a fine they have to go to prison, but long before
their sentence has expired they have lost their job, and must look out
for something else. If such men do not find work many of them are not
ashamed to steal, and it is only when trade is at flood-tide that they
can be sure of employment, no matter how irregular their habits may
be. At other times they are the first to be discharged and the last to
be engaged. It is not really destitution, but intemperance which turns
them into thieves. That they are destitute when arrested is perfectly
true, but we must go behind the immediate fact of their destitution in
order to arrive at the true causes of their crimes. When this is done
it is found that the stress of economic conditions has very little to
do with making these unhappy beings what they are; on the contrary, it
is in periods of prosperity that they sink to the lowest depths.

Summing up the results of this inquiry into the relations between
destitution and offences against property, we arrive as nearly as
possible at the following figures, so far as England and Wales are
concerned:--

---------------------------------------------------------------------
  Proportion of offences against property to total
     offences:                                            8. p. cent.
                                                         ---
    Thus divided:
  Proportion of offenders in work when arrested:          4. p. cent.
  Proportion of offenders, habitual thieves:              2. p. cent.
  Proportion of offenders, homeless lads and old men:     1. p. cent.
  Proportion of offenders, drunkards, tramps:             1. p. cent.
                                                         ---
                                                          8. p. cent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

We shall now proceed to an examination of offences against the
Vagrancy Acts presumably arising from destitution. It has already
been pointed out that seven per cent. of the annual amount of crime
committed in England and Wales consists of offences against the
Vagrancy Acts, and it now remains for us to inquire whether these
offences are the result of destitution, or what part destitution plays
in producing them.

Out of the 52,136 offenders against the Vagrancy Acts in the year
1888, less than one half (45 per cent.) were charged with begging; the
other offences consisted principally in prostitution, in having
implements of housebreaking, in frequenting places of public resort to
commit felony, in being found on enclosed premises for unlawful
purposes. In all these cases, with the exception of prostitution, it
is not probable that destitution had much, if anything, to do with
inducing the offenders to violate the law. Men who live the life of
incorrigible rogues, who prowl about enclosed premises, who lead a
mysterious existence, without doing any work, are not to be classed
among the destitute; as a general rule, such persons are habitual
thieves and vagabonds, who persist in the life they have adopted
merely because it suits them best. One of the great difficulties in
dealing with persons of this stamp is their hatred of a well-ordered
existence; in a vast number of cases the life they live is the only
kind of life they thoroughly enjoy; it is a profound mistake to
imagine that they are pining for what are usually regarded as the
decencies and comforts of human beings. Nothing is further from their
thoughts. Let us alone and mind your own business is the secret
sentiment and often the open avowal of most of these people. "We
should be miserable living according to your ideas; let us live
according to our own." It is very common for benevolent people to
assume that the objects of their compassion and solicitude are, in
reality, as wretched as they imagine them to be. Living themselves in
ease, and it may be affluence, and surrounded by all the amenities of
existence, it is difficult for them to realise that multitudes can
enjoy a rude kind of happiness in the absence of all this. Such,
however, is the fact. The vagabond class is not more miserable than
any other; it is, of course, not without its sorrows, vicissitudes,
and troubles, but what section of the community is free from these
ills? This class has even a philosophy adapted to its circumstances,
the fundamental articles of which have been once for all summed up in
the lines of Burns:--

  "Life is all a variorum;
    We regard not how it goes,
  Let them cant about decorum
    Who have characters to lose."

What has just been said respecting the loafing, thieving vagabond
applies in a very great measure to the ordinary beggar. The habitual
beggar is a person who will not work. He hates anything in the shape
of regular occupation, and will rather put up with severe hardships
than settle down to the ordinary life of a working-man. It would be
easy to adduce instances to demonstrate the accuracy of what is here
stated. It would be easy to mention cases by the hundred, in which men
addicted to begging have been thoroughly fitted out and started in
life, but all to no purpose. Once a man fairly takes to begging, as a
means of livelihood, it is almost hopeless attempting to cure him.
After a time he loses the capacity for labour; his faculties, for want
of exercise, become blunted and powerless, and he remains a beggar to
the end of his days. It sometimes happens that the beggar who has
taken to mendicancy as a profession is obliged to go to the workhouse
as a kind of temporary refuge. This is not so frequent considering the
sort of life a vagrant has to lead; but when it does occur, the
labour-master of the Union very often finds it next to impossible to
got him to perform the task every able-bodied person is expected to
complete when taking shelter in a Casual Ward. As a result the
habitual beggar has sometimes to appear before the magistrates as a
refractory pauper, but a short sentence of imprisonment, which usually
follows, has lost all its terrors for him; he prefers enduring it to
doing the task allotted to him at the workhouse.

From this it will be seen that habits of indolence, and not the stress
of destitution, are responsible for a great deal of the begging which
goes on in England; but these habits are not answerable for the whole
of it. When times are bad begging has a decided tendency to increase,
and this arises from the fact that a considerable proportion of the
community possess wonderfully few resources within themselves. Even in
depressed times it is astonishing how well men who can turn their
hand, as it is called, can manage to live. Men of this stamp are not
beaten and rendered helpless by the misfortune of losing their usual
employment; they are capable of devising fresh methods of earning a
livelihood; they are persistent, persevering, energetic; they are not
content to stand by with their hands in their pockets and their back
at the wall; at times they even create an occupation, and devise new
wants for the community. Such men exist in large numbers among the
working population, and are able to tide over periods of slackness and
depression in a truly admirable way. But there are others who are
utterly lost the moment trade ceases to flourish. As soon as they lose
the job they have been accustomed to work at they at once sink into a
condition of complete helplessness; knowing not which way to move or
what steps to take; in a very short time they are to be found
soliciting alms in the streets. It is a very serious matter when such
persons are reduced to these straits. With the advent of better times
it is often very difficult to enrol them once again in the ranks of
industry. Bad habits have been acquired, self-respect has broken down,
the mind has become accustomed to a lower plane of existence; the
danger has arisen that persons who were to begin with only beggars by
accident may end by becoming beggars from choice. This is what
actually does happen in some instances, and especially where the level
of life and comfort has at all times been low. The transition from the
one state to the other is not a very pronounced one, and the step into
the position of a habitual beggar is not hard to take after a certain
number of lessons in the mendicant's art have once been learnt. In one
sense it is the pressure of want which has made these people beggars,
in another sense it is their own apathy and feebleness of resource.

It is not easy to estimate the number of persons who become habitual
mendicants in consequence of slackness of work and the temporary loss
of employment. As a matter of fact the whole body of statistical
information bearing upon vagrancy is rather unreliable in character,
and it is difficult to see how it can be anything else. In almost all
cases of begging the initiative is taken by the police; it very seldom
happens that a private citizen gives a beggar in charge. The regular
and systematic enforcement of the Vagrancy Acts by the public
authorities is impeded by a variety of causes, each of which makes it
difficult to grasp accurately the proportions of the begging
population. In the first place no two policemen enforce the law with
the same stringency; one is inclined to be lax and lenient, while
another will not allow a single case to escape. In some districts
chief constables do not care to bring too many begging cases before
the local magistrates; in other districts chief constables are zealous
for the rooting out of vagrancy. In some counties the magistrates
themselves are not so anxious to convict for vagrancy as they are in
others; where the latter tendency prevails, the police take their cue
from the magistrates and comparatively few offences against the
Vagrancy Acts are brought up for trial. Again, there are times when
the public have fits of indulgence towards beggars, which are
counterbalanced at other periods by a corresponding access of
severity; these oscillations of public sentiment are immediately felt
by the executive authorities. The conduct of policemen and magistrates
towards the begging fraternity is largely shaped by the dominant
public mood, and the statistics of vagrancy move up and down in
sympathy with it. Thus it comes to pass that the variations which take
place in the annual statistics of vagrancy do not necessarily
correspond with the growth or diminution of the number of persons
following this mode of life; the actual number of such persons in the
population may in reality be varying very little or, perhaps,
remaining stationary, whilst official statistics are pointing to the
conclusion that important changes are going on. In short, the
statistics of vagrancy are more useful as affording a clue to the
state of public sentiment with respect to this offence than as
offering an accurate test of the extent to which vagrancy prevails.

After this explanation it will be seen how difficult it is, in the
first place, to estimate the exact numbers of the vagrant population;
and, in the next place, the exact proportion of beggars who have been
driven into the ranks of vagrancy, as a result of bad trade and
inability to obtain work. My own impression is, that the number of
persons who are forced to beg for want of work is not large, and they
consist, for the most part, of men beyond middle life or verging upon
old age. There are two causes at present in operation in England which
often press hard upon such men. The first of these causes is one which
was felt more severely twenty or thirty years ago than at the present
moment--I moan the introduction of machinery into industries formerly
carried on to a large extent by hand. One of the most conspicuous
characteristics of the present century is the ever-increasing extent
to which inventions of all kinds have invaded almost every department
of industry. As far as the young are concerned, those inventions have
been on the whole a benefit, and what used to be hard work has become,
as Professor Alfred Marshall recently said, merely looking on. But the
case stands differently with workmen who are surprised by some new
invention at a period of life when the power of adaptability to a
fresh set of industrial circumstances is almost entirely gone. One of
the first consequences of a new invention may be, and often is, that
work which had hitherto been performed by men can now be done by women
and boys; or an occupation which had formerly taken years to learn can
now be mastered in a few weeks. In other cases the new machine is able
to do the work of twenty, fifty, or a hundred men; the article
produced is so immensely cheapened that the old handicraftsman is
driven out of the field; if he is a man entering into years, and
therefore unable to turn his hand to something else, the bread is
practically taken out of his mouth, and the machine, which is
undoubtedly a benefit to the community as a whole, means starvation to
him as an individual. When such circumstances occur, and positive
proof in abundance can be adduced to show that they do take place, the
position of the aged worker becomes a very hard and embarrassing one.
He finds it a very uphill task to change the whole course of his
industrial activities at a period of life when nature has lost much of
her elasticity; the new means he has had to adopt in order to earn a
livelihood are irksome to him; the diminished sum he is now able to
earn per week depresses his spirits and deprives him of certain little
comforts he had long been accustomed to enjoy; but in spite of these
unforeseen and unexpected hardships it is marvellous to see how nobly
working-men, as a rule, struggle on to the end, like a bird with a
broken wing. There are, however, cases in which the struggle is given
up. It would be impossible to enumerate all the causes which lead to
such a deplorable result; sometimes these causes are personal,
sometimes they are social, while in many instances they are a
combination of both. But, whatever such circumstances may be in
origin, the effects of them are generally the same; the worker who is
incapable of adjusting himself to his new industrial surroundings has
few alternatives before him. These alternatives, unless he is
supported by his family or relations, resolve themselves into the
Union, beggary, or theft. Many choose the Union and, with all its
drawbacks, it is undoubtedly the wisest choice; but others have such a
horror of the restraints imposed upon the inmates of a workhouse that
they enter upon the perilous and precarious career of the beggar or
petty thief. The men who make such a choice as this are not, as may
easily be surmised, the pick of their class. They consist, to a good
extent, of persons who have been somewhat unsteady in their habits;
they are not downright drunkards, and they have never allowed drink to
interfere with their regular occupation; but it has been their
immemorial custom to go in for a good deal of drinking on Saturday
nights; on Bank holidays, and other festive occasions. Sensible
workmen do not care to amuse themselves after this fashion; it is
rather too like a savage orgie for most tastes; at the same time it is
the only form of amusement which certain sections of the populace
truly and heartily enjoy, and, on the whole, it is perhaps better that
this rude form of merry-making should remain, than that the multitude
should be deprived of every outlet for the pent-up exuberance of their
spirits. My own impression is, that the rough and boisterous element
which shows itself so conspicuously when the labouring population is
at play will never be eradicated so long as men and women have to
spend so much of their time within the four walls of workshops and
factories, where so much restraint and suppression of the individual
is imperative, if the industrial machine is to go on. It is not at all
unnatural that the severe regularity and monotony of an existence
chiefly spent in this manner should be occasionally interspersed with
outbursts of somewhat boisterous revelry, and the persons who indulge
in it are not to be set down off-hand as worthless characters, because
they sometimes step beyond due and proper bounds. At the same time it
must be admitted that it is generally from the ranks of this class
that the supreme aversion to the workhouse proceeds, and that the
disposition to live by begging, rather than enter it, most largely
prevails. If it happens, therefore, that a man who has lived the life
we have just described is thrown out of employment, by the
introduction of machinery, at a period when he is too old to turn his
hand to something else, he not unfrequently ends by becoming a beggar,
and this continues to be his occupation to the last.

The second cause which leads a certain number of elderly men to adopt
a life of vagrancy is to be attributed to the action of Trades-Unions.
After a workman reaches a certain period of life he is no longer able
to do a full day's work. As soon as this period of life arrives, and
sometimes even before it does arrive, the artisan finds it becoming
increasingly difficult to obtain employment. The rate of wages in his
trade is fixed by Trades-Union rules; every man, no matter what his
qualifications may be, has to receive so much an hour, or the full
Trade-Union wage for the district; no one is allowed to take a job at
a lower figure. No doubt Trades-Unionists find that this regulation
works well an far as it relates to the young and the able-bodied, and
as these always compose the great majority in every trade society, it
is a regulation which is not likely to be rescinded or modified.
Nevertheless, it is a rule which often operates very unjustly in the
case of men who are getting old. These men may have been steady and
industrious workmen all their lives, they may still be able to do a
fair amount of honest work; but, as soon as that amount of work falls
below the daily average of the trade, such men have to go; they are
henceforth practically debarred from earning an honest livelihood at
what has hitherto been the occupation of their working life. Work may
be abundant in the district, but it is useless for grey-haired men to
apply; they cannot do the amount required, and as they are not
permitted to work at a lower rate of wages than their fellows, the
means of getting a living are arbitrarily taken out of their hands. As
a consequence of these Trades-Union enactments, cases are not
infrequent in which workmen who have just passed middle life, or have
sustained injuries, drift insensibly into vagrant habits. These habits
are acquired almost without their knowing it. In the vague hope of
perhaps finding something to do a man will wander from town to town
existing as best he can; after the hope of employment has died away he
still continues to wander, and thus forms an additional unit in the
permanent army of beggars and vagrants. Trade-Unionists would
undoubtedly remedy a great wrong if some effective means were devised
by them to meet cases of this character. It should be remembered by
those most opposed to any modifications of the present system that
they may one day be its victims. The hindrances in the way of putting
an end to the injustice inherent in the present arrangements are not
incapable of being overcome. It is surely possible to devise a rule
which, while leaving intact the essential features of the present
system, will render it more flexible--a rule to enable the maimed and
the aged who cannot do a full day's work to make, through the Union if
need be, some special arrangement with the employers. Such a rule, if
properly safe-guarded to prevent abuse, would be of inestimable
benefit to many a working man.

If the step here suggested were adopted by the Trade Societies, it
would, according to calculations which I have made, reduce the begging
population by about two per cent. This percentage, in my opinion,
represents the number of vagrants who are able and willing to do a
certain amount of work, but cannot get it to do. It is a percentage
which at any rate does not err on the side of being too low; when
trade is at its ordinary level it is perhaps a little too high. In any
case this proportion may be taken as a tolerably accurate estimate of
the numbers of the vagrant class which will not enter the Unions when
out of employment, and are consequently forced by the pressure of want
to resort to a life of beggary.

The proportion here indicated of the number of vagrants who are
willing to work coincides in a remarkable manner with certain
statistics recently collected by H. Monod of the Ministry of the
Interior in France.[19] According to M. Monod a benevolently disposed
French citizen wished to know the amount of truth contained in the
complaints of sturdy beggars, that they were willing to work if they
could get anything to do or anyone to employ them. This gentleman
entered into negotiations with some merchants and manufacturers, and
induced them to offer work at the rate of four francs a day to every
person presenting himself furnished with a letter of recommendation
from him. In eight months 727 sturdy beggars came under his notice,
all complaining that they had no work. Each of them was asked to come
the following day to receive a letter which would enable him to get
employment at four francs a day in an industrial establishment. More
than one half (415) never came for the letter; a good many others
(138) returned for the letter but never presented it. Others who did
present their letter worked half a day, demanded two francs and were
seen no more. A few worked a whole day and then disappeared. In short,
out of the whole 727 only 18 were found at work at the end of the
third day. As a result of this experiment M. Monod concludes that not
more than one able-bodied beggar in 40 is inclined to work even if he
is offered a fair remuneration for his services.

    [19] Cf. _L'Etat Moderne et ses Functions par Paul Leroy Beaulieu_,
    p. 300. See also Mr. J.C. Sherrard's letter to the _Times_ of
    January 8th, 1891, on "Tramps."

If further proof were wanted that vagrancy, as far, at least, as
England and Wales are concerned, is very seldom produced by
destitution, it will be found in the following facts. A comparison
between the number of male and female vagrants arrested in 1888 under
the provisions of the Vagrancy Acts shows that there were nearly four
times more male vagrants proceeded against before the magistrates than
female. The exact numbers are males, 40,672; females, 11,464. Although
the numbers charged vary from year to year, the proportion between
males and females always remains very much the same, and it may
therefore be considered as established that men are from three to four
times more addicted to vagrancy than women. If the charges of
prostitution were excluded (they amounted to 6,486 in 1888), it will
be found that the proportion of male vagrants to female is as eight to
one. Looking at this matter _à priori_, we should expect these figures
to be reversed. In the first place women form a considerably larger
proportion of the community than men, and in the second place there
are not nearly so many openings for females in our present industrial
system. Forming a judgment upon these two sets of facts alone, one
would almost inevitably come to the conclusion that women would be
found in much larger numbers among the vagrant class than men. There
are fewer careers open to them in the industrial world; they are less
fitted to move about from place to place in search of work; the pay
they receive in manufacturing and other establishments is, as a rule,
very poor; but in spite of all these economic disadvantages only one
woman becomes a beggar to every four men, or, if we exclude fallen
women, to every eight men. What does this condition of things serve to
show? It is an incontestable proof that at least three-fourths or,
perhaps, seven-eighths of the begging carried on by men is without
economic excuse. If women who are so heavily handicapped in the race
of life can run it to such a large extent without resorting to
vagrancy, so can men. That men fall so far behind women in this
respect is to be attributed, as we have seen, not to their want of
power, but to their want of will. They possess far more opportunities
of earning a livelihood than their sisters, but, notwithstanding this
advantage, they figure far more prominently in the vagrant list. The
only possible explanation of this state of things is that vagrancy is,
to a very large extent, entirely unconnected with economic conditions;
the position of trade either for good or evil is a very secondary
factor in producing this disease in the body politic; its extirpation
would not he effected by the advent of an economic millennium; its
roots are, as a rule, in the disposition of the individual, and not to
any serious degree in the industrial constitution of society; hence,
the only way to stamp it out is by adopting vigorous and effective
methods of repression.

The British Isles are in a position to adopt these measures with
boldness and confidence, for the Poor Law system provides for all
genuine cases of destitution, and in striking at begging with a heavy
hand, the authorities are at the same time doing much to suppress
other kinds of crime. It has to be remembered that the vagrant is a
dangerous person in more ways that one. The life he leads, his habit
of going from house to house, affords him ample opportunities of
noticing where a robbery may he successfully committed. If he does not
make use of the opportunities himself, he is not at all unwilling to
let others who will into his secret for a small consideration. In low
lodging-houses and public-houses of a similar type beggars and thieves
are accustomed to meet, to fraternise, to exchange notes; the beggar
is able to give the burglar a hint, and many a case of house-breaking
is the outcome of these sinister confabulations. Little do many people
imagine when they are doing a good deed, as they believe, to some
worthless, wandering reprobate, that he is at the same moment looking
around, so as to be able to tell a companion how best the house may be
robbed. It is very seldom thieves break into houses without having
received information beforehand respecting them, and the source of
that information is in many instances the vagrant, who has been
knocking at the door for alms a short time before.

One of the principal reasons which makes beggary such a profitable
occupation, and renders it so hard to repress, is the persistent
belief among great numbers of people that beggars are working men in
distress. That, of course, is the beggar's tale, but it is a baseless
fabrication. It is no more the practice of working-men to go about
begging than it is the practice of the middle-class, but until this
elementary fact can be laid hold of by the public all statutory
enactments for the suppression of mendicity will be but partial in
their operation. Speaking from considerable personal experience, as
well as from statistical facts, one is able to affirm that the great
mass of the working population of these islands have nothing whatever
in common with the indolent vagrant; and it is a libel on the
working-classes to assume that a man is a workman to-day and a beggar
to-morrow. As a matter of fact, beggars are recruited from all ranks
of the community, when they are not actually born to the trade. Of
course, the greatest number is drawn from the working population; it
is they who form the immense bulk of the nation, and it is only
reasonable to suppose that they will contribute to the begging
fraternity in proportion to their numbers. But, just as the proportion
of thieves drawn from the working-classes is not greater than the
proportion drawn from the well-to-do classes, so is it likewise with
beggars. The other classes, in proportion to their numbers, contribute
just about as many beggars to the community as the working population,
and such beggars are generally the most hardened and villainous
specimens of their tribe. With the beggar sprung from the working
population one is sometimes able to do something, but a beggar who has
descended from the higher walks of life is one of the most hopeless,
as well as one of the most corrupt creatures it is possible to
conceive. If the public would only allow themselves to realise that
these are the facts respecting vagrancy, and if they would exercise
their knowledge in consistently refusing help to professional
wanderers, the plague of beggars would soon disappear, to the immense
relief and benefit of everybody, not excluding the beggars themselves.

A persistent refusal to assist beggars, while perfectly justifiable in
these islands, is a method which can hardly be adopted in countries
where there is no efficient and comprehensive Poor Law. In such
countries, for instance, an Austria and Germany, where there is no
proper provision on the part of the State for the feeble, the
helpless, the aged, the maimed, begging, on the part of these
unfortunates, becomes, in many cases, an absolute necessity. Recent
statistics,[20] respecting the working of additions to the Austrian
vagrancy laws passed in 1885, would seem to show that numbers of the
genuine labouring population have been in the habit of resorting to
begging when going from place to place in search of employment. To
meet these cases the Austrian Government, in the year just mentioned,
secured the passing of a law for the establishment of what are called
Naturalverpflegstationen, or refuges for workmen on the tramp. These
shelters or refuges are strictly confined to the use of genuine
labourers; the poor of the surrounding neighbourhood are not allowed
to enter them; nor is any one afforded shelter who cannot show that he
has been at work within the previous three months, or who applies
twice for admission in the course of that time. A man must also
produce his papers and be willing to perform a certain amount of work;
in return for this he is allowed to remain at the shelter for eighteen
hours, but not more, and is informed on his departure where the next
station is situated. He is also told if there is any probability of
getting employment in the district and is given the names of employers
in want of men. These institutions are a combination, of the casual
ward and the labour bureau, differing, however, from the casual ward
in rejecting all mere wanderers and accepting genuine workmen alone.

    [20] Cf. Conrad's _Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften_,
    i. 928.

It in only in some parts of the Austrian Empire that this system has
as yet been put into operation, for the act is of a permissive
character and is mainly worked by the local authorities. In those
districts of lower Austria where it has been tried, it has so far
produced most satisfactory results; begging has decreased according to
the statistics for 1888, more than 60 per cent. in the course of three
years, while in other parts of Austria, where these institutions are
not yet adopted, it has only decreased 25 per cent. The system has as
yet been in operation for too short a period to enable an opinion to
be formed of its eventual success, but so far it promises well and is
an interesting experiment which deserves to be watched. In any case
the experience derived from the working of this law shows that in
Austria, at least, the workman in search of employment has up till
recently been too often confounded with the habitual beggar, a
confusion highly detrimental to the real interests of the State. One
of the main objects of every well ordered Poor Law system should be to
create as wide a gulf as possible between the begging class and the
working-class; it should do everything possible to prevent anything
like a solidarity of interests between these two sections of the
community; it should dissociate the worker from the vagrant in every
conceivable manner, so that the working population cannot possibly
fail to see that the State draws a sharp line of distinction between
them and the refuse of the land. It was a wise remark of Goethe's
that, if you want to improve men you must begin by assuming that they
are a little better than what they seem; and it is a principle which
is applicable to communities and classes as well as to individuals.

Before dismissing the question of the relations between vagrancy and
destitution there is one more point which still requires to be
considered. According to English law, prostitution is set down as a
form of vagrancy, and the number of persons convicted of this offence
is to be found included in the statistics of vagrancy. We shall,
therefore, consider prostitution in this connection as a form of
vagrancy, and proceed to examine the extent to which it is produced by
destitution. If this grave social disorder were entirely due to a want
of the elementary needs of life on the part of the unhappy creatures
who practice it, we should find an utter absence of it in America and
Australia. In these two important portions of the globe, woman's work
is at a premium; it is one of the easiest things imaginable for
females to get employment; no one willing to work need remain idle a
single day, and the bitter cry of householders, in those quarters of
the world, is that domestic servants are not to be had. But, in spite
of the favourable position in which women stand, as far as work is
concerned in America and Australia, what do we find? Do we find that
there is no such thing as a fallen class in Melbourne and New York? On
the contrary, it is often a subject of bitter complaint by American
and Australian citizens that their large towns are just as bad, as far
as sexual morality goes, as the cities of the old world. The higher
economic position of women does not seem to touch the evil either in
the Antipodes or beyond the Atlantic. It exists among communities
where destitution is an almost unmeaning word; it exists in lands
where no woman need be idle, and where she is highly paid for her
services. In the face of such facts it is impossible to believe that
destitution is the only motive which impels a certain class of women
to wander the streets.

What is true with respect to destitution is that it compels women to
remain in the deplorable life they have adopted, but it seldom or
never drives them to take to it. Almost all the best authorities are
agreed upon this point. No one has examined this social sin in all its
bearings with such patience and exhaustiveness as Parent Duchatelet,
and his deliberate opinion, after years of investigation, is that its
origin lies in the character of the individual, in vanity, in
slothfulness, in sex. It does not, however, follow that a person
possessing these characteristics in an abnormal degree is bound to
fall. If such a person is protected by parental care, no evil results
need necessarily ensue. It is when low instincts are combined with a
bad home that the worst is to be feared. This fact was clearly and
emphatically brought to light by the parliamentary inquiry which took
place in France a few years ago. M. Th. Roussel, one of the highest
authorities on the committee, the man, in fact, from whom the inquiry
derived its name, thus sums up some of its results: "However large a
part in the production of prostitution must be allowed to the love of
pleasure and of finery, to a dislike of work and to debased instincts,
the cause which, according to the facts cited, appears everywhere as
the most powerful and the most general, is the want of a home, the
want of maternal care." Here are some of the facts on which M. Roussel
bases his general statement. "At Bordeaux, out of 600 'filles
inscrites' 98 were minors. Of the latter, 44 appear to have fallen
through their own fault alone. The remaining 54 grew up under
abnormal, domestic conditions; 14 were orphans, without father or
mother, 7 had only one parent, 32 had been abandoned or perverted by
their parents."

In England it would be impossible to conduct a parliamentary inquiry
on the lines of the "Enquête Roussel," but it is very probable if such
an inquiry were instituted it would reveal a condition of things very
similar to what exists in France. The scattered and fragmentary
information we do possess points to that conclusion, and the
conclusion, it must be admitted, is not at all a hopeful or comforting
one. Supposing that all the homeless and deserted female children we
have now in our midst were immediately placed under the protection of
the State (as a matter of fact, most of them are), it does not follow
that they will grow up to lead regular lives. According to the
thirty-second report of the Inspector of Reformatory and Industrial
Schools, the authorities are unable to account satisfactorily for the
character of more than four fifths of the inmates of girls' industrial
schools who have left these institutions on an average for two or
three years. That is to say, it is probable that about twenty out of
every hundred girls go to the bad within two or three years of leaving
an industrial school. The proportion of girls discharged from
reformatory schools, whose character is bad within two years of their
discharge, is still larger than in the case of industrial schools.
This is only what might be expected, for it is the worst cases that
are now sent to reformatory schools. "Since the passing of the
Elementary Education Act," said Miss Nicoll of the Girls' Reformatory,
Hampstead, at the Fourth Conference of the National Association of
certified Reformatory and Industrial Schools, "a great change has
gradually been made in the character and age of the inmates of our
reformatories on admission. The School Boards in the country, and more
especially the School Board of London, by enforcing compulsory
attendance of all the children of the poor between the ages of five
and thirteen, have swept into what are termed Truant Schools all the
neglected and uncontrollable children who were formerly sent to
certified industrial schools--these latter being now retained in a
great measure for children who, besides being neglected and beyond the
control of their parents, have either taken their first steps in a
course of crime, or have, by association with vicious companions,
become familiar with it. The industrial schools have thus intercepted
the very class from which our numbers were usually drawn, leaving, as
a rule, for reformatories, girls about fifteen, who, though nominally
under fifteen, are sometimes a good deal older when admitted. Young
persons, as these are termed in the Summary Jurisdiction Acts of 1879,
are of a much more hardened character than before, and in addition to
having been guilty of acts of petty larceny, have frequently been
prostitutes for some time anterior to their admission. This being so,
it can hardly be wondered at if the success of reformatories is not so
marked as it was when they were first instituted."

Seeing that reformatories for girls, on account of the more hardened
character of their inmates on admission, are not so successful as
industrial schools, it is certainly within the mark to say that at
least one-fourth of the cases discharged from these institutions
become failures in the space of two years. If the proportion is so
high at the end of two years, what will it amount to at the end of
five? It is then that the young person enters upon what is _par
excellence_ the criminal age, and when that age is reached, I fear
that the proportion of failures increases considerably. In any case we
have sufficient data to show that the protection of the State, when
extended, as it is in the United Kingdom, to helpless and homeless
girls, does not in many instances suffice to keep them on the road of
virtue. Deep-seated instincts manage to assert themselves in spite of
the most careful training, the most vigilant precautions, and until
the moral development of the population, as a whole, reaches a higher
level, it will be vain to hope too much from the labours of State
institutions, however excellent these institutions may be.

It has, however, to be remembered that the fallen class is not by any
means recruited exclusively from the ranks of the helpless and the
homeless. On the contrary, according to the evidence of the Roussel
commission, nearly one half of the minors (44 out of 98) found in the
"maisons de tolerance" of Bordeaux had no domestic or economic
impediments to encounter. External circumstances, as far as could be
seen, had nothing to do with the unhappy position in which they stood,
and the life they adopted appears to have been entirely of their own
choosing. It is true the Bordeaux statistics only cover a small area,
and are not to be looked upon as in themselves exhaustive, but when
these statistics confirm, as they do, the careful observations of all
unbiassed investigators, we cannot be far wrong in coming to the
conclusion that in France, at least, fifty per cent. of the cases of
prostitution are not originally due to the pressure of want. Since the
introduction of Truant and Industrial Schools in this country for
homeless and neglected girls, it is certain that the proportion of
those who fall from sheer destitution must be extremely small. On the
Continent, where such institutions do not exist on such an extensive
scale, the proportion may be somewhat larger, but in the United
Kingdom it cannot, according to the most liberal computation, exceed
ten per cent. of the cases brought before the magistrates. Many
experienced observers will not allow that it reaches such a high
percentage.

We are now in a position to tabulate the results of our inquiries as
to the part played by destitution in producing prostitution and
vagrancy. The following table represents the proportion of persons
charged under the provisions of the Vagrancy Acts in the year 1888:--

Percentage of beggars,                              45 per cent.
Percentage of prostitutes,                          12    "
Percentage of other offenders,                      43    "
                                                   ---
                                                   100 per cent.

Percentage of beggars destitute from misadventure,   2 per cent.
Percentage of prostitutes,       do.     do.        10    "
Percentage of other offenders,   do.     do.         2    "
                                                   ---
                                                    14 per cent.

It has already been pointed out that persons charged with offences
against the Vagrancy Acts constitute on an average 7 per cent. of the
total annual criminal population. According to the statistics we have
just tabulated, 5 per cent. of these offences are not due to the
pressure of destitution, and only 2 per cent. are to be attributed
to that cause.

Let us now collect the whole of the figures set forth in this chapter,
so that we may be in a position to give an answer to the question with
which we set out, namely, to what extent are theft and vagrancy the
product of destitution?

Proportion of offences against Property and the Vagrancy Acts
  to total number of offences tried in 1888,            15 per cent.
Proportion of offenders against property destitute,      2    "
Proportion of offenders against Vagrancy Acts destitute, 2    "

Adding together the two classes of offenders against Property and the
Vagrancy Acts who, according to our calculations, are destitute when
arrested, we arrive at the fact that they form four per cent. of the
total criminal population. As has already been pointed out, beggars
and thieves are almost the only two sections of the criminal community
likely to be driven to the commission of lawless acts by the pressure
of absolute want. It very seldom happens that murders, for instance,
are perpetrated from this cause; in fact, not one murder in ten is
even committed for the purpose of theft. The vast majority of the
remaining offences against the criminal law are only connected in a
remote degree with the economic condition of the population, and in
hardly any instance can it be said of them, that they are the outcome
of destitution. In order, however, to err on the safe side, let us
assume that one per cent. of offenders, other than vagrants and
thieves, are to be ranked among the destitute. What is the final
result at which we then arrive with respect to the percentage of
persons forced by the action of destitution into the army of crime? In
the case of vagrants and thieves it has just been seen that the
proportion amounted to four per cent.; adding one per cent. to this
proportion, brings up the total of offenders who probably fall into
crime through the pressure of absolute want to five per cent. of the
annual criminal population tried before the courts.

These figures are important; they demonstrate the fact that although
there was not a single destitute person in the whole of England and
Wales, the annual amount of crime would not be thereby appreciably
diminished. At the present day it is a very common practice to pick
out a case of undoubted hardship here and there, and to assume that
such a case is typical of the whole criminal population. It is, of
course, well to point out such cases, and to emphasise them as much as
possible till we reach such a pitch of excellence in our administration
of the law as will render all unmerited hardship exceedingly rare. As
it is, such cases are becoming less frequent year by year, and it is
an entire mistake to suppose, as is too often done, that a serious
amount of the crime perpetrated in England is committed by men and
women who are willing to work but cannot get it to do. An opinion of
that kind has an alarming tendency to encourage crime; it creates a
false sentiment of compassion for the utterly worthless; it prevents
them from being dealt with according to their deserts, and worst of
all, it is apt to make the working population imagine that there is a
community of interest between them and the criminal classes which does
not in reality exist. From the point of view of public policy nothing
can be more pernicious than to propagate such an idea; and no artisan
who values his own dignity should ever allow any man, whether on
platforms or in newspapers, to identify him in any way whatever with
the common criminal.

Before finally leaving the question of the relations between
destitution and crime, we shall now briefly inquire whether anything
further can be accomplished in the matter of raising our legal and
poor law administration to such a pitch of excellence, that not even
five per cent. of our incriminated population can, with justice, bring
forward any economic pretext whatever for violating the law. As far as
legal administration is concerned, it must be remembered that mistakes
will sometimes occur, no matter how numerous the precautions may be
with which justice is surrounded.

To be certain of justice in all circumstances you must have not only
an infallible law, but also an infallible judge and an infallible
method of criminal administration. It is a truism to say that this is
an impossibility, and every now and again society will have to submit
to be shocked by the revelation of a palpable miscarriage of justice.
At the same time it is important to take every possible precaution
against the occurrence of such distressing accidents. This can only
be effected by placing the administration of the law in all its
departments, from the policeman to the Home Secretary, in the hands of
thoroughly competent officials who have not only their heart, but what
is equally important, their head in the work. When this is done, and
if these officials are not embarrassed by public clamour in the
performance of their duties (honest criticism will do them good), all
will have been accomplished which it is possible to get in the way of
effective and enlightened administration of the law.

In the next place it may be possible to mitigate the operation of our
present poor law system in all cases of destitution through
misadventure. Some prominent politicians--and I believe among them Mr.
Morley--appear to be in favour of this course; and at a recent meeting
of the British Association, Professor Alfred Marshall was inclined to
the belief that a much larger discrimination might be allowed than now
exists in the administration of out-door relief in cases of actual
want; and also that separate and graduated workhouses might be
established for the deserving poor. It will be admitted on all hands
that proposals of this character land us on very delicate ground, and
require the most mature consideration. Even now the inmate of a
workhouse is often better supplied with food, clothing, and shelter
than the poor labourer, who has to pay taxes to support him. If the
condition of that inmate is made still more comfortable, will it be
possible to prevent hundreds and thousands of the very poor, who now
keep outside these institutions, from immediately crowding into them
as soon as the slightest economic difficulties arise? Almost all
philanthropic schemes, and especially all such schemes when supported
by the public purse, have a tendency to be administered with more and
more laxity as time goes on; and a scheme of this kind, if carried
into law, would require to be managed with the utmost circumspection
in order to avoid pauperising great masses of the community.

A scheme of this character will, however, have to be tried if the
manifesto of the Executive Council of the Dockers' Union, issued in
September last, is to be acted upon by Trade-Unionists in general.
According to the doctrine laid down in this manifesto, the idea of a
Trade-Union, as a free and open combination, which every workman may
enter, provided he pays his subscription and conforms to the rules, is
an idea which must for the future be abandoned. Henceforth, a
Trade-Union is to be a close corporation to be worked for the benefit
of persons who have succeeded in getting inside it. The Dockers'
Union, to do them justice, see that this policy is bound to increase
the numbers of the destitute, but they propose to remedy this
condition of things by establishing "in each municipality factories
and workshops where all those who cannot get work under ordinary
conditions shall have an opportunity afforded them by the community."
If these State establishments are to be started for the unemployed,
the workers in them must work at something, and it will have to be
something which the unskilled labourer will not require a great deal
of time to learn. What would the dockers say if one of these
establishments was instituted by the municipality for the loading and
unloading of ships? Hardly a Trade-Union Congress meets in which the
complaint is not made that prison labour interferes with free labour;
but what sort of outcry would there be if State labour, on an
extensive scale, were to enter into serious competition with the
individual workman?

These schemes for the establishment of State institutions offering
work to the indigent will never solve the problem of want, and all
attempts that have hitherto been made in that direction have either
ended in failure or met with small success.

The latest of these schemes is a village settlement, which the
authorities in New Zealand started some time ago to meet the case of
the unemployed. The Government, in the first place, spent £16,000 in
making roads and other conveniences for the settlers, and afterwards
advanced £21,000 for building houses, buying implements, and so on.
According to recent advices from New Zealand, only £2000 of this
advance has been paid back, and it is the general feeling of the
colony that the project has proved a failure. These, and other
experiments of a similar character, compel us to recognise the
disagreeable fact that a certain proportion of people who are in the
habit of falling out of work are, as a class, extremely difficult to
put properly on their legs. Failure, for some reason or another,
always dogs their steps, and the more Society does for them, the less
they will be disposed to do anything for themselves.

When such persons are sent to prison on charges of begging, or petty
theft, it very often happens that they are assisted on their release
by a Discharged Prisoners' Aid Society. Tools are given them, work is
found for them, yet they do not thrive. Not infrequently the job is
given up on some frivolous pretext; or if it is a temporary one,
little or no effort is made till it actually comes to an end to look
out for another. It is little wonder that men who live in such a
fashion should occasionally be destitute; the only wonder is that they
manage to pass through life at all. Those men hang upon the skirts of
labour and seek shelter under its banner, but it is only for short and
irregular intervals that they march in the ranks of the actual
workers. The real working man knows such people well, and heartily
despises them.

Would it be a right thing to increase the burdens of the taxpayer by
opening State workshops, even if such a plan were feasible, for men of
the stamp we have just been describing? Decidedly it would not. Yet
these men form a fair proportion of the persons whom we have classed
as driven to crime by economic distress. As far, then, as the criminal
population is concerned, no necessity exists for the organisation of
State factories; and so far as destitution is a factor in the
production of crime, it can be grappled with by other agencies. In
fact, if a graduated system of Unions, with a kind of casual ward,
somewhat after the German Naturalverpflegstationen, could be worked
and if Trade Societies adopted, under proper precautions, the
principle of allowing debilitated members of their trade the
opportunity of doing something at a somewhat reduced rate, it would be
impossible for any well-intentioned man to say that he was driven to
crime from sheer want. It is worth while, on the part of the nation,
to make some small sacrifice to attain an object so supremely
important as this. It is very probable that hardly any sacrifice will
be needed. In any case it would get rid of the uncomfortable feeling
entertained by many that there are occasions when human beings are
punished who ought to be fed. It would completely alienate all
sympathy from crime; it would then be known that criminal offenders
deserved the punishment they received, and justice would be able to
deal with them with a firm and even hand.




CHAPTER V.

POVERTY AND CRIME.


Having analysed the part played by destitution in the production of
crime, the cognate question of the extent to which poverty is
responsible for it will now be considered. If actual destitution does
not count for very much in producing criminals, it may be that poverty
makes up the difference, and that the great bulk of delinquency, if
not the whole of it, arises from the combined operation of these two
economic factors. We have examined one of them, let us now go on to
the other. As this examination will have to be conducted from several
different points of view which, for the sake of clearness, it will be
expedient to consider one by one, I shall begin by inquiring what
light international statistics are capable of throwing on the
relations between poverty and crime. At the outset of this inquiry we
are at once met by the old difficulty respecting the value of
international criminal statistics. The imperfection of those
statistics is a matter it is always important to bear in mind, but in
spite of this circumstance the light which they shed on the problem of
poverty and crime is not to be rejected as worthless.

It has been pointed out in the preceding chapter that the offences
people, in a state of destitution, are most likely to commit are
beggary and theft. In the case of persons who are in a state of
poverty, but not destitute, it may be said that the offence they are
most likely to commit is theft in one or other of its forms. What then
are the international statistics of theft, and what is the relative
wealth of the several countries from which these statistics are drawn?
An answer to these two questions will throw a flood of light upon the
nature of the relations between poverty and crime. If these statistics
show that in those countries where there is most poverty there is also
most theft, the elucidation of such a fact will at once raise a strong
presumption that the connection between poverty and offences against
property is one of cause and effect. If, on the other hand,
international statistics are not at all conclusive upon this important
point, it will show that there are other factors at work besides
poverty in the production of offences against property. With these
preliminary remarks I shall now append a table of the number of
persons tried for theft of all kinds in some of the most important
countries of Europe within the last few years. In no two of these
countries is theft classified in the same manner, but in all of them
it is equally recognised as a crime; if, therefore, all offences
against property, of whatever kind, are put together under the common
heading of "theft," and if the number of cases of thefts (as thus
understood) tried in the various countries of Europe are carefully
tabulated, we possess, in such a table, a criterion wherewith to
judge, in a rough way, the respective position of those countries in
the matter of offences against property.

The appended table is extracted from a larger one, the work of Sig. L.
Bodio, Director-General of Statistics for the kingdom of Italy. The
calculations for every country, except Spain, are based on the census
of 1880 or 1881; the calculations for Spain are based on the census of
1877. In all the countries except Germany and Spain the calculations
are based on an average of five years; for Germany and Spain the
average is only two years.

Italy,    1880-84  Annual trials for theft per 100,000 inhabitants 221
France,   1879-83              do.                do.              121
Belgium,  1876-80              do.                do.              143
Germany,  1882-83              do.                do.              262
England,  1880-84              do.                do.              228
Scotland, 1880-84              do.                do.              289
Ireland,  1880-84              do.                do.              101
Hungary,  1876-80              do.                do.               82
Spain,    1883-84              do.                do.               74

To what conclusions do the statistics contained in this table point?
It is useless burdening this chapter with additional figures to prove
that England and France are the two wealthiest countries in Europe.
The wealth of England, for instance, is perhaps six times the wealth
of Italy; but, notwithstanding this fact, more thefts are annually
committed in England than in Italy. The wealth of France is enormously
superior to the wealth of Ireland, both in quantity and distribution,
but the population of France commits more offences against property
than the Irish. Spain is one of the poorest countries in Europe,
Scotland is one of the richest, but side by side with this inequality
of wealth we see that the Scotch commit, per hundred thousand of the
population, almost four times as many thefts as the Spaniards. With
the exception of Italy it is the poorest countries of Europe that are
the least dishonest, and, according to our table, even the Italians
are not so much addicted to offences against property as the
inhabitants of England.

Perhaps the most instructive figures in these international statistics
are those relating to England and Ireland. The criminal statistics of
the two countries are drawn up on very much the same principles; the
ordinary criminal law is very much the same, and there is very much
the same feeling among the population with respect to ordinary crime;
in fact, with the exception of agrarian offences, the administration
of the law in Ireland is as effective as it is in England. On almost
every point the similarity of the criminal law and its administration
in the two countries almost amounts to identity, and a comparison of
their criminal statistics, in so far as they relate to ordinary
offences against property, reaches a high level of exactitude. What
does such a comparison reveal? It shows that the Irish, with all their
poverty, are not half so much addicted to offences against property as
the English with all their wealth, and it serves to confirm the idea
that the connection between poverty and theft is not so close as is
generally imagined.

International statistics then, as far as they go, point to the
conclusion that it is the growth of wealth, rather than the reverse,
which has a tendency to augment the number of offences against
property, and national statistics, as far as England is concerned,
exhibit a similar result. It is perfectly certain, for instance, that
the mass of the population possessed a greater amount of money, and
were earning on the whole higher wages between 1870-74 than between
1884-88. According to the evidence given before the late Lord
Iddesleigh's Commission on the depression of trade, the prosperity of
the country in the five years ended 1874 was something phenomenal.
This was the opinion of almost every class in the community. Chambers
of commerce, leading manufactures, workmen in the various departments
of industry, all told the same tale of exceptional commercial
prosperity. During this period it was easy for any person with a pair
of hands to get as much as he could do; workmen were at a premium and
wages had risen all round.

But, notwithstanding this state of unwonted prosperity, we shall find
on turning to the statistics of offences against property that a
larger number of persons were convicted of such offences in the five
years ended 1874 than in the five years ended 1888. It hardly needs to
be stated that the five years ended 1888 were years of considerable
depression, some of them were years in which there was a good deal of
distress, and in none of them was the bulk of the population as well
off as in the preceding period. It is, therefore, plain that an
increase in the wealth of a country is not necessarily followed by a
decrease in the amount of crimes against property; that, in fact, the
growth of national and individual wealth, unless it is accompanied by
a corresponding development of ethical ideals, is apt to foster
criminal instincts instead of repressing them.

If we look at crime in general, instead of that particular form of it
which consists in offences against property, it will likewise become
apparent that it is not so closely connected with poverty as is
generally believed. The accuracy of Indian criminal statistics is a
matter that has already been pointed out. When these statistics are
placed side by side with our own what do we find? According to the
returns for the two countries in the year 1888, it comes out that in
England one person was proceeded against criminally to every forty-two
of the population, while in India only one person was proceeded
against to every 195. In other words, official statistics show that
the people of England are between four and five times more addicted to
crime than the people of India. On the supposition that poverty is the
parent of crime, the population of India should be one of the most
lawless in the world, for it is undoubtedly one of the very poorest.
The reverse, however, is the case, and India is justly celebrated for
the singularly law-abiding character of its inhabitants. In reply to
this it may be said that India differs so widely from England in race,
manners, religion and social organisation, that all these divergencies
must be taken into account when comparing the position of the two
countries with respect to crime. A contention of this kind is in
perfect harmony with what is here advanced. It is, in fact, a part of
our case that crime is either produced or checked by a great many
causes besides economic conditions. The comparison we are now making
between the criminal statistics of England and India is intended to
show that economic conditions alone will not satisfactorily explain
the genesis of crime. If such were the case India would have a blacker
criminal record than England, for it has a lower material standard of
life; but as India is able to exhibit a fairer record, in spite of its
economic disadvantages, we are compelled to come to the conclusion
that poverty is not the only factor in the production of crime.

A further illustration of the same fact will be found on examining the
Prison Statistics of the United States. According to an instructive
paper recently read by Mr. Roland P. Falkner before the American
Statistical Association, the foreign born population in America is, on
the whole, less inclined to commit crime than the native born
American. In some of the States--Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, and
California--"the foreign born," says Mr. Falkner, "make a worse
showing than the native. In a great number of cases, notably
Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee, we notice hardly any
difference. Elsewhere, the showing is decidedly in favour of the
foreign born, and nowhere more strongly than in Wisconsin and
Minnesota." It is perfectly certain that the foreign born population
of the United States is not, as a rule, so well-off economically as
the native born citizen. The vast proportion of the emigrant
population is composed of poor people seeking to better their
condition, and it is well known that a largo percentage of the hard,
manual work done in America is performed by those men. The economic
condition of the average native born American is superior to the
economic condition of the average emigrant; but the native American,
notwithstanding his economic superiority, cuts a worse figure in the
statistics of crime. This is a state of things the Americans
themselves are just beginning to perceive, and it cannot fail to make
them uneasy as to the efficacy of some of their erratic methods of
punishing crime. It has, until recently, been the habit of American
statisticians to compare the foreign born population with the whole of
the native population with respect to crime. The outcome of this
method of comparison was taken all round favourable to the born
Americans, and for many years people satisfied themselves with the
belief that a high percentage of crime in the United States was due to
the foreign element in the community. It is now seen that this method
of calculation is defective and false. A comparatively small number of
foreigners emigrate to the United States under eighteen years of age;
in order, therefore, to make the comparison between natives and
foreigners accurate, it must be made with foreigners over eighteen and
Americans over eighteen, for it is after persons pass that age that
they are most prone to commit crime. The result of this new and more
correct method of comparison has been to show that the native American
element, that is to say, the element best situated economically, is
also the element which perpetrates most crimes. Such a result is only
another illustration of the truth that an advanced state of economic
well-being is not necessarily accompanied by greater immunity from
crime.

A further illustration of this significant truth is to be witnessed in
the Antipodes. In no quarter of the world is there such wide-spread
prosperity as exists in the colony of Victoria. All writers and
travellers are unanimous upon this point. Nowhere in the world is
there less economic excuse for the perpetration of crime. Work of one
kind or another can almost always be had in that favoured portion of
the globe.

Even in the worst of times, if men are willing to go "up country," as
it is called, occupation of some sort is certain to be found, and
trade depression never reaches the acute point which it sometimes does
at home.

Nevertheless, on examining the criminal statistics of the colony of
Victoria, what do we find? According to the returns for 1887, one
arrest on a charge of crime was made in every 30 of the population,
and on looking down the list of offences for which these arrests were
made, it will be seen that Victoria, notwithstanding her
widely-diffused material well-being, is just as much addicted to
crimes against person and property as some of the poor and squalid
States of Europe. It may be said in extenuation of this condition of
things, that Victoria contains a larger grown-up population, and
therefore a larger percentage of persons in a position to commit crime
than is to be found in older countries. This is, to a certain extent,
true, but the difference is not so great as might at first sight be
supposed. Assuming that the criminal age lies between 15 and 60, we
find that in the seven Australasian colonies 563 persons out of every
1,000 are alive between these two ages. In Great Britain and Ireland
559 persons per 1,000 are alive between 15 and 60. According to these
figures the difference between the population within the criminal age
in the colony, as compared with the mother country, is very small, and
is quite insufficient to account for the relatively high percentage of
crime exhibited by the Victorian criminal statistics.

All these considerations force us back to the conclusion that an
abundant measure of material well-being has a much smaller influence
in diminishing crime than is usually supposed, and compels us to admit
that much crime would still exist even if the world were turned into a
paradise of material prosperity tomorrow.

In further confirmation of this conclusion let us glance for a moment
at another aspect of the relations between poverty and crime. It is
generally calculated that the working class population of England and
Wales form from 90 to 95 per cent. of the total population of the
country. According to the investigations of Mr. Charles Booth, as
contained in his work on East London, the working classes constitute
about 92 per cent. in the districts be had under examination, the
remaining 8 per cent. being made up of the lower and upper middle
classes. Let us therefore assume that 10 per cent. of the population
consists of the middle and upper classes, and that the other 90 per
cent. of the community is composed of working people. Many
statisticians will not admit that the middle and upper classes form 10
per cent. of the nation, and assert that 5 per cent. is nearer the
mark. This is also my own view, but for the purposes of this inquiry
we shall assume that it is 10 per cent.

How large a proportion of the criminal population is made up of the
middle and upper classes? An answer to this question would at once
show the exact relation between poverty and crime. If it could be
shown that the well-to-do classes, in proportion to their numbers, are
just as much addicted to the commission of criminal acts as the poorer
people, it would demonstrate that crime prevailed to an equal extent
among all sections of the community, and was not the work of one class
alone. Unfortunately, such statistics are not to be had. But, as the
facts are not to be got at directly, this does not mean to say that it
is impossible to catch a glimpse of what they are. This may be done in
the following manner:--According to the report of the Prison
Commissioners, between 5 and 6 per cent. of the persons committed to
gaol during the year ended March, 1890 (omitting court-martial cases),
were debtors and civil process cases. Now, it may be taken as certain
that in a very small proportion of these cases were the prisoners
working people. Nearly all these offenders are to be considered as
belonging to the well-to-do classes. Yet we see that they form 5 per
cent. of the criminal population, and it has to be remembered that the
fraudulent debtor is just as much a criminal, nay, even a worse
criminal in many instances than the thief who snatches a purse. In
addition to this 5 per cent. there is at least 3 per cent. of the
ordinary criminal population belonging to the higher ranks of life. At
the lowest estimate we have 6 per cent. of the criminal population
springing from the midst of the well-to-do, and if all cases of
drunkenness and assault were punished with imprisonment instead of a
fine, it would be found that the well-to-do showed just as badly in
the statistics of crime as their poorer neighbours.

In making this statement with respect to fines, I do not wish it to be
understood that all cases of drunkenness and assault should be
followed by imprisonment. On the contrary, it is a great mistake to
send anyone to gaol if it can possibly be avoided, and imprisonment
should never be resorted to so long as any other form of punishment
will serve the purpose. What is here stated is merely meant to bring
out the fact that the proportion of well-to-do among the prison
population does not accurately represent the proportion of offences
committed by that class; and it does not represent it for the simple
reason that the well-to-do have facilities for escaping imprisonment
which the ill-to-do have not. When a man with a certain command of
means is involved in criminal proceedings, he has always the
assistance of experienced counsel to defend him, he is always able to
secure the attendance of witnesses,[21] if he has any, and should the
offence be of a nature that a fine will condone, he is always able to
escape imprisonment by paying it. It very often happens that poor
people are unable to secure these advantages in a court of justice,
and prison statistics of the different classes, even if we had them,
would, for the reasons we have just mentioned, always give the working
classes more than their fair share of offenders.

    [21] A case was tried in London a short time ago which illustrates
    the difficulties in the way of poor people, so far as the
    attendance of witnesses is concerned. In this case the witness
    appeared five successive days in court waiting for the trial to
    come on. Not being paid by the defendant, this witness was
    unable to appear the sixth day. On that day the case was at
    last called, the prisoner had now no witness and was, of course,
    convicted.

It has always to be borne in mind in making calculations respecting
the proportion of criminal offenders among the various sections of the
community that there is a population of habitual criminals which forms
a class by itself. Habitual criminals are not to be confounded with
the working or any other class; they are a set of persons who make
crime the object and business of their lives; to commit crime is their
trade; they deliberately scoff at honest ways of earning a living, and
must accordingly be looked upon as a class of a separate and distinct
character from the rest of the community. According to police
estimates this class consists of between 50,000 and 60,000 persons in
England and Wales. Notwithstanding the smallness of its numbers, this
criminal population contributes a proportion amounting to fully 12 per
cent. to the local and convict prisons of England. As this percentage
of the prison population is recruited from wholly criminal ground, it
is important to place it in a distinct and separate category when
forming an estimate of the criminal tendencies of the several branches
of the population. This is what has been done in the subjoined table.
This table will accordingly show, first the proportion of the poorer
class to the total population, and next their proportion to the prison
population. It will do the same for the well-to-do class, and will
finally give the percentage of the criminal class in the local and
convict prisons:--

Proportion of working class to total population  90 p. ct.
Proportion, of prisoners from this class         82 p. ct.
Proportion of well-to-do to population           10 p. ct.
Proportion of prisoners from this class           6 p. ct.
Numbers of criminal class, say 60,000
Proportion of prisoners from this class          12 p. ct.

According to these figures, the well-to-do contribute less than their
proper proportion to the prison population. This arises, as has
already been stated, from the fact that this class has so many more
facilities for escaping the penalty of imprisonment; the difference
would be adjusted if the cases tried before the criminal courts were
taken as a standard. An examination of these cases would undoubtedly
show that each class was represented in proportion to its numbers.

According to Garofalo, one of the most learned of Italian jurists, the
poor people in Italy commit fewer offences against property, in
proportion to their numbers, than the well-to-do, while in Prussia
persons engaged in the liberal professions contribute twice their
proper share to the criminal population. A somewhat similar state of
things exists in France; there the number of persons engaged in the
liberal professions forms four per cent. of the population; but,
according to the investigations of Ferri, in his striking little book,
"Socialismo e Criminalita," the liberal professions were responsible
for no less than seven per cent. of the murders perpetrated in France
in 1879.

What is the period of the year we should expect most crime to be
committed if poverty is at the root of it? In this country, at least,
it is very well known that the labouring classes are apt to suffer
most in the depth of winter, and the depth of winter may be said to
correspond with the months of December, January, and February. It is
in these months that all outdoor occupations come to a comparative
standstill; it is then that the poorest section of the population--the
men without a trade, the men who live by mere manual labour--are
reduced to the greatest straits. In the winter months some of these
men have to pass through a period of real hardship; the state of the
weather often puts an absolute stop to all outdoor occupations, and
when this is the case, it takes an outdoor labourer all his might to
provide the barest necessaries for his home. In addition to this
difficulty, which lies in the nature of his calling, a labourer finds
the expense of living a good deal higher in the depth of winter. He
has to burn more fuel, he has to supply his children with warmer
clothing, in a variety of ways his expenses increase, notwithstanding
the most rigid economy. Winter is not only a harder season for the
outdoor labourer, it is a time of greater economic trial for the whole
working-class population. This, I think, is a statement which will be
universally admitted.

On the assumption that poverty is the principal source of crime we
ought to have a much larger prison population in the depth of winter
than at any other period of the year. The prison statistics for
December, January, and February--the three most inclement months, the
three months when expenses are greatest and work scarcest--should be
the highest in the whole year. As a matter of fact, it is during these
three months that there are fewest people in prison. According to an
excellent return, issued for the first time by the Prison Commissioners
in their thirteenth report, it appears that there was a considerably
smaller number of prisoners in the local prisons of England and Wales
in the winter months--December, January and February, 1889-90--than at
any other season of the year.[22] And this is not an isolated fact. A
glance at the criminal returns for a series of years will at once show
that crime is highest in summer and autumn--a time when occupation of
all kinds, and especially occupation for the poorest members of the
community, is most easily obtained--and lowest in winter and spring,
when economic conditions are most adverse.[23]

    [22] See Appendix, iii.

    [23] Scotch statistics are in harmony with English. For the year
    ended March, 1890, the number of ordinary prisoners in custody in
    Scotland was lowest in December, January and February. It was
    highest in July, August, September. Crime was also highest when
    pauperism was lowest. See 12th Report of Scottish Prison
    Commissioners.

All these facts, instead of pointing to poverty as the main cause of
crime, point the other way. It is a curious sign of the times that
this statement should meet with so much incredulity. It has been
reserved for this generation to propagate the absurdity that the want
of money is the root of all evil; all the wisest teachers of mankind
have hitherto been disposed to think differently, and criminal
statistics are far from demonstrating that they are wrong. In the
laudable efforts which are now being made, and which ought to be made
to heighten the material well-being of the community, it is a mistake
to assume, as is too often done, that mere material prosperity, even
if spread over the whole population, will ever succeed in banishing
crime. A mere increase of material prosperity generates as many evils
as it destroys; it may diminish offences against property, but it
augments offences against the person, and multiplies drunkenness to an
alarming extent. While it is an undoubted fact that material
wretchedness has a debasing effect both morally and physically, it is
also equally true that the same results are sometimes found to flow
from an increase of economic well-being. An interesting proof of this
is to be found in the recent investigations of M. Chopinet, a French
military surgeon, respecting the stature of the population in the
central Pyrenees. M. Chopinet, after a careful examination of the
conscript registers from 1873 to 1888, arrives at the following
conclusions as to what determines the physical condition of the
population. After discussing the cosmical influences and the evil
effects of poverty and bad hygienic arrangements on the people, he
proceeds to point out that moral corruption arising from material
prosperity is also a powerful factor in producing physical degeneracy.
He singles out one canton--the canton of Luchon--as being the victim
of its own prosperity. In this canton, he says, that the old
simplicity of life has departed, in consequence of its prodigious
prosperity. "Vices formerly unknown have penetrated into the country;
the frequenting of public houses and the habit of keeping late hours
have taken the place of the open air sports which used to be the
favoured method of enjoyment. Illegitimate births, formerly very rare,
have multiplied, syphilis even has spread among the young. Food of a
less substantial character has superseded the diet of former times,
and, in short, alcoholism, precocious debauchery, and syphilis have
come like so many plagues to arrest the development of the youth and
seriously debilitate the population."[24]

    [24] _Revue Scientifique_, September 13, 1890.

Facts such as these should serve to remind us that the growth of
wealth may be accompanied, and is accompanied, by degeneracy of the
worst character unless there is a corresponding growth of the moral
sentiments of the community. "The perfection of man," says M. de
Laveleye, "consists in the full development of all his forces,
physical as well as intellectual, and of all his sentiments; in the
feeling of affection for the family and humanity; in a feeling for the
beautiful in nature and art." It is in proportion as men strive after
this ideal that crime will decay, and material prosperity only becomes
a good when it is used as a means to this supreme end. Otherwise, the
mere growth of wealth, be it ever so widely diffused, will deprave the
world instead of elevating it. The mere possession of wealth is not a
moralising agent; as Professor Marshall[25] truly tells us, "Money is
general purchasing power, and is sought as a means to all kinds of
ends, high as well as low, spiritual as well as material." According
to this definition, money may as readily become a source of mischief
as an instrument for good; its wider diffusion among the community
has, therefore, a mixed effect, and it works for evil or for good,
according to the character of the individual. It is only when the
character is disciplined by the habitual exercise of self-restraint,
and ennobled by a generous devotion to the higher aims of life, that
money becomes a real blessing to its possessor. If, on the other hand,
money has merely the effect of making the well-to-do rich, and the
poor well-to-do, it will never diminish crime; it will merely cause
crime to modify its present forms. Such, at least, is the conclusion
to which a consideration of the contents of this chapter would seem to
lead.

    [25] _Principles of Economics_, p. 81.




CHAPTER VI.

CRIME IN RELATION TO SEX AND AGE.


In the present chapter we shall proceed to discuss the effect exercised
by two characteristics of a distinctly personal nature in the production
of crime, namely, age and sex.

As sex is the most fundamental of all human distinctions we shall
begin by considering the part it plays among criminal phenomena.
According to the judicial statistics of all civilised peoples, women
are less addicted to crime than men, and boys are more addicted to
crime than girls. Among most European peoples between five and six
males are tried for offences against the law to every one female. In
the southern countries of Europe, females form a smaller proportion of
the criminal population than in the northern. This circumstance may be
accounted for in several ways. In the first place, it may be the case
that women in the south of Europe are better morally than in the
north; it may be that the social conditions of their existence shield
them from crime; or it may be that the crimes men are most prone to
commit in the south are of such a nature that women are more or less
incapable of perpetrating them. It is perfectly well known that in the
south of Europe women lead more secluded lives than is the case in the
north; they are much less immersed in the whirl and movement of life;
it is not surprising, therefore, to find that they are less addicted
to crime. Nor is this all. The crimes committed in the South consist
to a large extent of offences against the person; physical weakness in
a multitude of cases prevents women from committing such crimes. In
the North, on the other hand, a large proportion of crimes are in the
nature of thefts and offences against property. Most of these crimes
women can commit with comparative ease; the result is that they form a
larger proportion of the criminal population. Assaults are offences
women are less capable of committing than men; hence, if we find that
the crime of a country consists largely of personal violence, we shall
also find that the percentage of female criminals will be relatively
small. In Italy, where offences against the person are so prevalent,
females only form about nine per cent. of the criminal population; in
England, where personal violence is seldom resorted to, females form
between 17 and 18 per cent. of the persons proceeded against, and
about 15 per cent. of the numbers convicted.

A consideration of these circumstances tends to show that although
southern women commit fewer crimes in proportion to men than northern
women, this fact is partly owing to the character of the crime. But it
is also owing to more secluded habits of life, and to the freedom from
moral contamination of a criminal nature which these habits secure.

Proceeding from quantity to quality we find that although females
commit much fewer crimes in proportion than males, the offences they
do commit are frequently of a more serious nature than the crimes to
which men are addicted. According to the investigations of Guerry and
Quetelet, women in France commit more crimes of infanticide, abortion,
poisoning, and domestic theft than men. They are addicted equally with
men to the perpetration of parricide, and are more frequently
convicted than men for the ill-treatment of children. English criminal
statistics also show that the proportion of women to men rises with
the seriousness of the offence. The proportion of women to men
summarily proceeded against is 17 per cent., the proportion proceeded
against for murder and attempts to murder is as high as 36 per cent.
Women are also more hardened criminals than men. According to the
statistics of English prisons, women who have been once convicted are
much more likely to be reconvicted than men,[26] and the prison
returns of Continental countries tell the same tale.

    [26] In 1889-90 the recommitted males were 44.3 per cent. of the
    total number of males committed (exclusive of debtors and naval
    and military offenders); the recommitted females 65.8 per cent.
    of the total number of females committed exclusive of debtors.

The facts relating to female crime having been stated, it will now be
our business to inquire why women, on the whole, commit fewer crimes
than men. The most obvious answer is that they are better morally. The
care and nurture of children has been their lot in life for untold
centuries; the duties of maternity have perpetually kept alive a
certain number of unselfish instincts; those instincts have become
part and parcel of woman's natural inheritance, and, as a result of
possessing them to a larger extent than man, she is less disposed to
crime. It is very probable that there is an element of truth in the
idea that the care of offspring has had a moralising effect upon
women, and that this effect has acquired the power of a hereditary
characteristic; at the same time, it must be remembered that other
causes are also in operation which prevent women figuring as largely
in criminal returns as men.

Among the most prominent of these causes is the want of physical
power. In all crimes requiring a certain amount of brute strength,
such as burglary, robbery with violence, and so on, the proportion of
women to men is small. A woman very rarely possesses the animal force
requisite for the perpetration of crimes accompanied with much
personal violence. But where the element of personal violence does not
come conspicuously to the front the proportion of female criminals to
male immediately rises, and in such crimes as poisoning, child murder,
abortion, domestic theft, women are more criminally disposed than men.
Undoubtedly the lack of power has as much to do with keeping down
female crime as the want of will. This is especially manifest in the
crime of infanticide. For the perpetration of this crime women possess
the power, and the vast number of women convicted of this offence in
proportion to men is ample proof that they often possess the will. Of
course the temptation to women to commit this kind of crime is often
extreme; it is the product, in many instances, of an overwhelming
sense of shame; and the perpetrators of infanticide are often far from
being the most debased of their sex. Still, the prevalence of
infanticide among women is an evidence that, where the temptation is
strong and the power sufficient, women are just as criminally inclined
as men.

It has also to be borne in mind that women are very frequently the
instigators of crime and escape punishment because they are not
actually engaged in its commission. In almost all cases where
robberies are committed by a pack of thieves, a part of the
preparatory arrangements is entrusted to women, and women lend a
helping hand in disposing of the spoil. It is the men, as a rule, who
receive all the punishment, but the guilt of both sexes is very much
the same. In many cases of forgery and fraudulent bankruptcy among the
well-to-do classes, for which men only are punished, the guilt of
women is equally great. Household extravagance, extravagance in dress,
the mad ambition of many English women to live in what they call
"better style" than their neighbours sends not a few men to penal
servitude. The proportion of female crime in a community is also to a
very considerable extent determined by the social condition of women.
In all countries where social habits and customs constrain women to
lead retiring and secluded lives the number of female criminals
descends to a minimum. The small amount of female crime in Greece[27]
is an instance of this law. On the other hand, in all countries where
women are accustomed to share largely the active work of life with
men, female crime has a distinct tendency to reach its maximum. An
instance of this is the high percentage of female crime in Scotland.
According to the Judicial Statistics for the year 1888 no less than 37
per cent. of the cases tried before the Scotch courts consisted of
offences committed by women. It is true only 11 per cent. of these
offences were of a serious nature--the remainder being more or less
trivial, but, even after taking this circumstance into consideration,
the unwelcome fact remains that Scotch women commit a higher
percentage of crimes in proportion to men than the female population
of any other country in Europe. The proportion of English female
offenders to male is not half so high; it was only 17 per cent. in
1888, and is showing a tendency to decrease, being as high as 20 per
cent. for the twenty years ended 1876. The proportion of female
offenders in Scotland to the total criminal population is moving in an
opposite direction. The late Professor Leone Levi, in a paper read
before the Statistical Society in 1880, stated that Scotch women
formed 27 per cent. of the persons tried before the criminal courts;
they now form 37 per cent., a most alarming rate of increase.

    [27] According to prison statistics of the Greek Government for
    1889, out of a total prison population of 5,023 only 50 were
    women. See _Revista de Discipline Carcerarie_, Nov. 30th, 1890,
    page 667.

It hardly admits of doubt that the high ratio of female crime in
Scotland is to be attributed to the social status of women. In no
other country of Europe do women perform so much heavy manual work;
working in the fields and factories along with men; depending little
upon men for their subsistence; in all economic matters leading what
is called a more emancipated life than women do elsewhere; in short,
resembling man in their social activities, they also resemble him in
criminal proclivities. Scotch criminal statistics are thus a striking
confirmation of the general law revealed by the study of criminal
statistics as a whole; namely, that the more women are driven to enter
upon the economic struggle for life the more criminal they will
become. This is not a very consoling outlook for the future of
society. It is not consoling, for the simple reason that the whole
drift of opinion at the present time is in the direction of opening
out industrial and public life to women to the utmost extent possible.
In so far as public opinion is favouring the growth of female
political leagues and other female organisations of a distinctly
militant character, it is undoubtedly tending on the whole to lower
the moral nature of women. The combative attitude required to be
maintained by all members of such organisations is injurious to the
higher instincts of women, and in numbers of cases must affect their
moral tone. The amount of mischief done by these public organisations
for purposes of political combat is not confined to women alone. The
overwhelming influence exercised by mothers on the minds of children
is notorious; and that influence is not so likely to be for good where
the mother's mind is contaminated by a knowledge of, and sometimes by
practising, the shady tricks of electioneering.

The present tendency to create a greater number of openings in trade
and industry for women is not to be dismissed as pernicious because of
its evil effect in multiplying female crime. After all, an enlarged
industrial career for women may be the lesser of two evils. According
to the present industrial constitution of society a very large number
of females must earn a living in the sweat of their brow, and until
some higher social development supersedes the existing order of things
it is only right that as wide a career as possible should be opened
out for the activities of women who must work to live. At the same
time it would be an infinitely superior state of things if society did
not require women's work beyond the confines of the home and the
primary school. In these two spheres there is ample occupation of the
very highest character for the energies of women; in them their work
is immeasurably superior to men's; and it is because the work required
in the home and the school is at the present moment so improperly
performed that our existing civilisation is such a hot-bed of physical
degeneracy, pauperism, and crime. One thing at least is certain, that
crime will never permanently decrease till the material conditions of
existence are such that women will not be called upon to fight the
battle of life as men are, but will be able to concentrate their
influence on the nurture and education of the young, after having
themselves been educated mainly with a view to that great end.
European society at the present moment is moving away from this ideal
of woman's functions in the world; she is getting to be regarded in
the light of a mere intellectual or industrial unit; and the flower of
womankind is being more and more drafted into commercial and other
enterprises. Some affect to look upon this condition, of things as
being in the line of progress; it may be, and to all appearance is, in
the line of material necessity, but it is unquestionably opposed to
the moral interests of the community. These interests demand that
women should not be debased, as criminal statistics prove that they
are by active participation in modern industrialism; they demand that
the all-important duties of motherhood should be in the hands of
persons capable of fulfilling them worthily, and not in the hands of
persons whose previous occupations have often rendered them unfit for
being a centre of grace and purity in the home. It cannot be too
emphatically insisted on that the home is the great school for the
formation of character among the young, and it is on character that
conduct depends. In proportion as this school of character is
improved, in the same proportion will crime decrease. But how is it to
be improved when the tendencies of industrialism are to degrade the
women who stand by nature at the head of it? Indifferent mothers
cannot make children good citizens; and the present course of things
industrial is slowly but surely tending to debase the fountain head of
the race. At the International Conference concerning the regulation of
labour held recently at Berlin, M. Jules Simon, at the close of an
excellent speech to the delegates, pointed out the remedy for the
present condition of things. "You will pardon me," he said, "for
concluding my observations with a personal remark, which is perhaps
authorised by a past entirely consecrated to a defence of the cause
which brings us here. The object we are aiming at is moral as well as
material; it is not only in the physical interests of the human race
that we are endeavouring to rescue children, youths, and women from
excessive toil; we are also labouring to restore woman to the home,
the child to its mother, for it is from her only that those lessons of
affection and respect which make the good citizen can be learned. We
wish to call a halt in the path of demoralisation down which the
loosening of the family tie is leading the human mind."

Passing from the question of sex and crime we shall now consider the
proportions which crime bears to age. According to the calculations of
the late Mr. Clay, chaplain of Preston prison, the practice of
dishonesty among persons, who afterwards find their way into prisons,
begins at a very early age. In a communication addressed to Lord
Shaftesbury, in 1853, he said that 58 per cent. of criminals were
dishonest under 15 years of age; 14 per cent. became dishonest between
15 and 16; 8 per cent. became dishonest between 17 and 19; 20 per
cent. became dishonest under 20.

I have little doubt that these proportions are still in the main
correct, and that the criminal instinct begins to show itself at a
very early period in life. In Staffordshire "it is an ascertained
fact, that there is scarcely an habitual criminal in the county who
has not been imprisoned as a child."[28] But it is after the age of
twenty has been reached that the criminality of a people attains its
highest point. A glance at the subjoined table will make this clear:--

Population of England and    |   Prisoners in Local Gaols
    Wales in 1871--          |         in 1888--

Under 5              13.52   |   Under 12                 0.1
5 and under 15       22.58   |   12 and under 16          2.8
15   "      20        9.59   |   16    "      21         16.1
20   "      30       16.66   |   21    "      30         30.2
30   "      40       12.80   |   30    "      40         24.3
40   "      50       10.05   |   40    "      50         14.7
50   "      60        7.32   |   50    "      60          6.4
60 and upwards        7.48   |   60 and upwards           5.4

    [28] _Reformatory and Refuge Journal_, July, 1890.

These figures show that in proportion to the population, crime is, as
we should expect, at its lowest level from infancy till the age of
sixteen. From that age it goes on steadily increasing in volume till
it reaches a maximum between thirty and forty. After forty has been
passed the criminal population begins rapidly to descend, but never
touches the same low point in old age as in early youth.

Females do not enter upon a criminal career so early in life as
males;[29] in the year 1888, while 20 per cent. of the _male_
population of our local prisons in England and Wales were under 21,
only 12 per cent. of the _female_ prison population were under that
age. On the other hand, women between 21 and 50, form a larger
proportion of the female prison population, than men between the same
ages do of the male prison population. The criminal age among women is
later in its commencement, and earlier in coming to a close than in
the case of men. It is later in commencing because of the greater care
and watchfulness exercised over girls than boys; but it is more
persistent while it lasts, because a plunge into crime is a more
irreparable thing in a woman than in a man. A woman's past has a far
worse effect on her future than a man's. She incurs a far graver
degree of odium from her own sex; it is much more difficult for her to
get into the way of earning an honest livelihood, and a woman who has
once been shut up within bolts and bars is much more likely to be
irretrievably lost than a man. If it is important to keep men as much
as possible out of prison, it is doubly necessary to keep out women;
but it is, at the same time, a much harder thing to accomplish. This
arises from the fact that the great bulk of female offenders enter the
criminal arena after the age of twenty-one, and can only be dealt with
by a sentence of imprisonment. If females began crime at an earlier
period of life, it would be possible to send them to Reformatories or
Industrial Schools, and a fair hope of ultimately saving them would
still remain; but as this is impossible with grown-up persons, prison
is the only alternative, and it is after imprisonment is over that a
woman begins to recognise the terrible social penalties it has
involved.

    [29] Ages and proportion per cent. of males and females committed
    in 1889-90.

         Ages                       Males        Females

    Under 12 years                    0.2            0.0
    12 years and under 16             3.1            1.1
    16 years and under 21            17.5           10.7
    21 years and under 30            28.4           31.4
    30 years and under 40            23.9           28.6
    40 years and under 50            14.2           17.5
    50 years and under 60             6.4            6.8
    60 years and above                6.2            3.8
    Age not ascertained               0.1            0.1

The proportion of offenders under sixteen years of age to the total
local prison population of England and Wales, has decreased in a
remarkable way within the last twenty or thirty years. The proportion
of offenders under sixteen committed to prison between 1857-66,
amounted to six and three-quarters per cent. of the prison population,
and if we go back behind that period it was higher still. In fact,
during the first quarter of the present century, the extent and
ramifications of juvenile crime had almost reduced statesmen to
despair. But the spread of the Reformatory system and the introduction
more recently of Industrial and Truant Schools for children who have
just drifted, or are fast drifting, into criminal courses, has had a
remarkable effect in diminishing the juvenile population of our
prisons. At the present time the proportion of juveniles under sixteen
to the rest of the local prison population is only a little over two
per cent. and it is not likely that it will ever reach a higher
figure. It might easily be reduced almost to zero if children destined
for Reformatories were sent off to these institutions at once, instead
of being detained for a month or so in prison till a suitable school
is found for them. Some persons object to the idea of sending children
to Reformatories at once, on the ground that to abolish the terror of
imprisonment from the youthful mind would embolden the juvenile
inclined to crime and lead him more readily to commit it. Others
object on the ground that it is only right the child should be
punished for his offence. In answer to the last objection, it may
pertinently be said that a sentence of three or four years to a
Reformatory is surely sufficient punishment for offences usually
committed by small boys. With regard to the first objection, our own
experience is that the ordinary juvenile is much more afraid of the
policeman than of the prison, and that the fear of being caught would
operate just as strongly upon him if he were sent straight to the
Reformatory as it does now. The evils connected with the present
system of sending children destined for Reformatories to prison are of
two kinds. At the present time many magistrates will not send children
to Reformatories who sorely need the restraints of such an
institution, because they know it involves a period of preliminary
imprisonment before they can get there. Secondly, it enables a lad to
know what the inside of a prison really is. On these two points let me
quote the words of an experienced magistrate. "I have many times,"
said Mr. Whitwell, at the fourth Reformatory Conference, "when having
to deal with young people, felt it very desirable to send them to a
Reformatory, but have shrunk from it because we are obliged to send
them to prison first. I think it should be left to the discretion of
the magistrates and not made compulsory. I feel very strongly indeed
that it is most desirable to keep the child from knowing what the
inside of a prison is. Let them think it something awful to look
forward to. _When they have been in the prison they are of opinion
that it is not such a very bad place after all, and they are not
afraid of going there again_; but if they are sent to a Reformatory
and told that they will be sent to a prison if they do not reform,
they will think it an awful place." These are wise words. It is
impossible to make imprisonment such a severe discipline for children
as it is for grown-up men and women, and as it is not so severe,
children leave our gaols with a false impression on their minds. The
terror of being imprisoned has, to a large extent, departed; they
think they know the worst and cease to be much afraid of what the law
can do. Hence the fact that society has less chance of reclaiming a
child who has been imprisoned than it has of reclaiming one who has
not undergone that form of punishment although he has committed
precisely the same offence. In England, many authorities on
Reformatory Schools are strongly in favour of retaining preliminary
imprisonment for Reformatory children; in Scotland, experienced
opinion is decisively on the other side. On this point, the Scotch are
undoubtedly in the right. The working of prison systems, whether at
home or abroad, teaches us that any person, be he child or man, who
has once been in prison, is much more likely to come back than a
person who, for a similar offence, has received punishment in a
different form. The application of this principle to the case of
Reformatory children decisively settles the matter in favour of
sending such children to Reformatories at once. If this simple reform
were effected, the child population of our prisons would almost cease
to exist. In the year 1888, this population amounted to 239 for
England and Wales under the age of twelve, and 4,826 under the age of
sixteen, thus making a total of 5,065 or 2.9 per cent. of the whole
local prison population.

In the preceding remarks on juvenile offenders under 16, it has been
pointed out that the great decrease in the numbers of such offenders
among the prison population is mainly owing to the development of
Industrial and Reformatory Schools. In order, therefore, to form an
accurate estimate of juvenile delinquency, we must look not merely at
the number of juveniles in prison; attention must also be directed to
the number of juveniles in Reformatory and Industrial Institutions.
Although these institutions are not places of imprisonment, yet they
are places of compulsory detention, and contain a very considerable
proportion of juvenile delinquents. All juveniles sent to
Reformatories have, indeed, been actually convicted of criminal
offences, and in 1888 the number of young people in the Reformatory
Schools of Great Britain (excluding Ireland) was in round numbers six
thousand (5,984). These must be added to the total juvenile prison
population in order to form a true conception of the extent of
juvenile crime. It is almost certain that if these young people were
not in Reformatories they would be in prisons, for, in almost the same
proportion as the Reformatory and Industrial School inmates have
increased, the juvenile prison population has decreased.

To the population of the Reformatory Schools must also be added a
large percentage of the Industrial School population. Since the year
1864, the number of boys and girls in Industrial and Truant Schools
has gone on steadily increasing. In that year the inmates amounted to
1,608; twenty-four years afterwards, that is to say, in 1888, the
number of children in Great Britain in Industrial and Truant Schools
amounted to 21,426.[30] It is true that a considerable proportion of
these children were not sent to the schools on account of having
committed crime; at the same time it has to be remembered that nearly
all of them were on the way to it, and would in all probability have
become criminals had the State left them alone for a year or two
longer. At the time of their committal the children we are now dealing
with were either children who had been found begging, or who were
wandering about without a settled home, or who were found destitute,
or who had a parent in gaol, or who lived in the company of female
criminals, prostitutes, and thieves. Such children may not actually
have come within the clutches of the criminal law, but it is
sufficient to look for a moment at the surroundings they had lived in
to see that this was only a question of time. We must, therefore, add
those children, along with the Reformatory population, to the number
of juveniles in gaol if we wish to form a proper estimate of the
extent of juvenile delinquency. If this is done we arrive at the
conclusion that the criminal and semi-criminal juvenile population is
at the present time more than 25,000 strong in England and Wales
alone; if Scotland be included it is more than 30,000 strong. These
figures are enough to show that it is only compulsory detention in
State establishments which keeps down the numbers of juvenile
offenders; and there can be little doubt, if the inmates of these
institutions were let loose upon the country, juveniles would very
soon constitute seven, eight, or, perhaps, ten per cent. of the prison
population.

    [30] In 1889 there is a slight decrease.

Let us now consider the case of young offenders between the ages of 16
and 21. This is the most momentous for weal or woe of all periods of
life. During this stage, the transition from youth to manhood is
taking place; the habits then formed acquire a more enduring
character, and, in the majority of cases, determine the whole future
of the individual. If youths between the ages just mentioned could by
any possibility be prevented from embarking on a criminal career, the
drop in the criminal population would be far-reaching in its effects.
It is from the ranks of young people just entering early manhood that
a large proportion of the habitual criminal population is recruited;
and if this critical period of life can be tided over without repeated
acts of crime, there is much less likelihood of a young man
degenerating afterwards into a criminal of the professional class. It
is most important that the professional criminal class should be
diminished at a quicker rate than is the case at present; and, in
spite of police statistics to the contrary, it is a class which has
not become perceptibly smaller within the last twenty or five and
twenty years. A proof of this statement is to be seen in the fact that
offences against property with violence display a tendency to
increase, and it is offences of this nature which are pre-eminently
the work of the habitual criminal. It is a comparatively rare thing to
find a habitual criminal stop mid-way in his sinister career; the
accumulated impressions resulting from a life of crime have too
effectively succeeded in shaping his character and conduct, and he
persists, as a rule, in leading an anti-social life so long as he has
physical strength to do it.

The only hope, therefore, of diminishing the habitual criminal
population, is to lessen the number of recruits; and as most of these
recruits are to be found among lads of between sixteen and twenty-one,
it is to these lads that serious attention must be directed. Every year
a certain proportion of youths ranging between these two ages shows a
pronounced disposition to enter permanently upon a criminal life by
repeatedly returning to prison. The deterrent effect of short sentences
has ceased to operate upon them, and all the symptoms are present that
a downright career of crime has begun. In such circumstances what is to
be done? A plan has been proposed by Mr. Lloyd Baker for dealing with
refractory and unmanageable Reformatory children, the substance of
which is to send them to another institution of a stricter character
than the ordinary Reformatory School, and which for want of a better
name he calls a Penal Reformatory. It is very probable that something
in the nature of a Penal Reformatory is just what is wanted to prevent
a youth on the downward road from finally swelling the proportions of
the professional criminal population. If Great Britain ever established
such institutions, she would then possess a graded set of organisations
for dealing with the young, which would cover the whole period of
youthful life. The Truant School would catch the child on the first
symptoms of waywardness, the Industrial School would arrest him
standing on the verge of crime, the Reformatory School would dual with
actual offenders against the law, and the Penal Reformatory would
grapple with habitual offenders under the age of manhood.[31]

    [31] Ages at which 507 offenders first began to commit crime--

    Under 10         1.5        41 to 45      2.1
    11 to 15        17.0        46 to 50      2.3
    16 to 20        36.1        51 to 55      2.1
    21 to 25        20.1        56 to 60       .8
    26 to 30         7.1        61 to 65       .8
    31 to 35         5.1        66 to 70       .2
    36 to 40         3.6

    Marro. _I Caratteri dei delinquente. Studio antropologico-sociologico_,
    p. 356.

After the age of manhood has been reached, and the main lines of
character are formed, punitive methods of dealing with criminal
offenders must assume a more prominent position, and the prison should
then take the place of the Reformatory. In youth the deterrent effects
of punishment are small, and the beneficial effects of reformative
measures are at their maximum. In manhood, on the other hand, this
condition of things is reversed, and the deterrent effects of
punishment exceed the beneficial effects of reformative influences. An
interesting example of the value of punishment for adults, as compared
with other methods, is given by Sir John Strachey in his account of
infanticide in certain parts of India. "For many years past," he says,
"measures have been taken in the North-West Provinces for the
prevention of this crime. For a long time, when our civilisation was
less belligerent than it has since become, it was thought that the best
hope of success lay in the removal of the causes which appeared to lead
to its commission, and especially in the prevention of extravagant
expenditure on marriages; but although these benevolent efforts were
undoubtedly useful, their practical results were not great, and it
gradually became clear that it was only by a stringent and organised
system of coercion that these practices would ever be eradicated. In
1870 an act of the legislature was passed which enabled the Government
to deal with the subject. A system of registration of births and deaths
among the suspected classes was established, with constant inspection
and enumeration of children; special police-officers were entertained
at the cost of the guilty communities, and no efforts were spared to
convince them that the Government had firmly resolved that it would put
down these practices, and would treat the people who followed them as
murderers. Although the time is, I fear, distant when preventive
measures will cease to be necessary, much progress has been made, and
there are now thousands of girls where formerly there were none. In the
Mainpuri district, where, as I have said, there was not many years ago
hardly a single Chauhán girl, nearly half of the Chauhán children at
the present time are girls; and it is hoped that three-fourths of the
villages have abandoned the practice."[32]

    [32] _India_ by Sir John Strachey, pp. 292-3.

These facts speak for themselves and afford an incontestable proof of
the value of punishment as a remedial measure when other remedies have
failed.[33] In the re-action which is now in full force, and rightly
so, against the excessive punishments of past times, there is a marked
tendency among some minds to go to the opposite extreme, and an
attempt is being made to show that imprisonment has hardly any
curative effect at all. Its evils, and from the very nature of things
they are not a few, are almost exclusively elaborated and dwelt upon,
little attention being paid to the vast amount of good which
imprisonment alone is able to effect. It is possible that imprisonment
sends a few to utter perdition at a quicker pace than they would have
gone of their own accord, but on the other hand, it rescues many a man
before he has irrevocably committed himself to a life of crime. If it
fails the first time, it very often succeeds after the second or the
third, and no one is justified in saying imprisonment is worthless as
a reformative agency till it has failed at least three times. According
to the judicial statistics for England and Wales, imprisonment is
successful after the third time in about 80 per cent. of the cases
annually submitted to the criminal courts, and although it is a pity
that the percentage is not higher, yet it cannot fairly be said that
such results are an evidence of failure. The prison is unquestionably
a much less effective weapon for dealing with crime among Continental
peoples, and in the United States, than it has shown itself to be in
Great Britain; but this failure arises in the main from the laxity and
indulgence with which criminals are treated in foreign prisons. A
prison to possess any reformative value must always be made an
uncomfortable place to live in; Continental peoples and the people of
America have to a large extent lost sight of this fact; hence the
failure of their penal systems to stop the growth of the delinquent
population. If, however, imprisonment is not allowed to degenerate
into mere detention, it is bound to act as a powerful deterrent upon
grown-up offenders, and it is the only menace which will effectually
keep many of them within the law. The hope of reward and the fear of
punishment, or, in other words, love of pleasure, and dread of pain,
are the two most deeply seated instincts in the human breast; if Mr.
Darwin's theory be correct, it is through the operation of these
fundamental instincts that such a being as man has come into existence
at all. In any case these instincts have hitherto been the chief
ingredients of all human progress, the most effective spur to energy
of all kinds, and when properly utilised they are the most potent of
all deterrents to crime. Were it possible for the hand of social
justice to descend on every criminal with infallible certainty; were
it universally true that no crime could possibly escape punishment,
that every offence against society would inevitably and immediately be
visited on the offender, the tendency to commit crime would probably
become as rare as the tendency of an ordinary human being to thrust
his hand into the fire. The uncertainty of punishment is the great
bulwark of crime, and crime has a marvellous knack of diminishing in
proportion as this uncertainty decreases. No amelioration of the
material circumstances of the community can destroy all the causes of
crime, and till moral progress has reached a height hitherto attained
only by the elect of the race, one of the most efficient curbs upon
the criminally disposed will consist in increasing the probability of
punishment.

    [33] Cf. _Tarde Philosophie Penale_, p. 467.

In proportion as the probability of being punished is augmented, the
severity of punishment can be safely diminished. This is one of the
paramount advantages to be derived from a highly efficient police
system. The barbarity of punishments in the Middle Ages is always
attributed by historians to the barbarous ideas of those rude times.
But this is only partially true; one important consideration is
overlooked. In the Middle Ages it was extremely difficult to catch the
criminal; in fact, it is only within the present century that an
organised system for effecting the capture of criminals has come into
existence. The result of the nebulous police system of past times was
that very few offenders were brought to justice at all, and society,
in order to prevent lawlessness from completely getting the upper
hand, was obliged to make a terrible example of all offenders coming
within its grasp. As soon, however, as it became less difficult to
arrest and convict lawless persons, the old severities of the criminal
code immediately began to fall into abeyance. Sentences were
shortened, punishments were mitigated, the death penalty was abolished
for almost all crimes except murder. But even now, the moment society
sees any form of crime showing a tendency to evade the vigilance of
the law, a cry is immediately raised for sterner measures of
repression against the perpetrators of that particular form of crime.
The Flogging Bill recently passed by Parliament is a case in point.
These instances afford a fairly accurate insight into the action of
society with regard to the punishment of crime. It punishes severely
when the criminal is seldom caught; it punishes more lightly when he
is often caught; and its punishments will become more mitigated still,
as soon as the probability of capture is made more complete. A
comparatively light sentence is in most cases a very effective
deterrent, when it is made almost a certainty, and all alterations in
the future in criminal administration should be in the direction of
making punishment more certain rather than more severe. Such efforts
are sure to be rewarded by a decrease in the amount of crime.




CHAPTER VII.

THE CRIMINAL IN BODY AND MIND.


Has the criminal any bodily and mental characteristics which
differentiate him from the ordinary man? Does he differ from his
fellows in height and weight? Does he possess a peculiar conformation
of skull and brain? Is he anomalous in face and feature, in intellect,
in will, in feeling? Is he, in short, an individual separated from the
rest of humanity by any set or combination of qualities which clearly
mark him off as an abnormal being? As these matters are at present
exciting considerable attention, let us now look at the criminal from
a purely biological point of view.

A good deal of diversity of opinion exists among competent authorities
respecting the stature of criminals. Lombroso says that Italian
criminals are above the average height; Knecht says German criminals
do not differ in this respect from other men; Marro says the stature
of criminals is variable; Thomson and Wilson say that criminals are
inferior in point of stature to the average man. Whatever may be the
case on the Continent, there can be little doubt that as far as the
United Kingdom is concerned, the height of the criminal class is lower
than that of the ordinary citizen. In Scotland the average height of
the ordinary population is (559) 67.30 inches; the average height of
the criminal population, as given by Dr. Bruce Thomson, is (324) 66.95
inches. According to Dr. Beddoe, the average height of the London
artizan population is (318) 66.72 inches; the average height of the
London criminal (300) 54.70 inches; the average height of Liverpool
criminals, according to Danson, is (1117) 66.39 inches. Danson's
figures point to the fact that there is hardly any difference in
height between the criminal classes of Liverpool and the artizan
population of London It has, however, to be borne in mind that the
population of the North of England, being largely of Scandinavian
descent, is taller than the population of the South of England. The
height of Liverpool criminals should be compared with the average
height of the Scotch, to whom they are more nearly allied by race. If
this is done, it will be seen that they fall considerably short of the
normal stature.

The difference between the height of the criminal population and that
of the most favoured classes is more remarkable still. According to
Dr. Roberts' tables, the average height of the latter is 69.06 inches;
the London criminal is only 64.70 inches. There is thus a difference
of from four to five inches between the most highly favoured classes
and the London criminal class. The difference between the criminal
class and the merely well-to-do is not quite so great. Selecting Mr.
Galton's Health Exhibition measurements as a test of the stature of
the well-to-do classes, the results come out as follows:--Health
Exhibition measurements, 67.9 inches; London criminals, 64.70 inches.
The criminal is thus between two and three inches inferior in height
to the well-to-do portion of the community. In fact, the height of the
London criminal is very nearly the same as that of the East-End Jew.
According to Mr. Jacobs, in a paper communicated to the Journal of the
Anthropological Institute, the average stature of the East-End Jew is
64.3 inches; his co-religionist in the West-End is 67.5 inches. We may
accordingly take it as the outcome of these measurements that the
criminal population of Great Britain is inferior in point of stature
to the ordinary population.

From stature we shall pass to weight. Lombroso and Marro say that the
weight of Italian criminals is superior to the weight of the average
Italian citizen. On the other hand, the weight of London criminals is
almost the same as that of London artizans, but inferior to the weight
of the artizan population in the large English towns taken as a whole.
Average weight of London criminals (300) 136 pounds; average weight of
London artizan (318) 137 pounds; average weight of artizans in large
towns generally, 138 pounds. The London criminal is considerably
inferior in weight to the well-to-do classes, as will be seen from Mr.
Galton's Health Exhibition statistics. Average weight, Health
Exhibition, 143 pounds; average weight, most favoured class (Roberts),
152 pounds. These figures show that the criminal class in London is
seven pounds lighter than the well-to-do, and sixteen pounds lighter
than the most favoured section of the population.

Hardly any investigations have been made in this country respecting
the skulls of criminals, and the inquiries of continental
investigators have so far led to very conflicting results. It is a
contention of Lombroso's that the skulls of criminals exhibit a larger
proportion of asymmetrical peculiarities than the skulls of other men.
On this point Lombroso is supported by Manouvrier. But Topinard, an
anthropologist of great eminence, is of the opposite opinion. He
carefully examined the same series of skulls as been examined by
Manouvrier--the skulls of murders--and he discovered no marked
difference between these and other skulls. Heger, a Belgian
anthropologist says that the skulls of delinquents do not differ from
the skulls of the race to which the delinquent belongs. In fact, till
more exactitude is introduced into the methods of skull measurement,
all deduction based upon an examination of the criminal skull must be
regarded as untrustworthy. A striking instance of this was witnessed
at the proceedings of the Paris Congress of Criminal Anthropology held
in 1889. When the skull of Charlotte Corday, who killed the
revolutionist Marat, was subjected to examination, Lombroso declared
that it was a truly criminal type of skull; Topinard, on the other
hand, gave it as his opinion that it was a typical female skull. On
this point Topinard was supported by Benedict.[34] As long as such
divergencies of view exist among anthropologists it is impossible to
place much stress upon inquiries relative to the conformation of the
criminal skull. Before a beginning can be made with inquiries of this
character, there must be some fundamental basis of agreement among
investigators as to what is to be accounted asymmetrical in skull
measurements and what is not. Even then it will have to be remembered,
before coming to conclusions, that no skull is perfectly
symmetrical--every one showing some variation from the ideal type.
When the extent of this variation has been absolutely demonstrated to
be greater in the case of criminals than among other sections of the
community, we shall then be approaching solid ground. At present we
must wait for further light before anything can be said with certainty
with respect to the criminal skull.

    [34] See _Revista Internacional de Anthropologia Criminal y
    Ciencias Medico-Legales, Marzo e April de 1890_.

Just as little is known at present about the brain of criminals as
about the skull. Some years ago Professor Benedict startled the world
by stating that he had discovered the seat of crime in the
convolutions of the brain. He found a certain number of anomalies in
the convolutions of the frontal lobes, and he came to the conclusion
that crime was connected with the existence of these anomalies. But he
had omitted to examine the frontal convolutions of honest people. When
this was done by other investigators, it was found that the brain
convolutions of normal men presented just as many anomalies, some
investigators (Dr. Giacomini) said even more than the brains of
criminals. According to Dr. Bardeleben, there is no such thing as a
normal type of brain. Weight of brain is a much simpler question than
brain type, but so far it is impossible to say whether the criminal
brain is heavier or lighter than the ordinary brain. The solution of
this comparatively simple point is beset by a certain number of
obstacles. It is not enough, Dr. Binswanger tells us, to weigh the
brains of criminals and the brains of ordinary persons and then strike
an average of the results. The height and weight of the persons whose
brains are averaged are essential to the formation of accurate
conclusions; till these important factors are taken into account, all
deductions based upon weight of brain only rest upon an unsure
foundation.

But supposing we had a trustworthy body of facts bearing upon the
weight and structure of the criminal brain, we should still require to
know much more of brain functions in general before satisfactory
conclusions could be drawn from these facts. We know something, it is
true, of the physiological functions at certain cerebral regions, but
as yet nothing is known of the localisation of any particular mental
faculty, whether criminal or otherwise. A conclusive proof that the
study of the brain, as an organ of thought, is still in its infancy,
is found in the fact that the fundamental question is still unsolved,
whether the whole brain is to be considered one in all its parts, so
far as the performance of psychic functions is concerned, or whether
these functions are localised in certain definite centres. Till these
fundamental difficulties are cleared away, the presence of anomalies
in certain convolutions of the brain will not prove very much one way
or the other.[35]

    [35] A masterly article on the "Localisation of Brain Functions"
    will be found in Wundt's _Philosophische Studien Sechster Band_,
    1. _Heft Zur Frage der Localisation der Grosshirnfunctionen_,
    Von W. Wundt. Compare also _The Croonian Lectures on Cerebral
    Localisation_, by David Ferrier. London: 1890.

An examination of the criminal face has so far led to no definite and
assured results. In the imagination of artists the criminal is almost
always credited with the possession of a retreating forehead. As a
matter of fact, Dr. Marro, one of the most eminent representatives of
the anthropological school, assures us that this is not the case.
After comparing the foreheads of 539 delinquents with the foreheads of
100 ordinary men, he found that criminals had a smaller percentage of
retreating foreheads than the average man.[36] He also found that
projecting eyebrows, another trait which is supposed to be a criminal
peculiarity, were almost as common among ordinary people as among
offenders against the law. Projecting ears is another peculiarity
which is often associated with the idea of a criminal. But Dr. Lannois
states that after a careful examination of the ears of 43 young
offenders, he found them as free from anomalies as the ears of other
people.[37]

    [36] Marro, _I Caratteri dei Delinquenti_, p. 157.

    [37] _Archives d'anthropologie criminelle Livraison_, 10.

As it is the Italians who have studied these matters most exhaustively,
it is mainly to them we must go for information. In a little book on
the skeleton and the form of the nose, Dr. Salvator Ottolenghi comes to
the somewhat curious result that the bones of the criminal nose offer
many anomalies of a pre-human or bestial character; but the nose itself
is straight and long, or, in other words, just as highly developed as
the noses of ordinary men. Careful inquiries have been undertaken by
criminal anthropologists into the colour of the hair, the length of the
arms, the colour of the skin, tattooing, sensitiveness to pain among
the criminal population, but these laborious investigations have so
far led to few solid conclusions. According to Lombroso, insensibility
to pain is a marked characteristic of the typical criminal.[38]
"Individuals," he says, "who possess this quality consider themselves
as privileged, and they despise delicate and sensitive persons. It is a
pleasure to such hardened men to torment others whom they look upon as
inferior beings." On this point M. Joly is at variance with Lombroso.
"I asked," he says, "at the central hospital, the Santé, where all
persons who become seriously ill in the prisons of the Seine are looked
after, if this disvulnerability had ever been noticed. I was told that
far from that, prisoners were always found very sensitive to pain ...
Honest people, industrious workmen, the fathers of families treated at
the Charité or the Hôtel-Dieu (Paris hospitals), undergo operations
with much more fortitude than the sick prisoners of the Santé."[39] On
this point, therefore, as on so many others, we are still without a
sufficient body of evidence, and must, meanwhile, suspend our judgment.

    [38] _L'Homme Criminel_, 324.

    [39] _Le Crime_, 193.

Let us now consider the criminal's physiognomy. In this connection it
must be borne in mind that a prolonged period of imprisonment will
change the face of any man, whether he is a criminal or not. Political
offenders who have undergone a sentence of penal servitude, and who may
be men of the highest character, acquire the prison look and never
altogether get rid of it. If a man spends a certain number of years
sharing the life, the food, the occupations of five or six hundred
other men, if he mixes with them and with no one else, he will
inevitably come to resemble them in face and feature. A remarkable
illustration of this fact has recently been brought to light by the
Photographic Society of Geneva. "From photographs of seventy-eight old
couples, and of as many adult brothers and sisters, it was found that
twenty-four of the former resembled each other much more strongly than
as many of the latter who were thought most like one another."[40] It
would, therefore, seem that the action of unconscious imitation,
arising from constant contact, is capable of producing a remarkable
change in the features, the acquired expression frequently tending to
obliterate inherited family resemblances. According to Piderit,
physiognomy is to be considered as a mimetic expression which has
become habitual. The criminal type of face, so conspicuous in old
offenders, is in many cases merely a prison type; it is not congenital;
men who do not originally have it almost always acquire it after a
prolonged period of penal servitude.

    [40] _Daily News_, June 12, 1890.

But apart from the prison type of countenance, it is highly probable
that a distinct criminal type also exists. Certain professions
generate distinctive castes of feature, as, for instance, the Army and
the Church. This distinctiveness is not confined to features alone, it
diffuses itself over the whole man; it is observable in manner, in
gesture, in bearing, in demeanour, and is constantly breaking out in a
variety of unexpected ways. In like manner the habitual criminal
acquires the habits of his class. Crime is his profession; it is also
the profession of all his associates. The constant practice of this
profession results in the acquisition of a certain demeanour, a
certain aspect, gait, and general appearance, in many instances too
subtle to define, but, at the same time, plain and palpable to an
expert.

The slang of criminals is also explicable on the same principle. Every
trade and calling has its technical terms. The meaning of these terms
is hidden from the rest of the world, but the origin of their
existence is not difficult to explain. The jargon of the criminal
arises from the same causes and is constructed on exactly the same
principles as the technical words and phrases of the man of science.
When a man of science is compelled to make frequent use of a phrase,
he generally gets rid of it by inventing some technical word; it is
precisely the same with criminals. With them technical words are used
instead of phrases, and short words instead of long ones in all
matters where criminal interests are intimately concerned, and on all
topics which are habitually the subjects of conversation among the
criminal classes. The language of the Stock Exchange with its Bulls,
Bears, Contangos, and other short and comprehensive expressions for
various kinds of stocks, is on all fours with the slang of criminals,
and it is not necessary to resort to atavism in order to explain it.
It arises to supply professional needs, and criminal argot springs up
from exactly the same cause.

Summing up our inquiries respecting the criminal type we arrive, in
the first place, at the general conclusion, that so far as it has a
real existence it is not born with a man, but originates either in the
prison, and is then merely a prison type, or in criminal habits of
life, and is then a truly criminal type. As a matter of fact, the two
types are in most cases blended together, the prison type with its
hard, impassive rigidity of feature being superadded to the gait,
gesture and demeanour of the habitual criminal. In combination these
two types form a professional type and constitute what Dr. Bruce
Thomson[41] has called "a physique distinctly characteristic of the
criminal class." It is not, however, a type which admits of accurate
description, and its practical utility is impaired by the fact that
certain of its features are sometimes visible in men who have never
been convicted of crime. The position of the case, with respect to the
criminal type, may be best described by saying that an experienced
detective officer will be sure in nine cases out of ten that he has
got hold of a criminal by profession, but in the tenth case he will
probably make a mistake. In other words, face, manner and demeanor are
no infallible index of character or habits of life.

    [41] _Journal of Mental Science_, vol. xvi.

When crime is not an inherited taint, but merely an acquired habit,
this fact has an important practical bearing upon the proper method of
dealing with it. Acquired habits, we are now being taught by Professor
Weismann, are incapable of being transmitted to posterity, and Mr.
Galton is of the same opinion.[42] This is not the place to elaborate
the theory of inheritance, as understood by those writers; its
essence, however, is that we only inherit the natural faculties of our
forebears, and not those faculties which they have acquired by
practice and experience. The son of a rope-dancer does not inherit his
father's faculties for rope-dancing, nor the son of an orator his
father's ready aptitude for public speech, nor the son of a designer
his father's acquired skill in the making of designs. All that the son
inherits is the natural faculties of the parent, but no more. Hence it
follows that the son of a thief, on the supposition that thieving
comes by habit and practice, does not by natural inheritance acquire
the parent's criminal propensity. As far as his natural faculties are
concerned he starts life free from the vicious habits of his parent,
and should he in turn become a thief, as sometimes happens, it is not
because he has inherited his father's thievish habits, but because he
has himself acquired them. It is imitation, not instinct, which
transforms him into a thief; and if he is removed from the influence
of evil example he will have almost as small a chance of falling into
a criminal life as any other member of the community. It will not be
quite so small, because no public institution, however well conducted,
can ever exercise so moralising an effect as a good home, but it will
be much smaller than if he grew up to maturity under the pernicious
surroundings of a criminal home.

    [42] _Die Continuität des Keimplasma als Grundlage einer Theorie
    der Vererbung_. A. Weismann. Jena, 1885. _Natural Inheritance_.
    F. Galton.

If we do not inherit the acquired faculties and habits of our parents,
it is unfortunately too true that we inherit their diseases and the
connection between disease and crime is a fact which cannot be denied.
In many cases it is perfectly true that persons suffering from disease
or physical degeneracy do not become criminals, in most cases they do
not; at the same time a larger proportion of such persons fall into a
lawless life than is the case with people who are free from inherited
infirmities. The undoubted tendency of physical infirmity is to
disturb the temper, to weaken the will, and generally to disorganise
the mental equilibrium. Such a tendency, when it becomes very
pronounced, leads its unhappy possessor to perpetrate offenses against
his fellow-men, or, in other words, to commit crime. In a recent
communication to a German periodical, Herr Sichart, director of
prisons in the kingdom of Wurtemburg, has shown that a very high
percentage of criminals are the descendants of degenerate parents.
Herr Sichart's inquiries extended over several years and included
1,714 prisoners. Of this number 16 per cent. were descended from
drunken parents; 6 per cent. from families in which there was madness;
4 per cent. from families addicted to suicide; 1 per cent. from
families in which there was epilepsy. In all, 27 per cent. of the
offenders, examined by Herr Sichart were descended from families in
which there was degeneracy. According to these figures more than one
fourth of the German prison population have received a defective
organisation from their ancestry, which manifests itself in a life of
crime.

In France and Italy the same state of things prevails. Dr. Corre is of
opinion that a very large proportion of persons convicted of bad
conduct in the French military service are distinctly degenerate
either in body or mind. Dr. Virgilio says that in Italy 32 per cent.
of the criminal population have inherited criminal tendencies from
their parents. In England there is no direct means of testing the
amount of degeneracy among the criminal classes, but, in all
likelihood, it is quite as great as elsewhere. According to the report
of the Medical Inspector of convict prisons for 1888-9, the annual
number of deaths from natural causes, among the convict population, is
from 10 to 12 per 1000. Let us compare those figures with the death
rate of the general population as recorded in the Registrar-General's
report for 1888. The annual death rate from all causes of the general
population, between the ages of 15 and 45, is about 7 per 1000. I have
selected the period of life between 15 and 45 for the reason that it
corresponds most closely with the average age of criminals. If deaths
from accident are excluded from the mortality returns of the general
population, it will be found that the rate of mortality among
criminals, in convict prisons, is from one third to one half higher
than the rate of mortality among the rest of the community of a
similar age. If the rate of mortality of the criminal population is so
high inside convict prisons, where the health of the inmates is so
carefully attended to, what must it be among the criminal classes when
in a state of liberty? Independently of the premature deaths brought
on by irregularity of life, it is certain that a high proportion of
criminals bear within them the seeds of inherited disorders, and it is
these disorders which largely account for the high rate of mortality
amongst them when in prison.

The high percentage of disease and degeneracy among the English
criminal population may be seen in other ways. The population in the
local gaols in 1888-9, between the ages of 21 and 40, constituted 54
per cent. of the total prison population, whilst the same class between
the ages of 40 and CO formed only 20 per cent. of the prison
population. One half of this drop in the percentage of prisoners
between 40 and 60 may be accounted for by the decreased percentage of
persons between these two ages in the general population. The other
half can only be accounted for by the extent to which premature decay
and death rage among criminals who have passed their fortieth year. In
other words, the number of criminals alive after forty is much smaller
than the number of normal men alive after that age.

A direct proof of the extent of degeneracy in the shape of insanity
among persons convicted of murder can be found in the Judicial
Statistics. The number of persons convicted of wilful murder, not
including manslaughter or non-capital homicides, from 1879 to 1888
amounted to 441. Out of this total 143 or 32 per cent. were found
insane. Of the 299 condemned to death, no less than 145, or nearly one
half, had their sentences commuted, many of them on the ground of
mental infirmity. The whole of these figures decisively prove that
between 40 and 50 per cent. of the convictions for wilful murder are
cases in which the murderers were either insane or mentally infirm.
Murder cases are almost the only ones respecting which the antecedents
of the offender are seriously inquired into. But when this inquiry
does take place the vast amount of degeneracy among criminals at once
becomes apparent.

Passing from the mental condition of murderers, let us now take into
consideration the mental state of criminals generally. Beginning with
the senses, it may be said that very little stress can be laid on the
experiments conducted by the Anthropological School as to
peculiarities in the sense of smell, taste, sight, and so on,
discovered among criminals. In all these inquiries it is so easy for
the subject to deceive the investigator, and he has often so direct an
interest in doing it that all results in this department must be
accepted with the utmost caution. Wherever investigations necessitate
the acceptance upon trust of statements made by criminals, their
scientific value descends to the lowest level. As this must be largely
the case with respect to the senses of hearing, taste, smell, etc., it
is almost impossible to reach assured conclusions.

It is different in inquiries respecting the intellect. Here the
investigator is able to judge for himself. According to Dr. Ogle, 86.5
per cent. of the general population were able to read and write in the
years 1881-4, and as this represents an increase of 10 per cent. since
the passing of the Elementary Education Act, it is probably not far
from the mark to say that at the present time almost 90 per cent. of
the English population can read and write. In other words, only 10
per cent. of the population is wholly ignorant. In the local prisons
on the other hand, no less than 25 per cent. of the prisoners can
neither read nor write, and 72 per cent. can only read or read and
write imperfectly. The vast difference in the proportion of
uninstructed among the prison, as compared with the general
population, is not to be explained by the defective early training of
the former. This explanation only covers a portion of the ground: the
other portion is covered by the fact that a certain number of
criminals are almost incapable of acquiring instruction. The memory
and the reasoning powers of such persons are so utterly feeble that
attempts to school them is a waste of time.[43] Deficiencies in
memory, imagination, reason, are three undoubted characteristics of
the ordinary criminal intellect. Of course, there are very many
criminals in which all these qualities are present, and whose defects
lie in another direction, but taken as a whole the criminal is
unquestionably less gifted intellectually than the rest of the
community.

Respecting the emotions of criminals, it is much more difficult to
speak, and much more easy to fall into error. The only thing that can
be said of them for certain, is, that they do not, as a rule, possess
the same keenness of feeling as the ordinary man. Some Italian writers
make much of the religiosity of delinquents; such a sentiment may be
common among offenders in Italy; it is certainly rare among the same
class in Great Britain. The cellular system puts an effective stop to
any thing like active hostility to religion; but it is a mistake to
argue from this that the criminal is addicted to the exercise of
religious sentiments. The family sentiment is also feebly developed;
the exceptions to this rule form a small fraction of the criminal
population.

    [43] In Christiania the number of children who cannot learn
    amounts in the elementary schools to 4 per 1000. See _Reformatory
    and Refuge Journal_ for August, 1890.

The will in criminals, when it is not impaired by disease, is, in the
main, dominated by a boundless egoism. Let us first consider those
whose wills are impaired by disease. Among drunkards and the
degenerate generally the power of sustained volition is often as good
as gone. Nothing can be more pitiful or hopeless than the position of
wretched beings in a condition such as this. Often animated by good
resolutions, often anxious to do what is right, often possessing a
sense of moral responsibility, these unhappy creatures plunge again
and again into vice and crime. In some cases of this description the
will is practically annihilated; in others it is under the dominion of
momentary caprice; in others again it has no power of concentration,
or it is the victim of sudden hurricanes of feeling which drive
everything before them. Persons afflicted in this way, when not
drunkards, are generally convicted for crimes of violence, such as
assault, manslaughter, murder. They experience real sentiments of
remorse, but neither remorse nor penitence enables them to grapple
with their evil star. The will is stricken with disease, and the man
is dashed hither and thither, a helpless wreck on the sea of life.[44]

    [44] Cf. Ribot, _Les Maladies de la Volonté_, 1887.

Let us now consider the class of criminals whose wills are not
diseased, but are, on the other hand, dominated by a boundless egoism.
Of such criminals it may be said that there is no essential difference
between them and immoral men. Egoism, selfishness, a lack of
consideration for the rights and feelings of others, are the dominant
principles in the life of both. The dividing line between the two
types consists in this, that the egoism of the immoral man is bounded
by the criminal law; but the egoism of the criminal is bounded by no
law either without him or within. It does not follow from this that
the criminal is without a sense of duty or a dread of legal
punishment. In most cases he possesses both in a more or less
developed form. But his immense egoism so completely overpowers both
his sense of duty and his fear of punishment that it demands
gratification at whatever cost. He sees what he ought to do; he knows
how he ought to act; he is perfectly alive to the consequences of
transgression, but these motives are not strong enough to induce him
to alter his ways of life.

On summing up the results of this inquiry into criminal biology we
arrive at the following conclusions. In the first place, it cannot be
proved that the criminal has any distinct physical conformation,
whether anatomical or morphological; and, in the second place, it
cannot be proved that there is any inevitable alliance between
anomalies of physical structure and a criminal mode of life. But it
can be shown that criminals, taken as a whole, exhibit a higher
proportion of physical anomalies, and a higher percentage of physical
degeneracy than the rest of the community. With respect to the mental
condition of criminals, it cannot be established that it is, on the
whole, a condition of insanity, or even verging on insanity. But it
can be established that the bulk of the criminal classes are of a
humbly developed mental organisation. Whether we call this low state
of mental development, atavism, or degeneracy is, to a large extent, a
matter of words; the fact of its wide-spread existence among criminals
is the important point.

The results of this inquiry also show that degeneracy among criminals
is sometimes inherited and sometimes acquired. It is inherited when
the criminal is descended from insane, drunken, epileptic, scrofulous
parents; it is often acquired when the criminal adopts and
deliberately persists in a life of crime. The closeness of the
connection between degeneracy and crime is, to a considerable extent,
determined by social conditions. A degenerate person, who has to earn
his own livelihood, is much more likely to become a criminal than
another degenerate person who has not. Almost all forms of degeneracy
render a man more or less unsuited for the common work of life; it is
not easy for such a man to obtain employment; in certain forms of
degeneracy it becomes almost impossible. A person in this unfortunate
position often becomes a criminal, not because he has strong
anti-social instincts, but because he cannot get work. Physically, he
is unfit for work, and he takes to crime as an alternative.

Another important result is the close connection between madness and
crimes of blood. We have seen that almost one third of the cases of
conviction for wilful murder are cases in which the murderer is found
to be insane. And this does not represent the full proportion of
murderers afflicted mentally; a considerable percentage of those
sentenced to death have this sentence commuted on mental grounds. In
Germany, from 26 to 28 per cent. of criminals suffering from mental
weakness escape the observation of the court in this important
particular, and the same state of things unquestionably exists in the
United Kingdom. The actual percentage of criminals who suffer from
mental disorders in the prisons of Europe is probably much greater
than is generally supposed. At the present time a knowledge of
insanity is no part of the ordinary medical curriculum. "With respect
to this malady the great majority of medical men are themselves in the
position of laymen. They have not studied it. It was not included in
their examinations."[45] Till this state of things is altered we shall
never exactly know the intimacy of the connection between nervous
disorders and crime.

    [45] _Sanity and Insanity_. C. Mercier, p. XII.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE PUNISHMENT OF CRIME.


In a previous chapter the deterrent action of punishment on the
criminal population has been pointed out. It now remains for us to
consider the nature of punishment, and the methods by which punishment
should be carried out. What is punishment as applied to crime?
According to Kant it is an act of retribution; it consists in
inflicting upon the criminal the same injury as he has inflicted on
his victim. It is an application by society of the principle of "jus
talionis." Such a definition of punishment does not harmonise with the
facts. We cannot punish the slanderer by slandering him in turn; and
in punishing the murderer, it is impossible to torture him in the same
way as he has probably tortured his victim. According to the theory of
retribution, punishment becomes an end in itself; it is quite
unrelated to the benefits it may confer on the person who is punished,
or on the community which punishes him.

The difficulties surrounding the theory of retribution have led to
other definitions of punishment. Punishment, it is said, is not
inflicted on the offender as a retribution for his misdeeds, it is
inflicted for the purpose of protecting society against its enemies.
Such a view leaves moral considerations entirely out of account; it
leaves no room for the just indignation of the public at the spectacle
of crime. It is defective in other ways. For instance, a criminal has
a particular animosity against some single individual; it may be he
murders this person, or does him grievous bodily harm. Such an
offender has no similar animosity against any one else; as far as the
rest of the community is concerned he is perfectly harmless. On the
supposition that punishment is only intended to protect society
against the criminal, a man of this description would escape
punishment altogether. Or supposing a man (and this often happens),
after committing some serious crime for which he is sent to penal
servitude, sincerely and bitterly repented of it, and would be, if
released, a perfectly harmless member of the community, such a man,
according to the theory we are now discussing, should be released at
once. The certainty that the public conscience would tolerate no such
step shows that punishment has a wider object than the mere attainment
of social security.

Punishment is only a means say some; its real end is the reformation
of the offender. The practical application of such a principle would
lead to very astonishing results. It is perfectly well known that
there is no more incorrigible set of offenders than habitual vagrants
and drunkards. And on the other hand, the most easily reformed of all
offenders is often some person who has committed a serious crime under
circumstances which could not possibly recur. According to the theory
that reformation is the only end of punishment, petty offenders would
be shut up all their lives, while the perpetrator of a grave crime
would soon be set free. An absurd result of this kind is fatal to the
pretention that punishment is merely a means and not also an end.

Is it the end of punishment to act as a deterrent? We are often told
from the judicial bench that a man receives a certain sentence as a
warning and example to others. If such is the end of punishment it
lamentably fails in its purpose, for in a number of cases it neither
deters the offender nor the class from which the offender springs. It
was under the influence of this idea that criminals used to be hanged
in public, but experience failed to show that these ghastly
exhibitions had much deterrent effect on the community. Besides, it is
rather ridiculous to say, I do not punish you for the crime you have
committed, I punish you as a warning to others. In these circumstances
the effect of punishment is not to be upon the person punished, but
upon a third party who has not fallen into crime. Unless the
punishment is just in itself, society has no right to inflict it in
the hope of scaring others from criminal courses. Justice administered
in this spirit, turns the convicted offender into a whipping boy; the
punishment ceases to be related to the offence, and is merely related
to the effect it will have on a certain circle of spectators.

In our view, punishment ought to be regarded as at once an expiation
and a discipline, or, in other words, an expiatory discipline. This
definition includes all that is valuable in the theories just
reviewed, and excludes all that is imperfect in them. The criminal is
an offender against the fundamental order of society in somewhat the
same way as a disobedient child is an offender against the centre of
authority in the home or the school. The punishment inflicted on the
child may take the form of revenge, or it may take the form of
retribution, or it may take the form of deterrence, but it undoubtedly
takes its highest form when it combines expiation with discipline.
Punishment of this nature still remains punitive as it ought to do,
but it is at the same time a kind of punishment from which something
may be learned. It does not merely consist in inflicting pain,
although the presence of this element is essential to its efficacy; it
consists rather in inflicting pain in such a way as will tend to
discipline and reform the character. Such a conception of punishment
excludes the barbarous element of vengeance; it is based upon the
civilised ideas of justice and humanity, or rather upon the sentiment
of justice alone, for justice is never truly just except when its
tendency is also to humanise.

  "Sine caritate justicia
  Vindicationi similis."

From the theory of punishment let us now turn to its methods. The most
severe of these is the penalty of death. A great deal has been said
and written both for and against the retention of this form of
punishment. To set forth the arguments on both sides in a fair and
adequate manner would require a volume; it must, therefore, suffice to
say that in the field of controversy the contest between the opposing
parties is a fairly even one. In fact, looking at the matter from a
purely polemical point of view, the advocates of the death penalty
have probably the best of it. It has, however, to be remembered that
such questions are not solved by battalions of abstract arguments, but
by the slow, silent, invisible action of public sentiment. The way in
which this impalpable sentiment is moving on the question of the death
penalty may be seen, first, in the manner in which crime after crime
during the present century has been excluded from the supreme sentence
of the law, and secondly, in the steady diminution of capital
executions throughout the civilised world. If the present drift of
feeling continues for another generation or two it is not at all
improbable, in spite of temporary reactions here and there, that the
question of capital punishment will have solved itself.

Another form of punishment is transportation. As far as Great Britain
is concerned, transportation possesses only a historic interest. No
one is now sent out of the country for offences against the law.
Experience showed that penal colonies were a failure, and that the
truly criminal could be more effectively dealt with at home. Within
recent years the French have resorted to the system of transportation;
but, according to several eminent French authorities, the penal
settlement in New Caledonia is hardly justifying the anticipations of
its founders.

Penal servitude has taken the place of transportation in Great
Britain. Every person sentenced to a term of five years and over
undergoes what is called penal servitude. The sentence is divided into
three stages. In the first stage the offender passes nine months of
his sentence in one of the local prisons in solitary confinement. In
the next stage he is allowed to work in association with other
prisoners; and in the last stage he is conditionally released before
his sentence has actually expired. If a prisoner conducts himself
well, if he shows that he is industrious, he will be released at the
expiration of about three fourths of his sentence. If, on the other
hand, he is idle and ill-conducted, he will have to serve the full
term.

During the first nine months of his confinement the convict sentenced
to penal servitude is treated in exactly the same way as a person
sentenced to a month's imprisonment; the only difference being that he
is provided with better food. During the period of detention in a
Public Work's Prison the convict may, if well-conducted, pass through
five progressive stages; each of these stages confers some privileges
which the one below it does not possess. The first stage of all is
called the Probation Class. In this, as well as in every succeeding
class, a man's industry is measured by a process called the Mark
system. This system is somewhat similar to the method adopted for
rewarding industry in our public schools. In those schools a boy's
diligence is recognised by his receiving so many marks per day, and he
would be an ideal pupil who received the maximum number of marks. In
convict prisons, on the other hand, the maximum number of marks, which
is eight per day, can easily be earned by any person willing to do an
average day's work. If a convict earns the maximum number of marks per
day for three months he is promoted at the end of that time out of the
Probation Class into a higher stage called the Third Class. He must
remain in the third class for at least a year; while in this class he
is permitted to receive a visit and to write and receive a letter
every six months. He is also rewarded at the rate of a penny for every
20 marks, which enables him to earn twelve shillings in the course of
the year.

After the expiration of one year in the Third Class the prisoner, if
he has regularly earned eight marks a day, is advanced to the Second
Class. In this stage he can receive a visit and write and receive a
letter every four months. He is allowed a little choice in the
selection of his breakfast; the value attached to his marks is also
increased, and he is able in the Second Class to earn 18 shillings a
year. At the termination of a year, if a prisoner continues his habits
of industry, he is promoted to the First Class. Persons whose
education is defective are not permitted to enter the First Class,
unless they have also made progress in schooling. In the First Class a
man is allowed to receive a visit and to write and receive a letter
every three months. He is also given additional privileges in the
choice of food. In the First Class he can earn 30 shillings a year.

Above the First Class is a Special Class composed of men whose conduct
has been specially exemplary. Men may be admitted into this class 12
months before their liberation; they may also be placed in positions
of trust and responsibility in connection with the prison, and are
able to earn a gratuity amounting to six pounds. Such men are, as a
matter of course, liberated at the expiration of three fourths of
their sentence, which means that a term of five years' penal servitude
is reduced to somewhat under four years.

For female convicts all these rules are modified and mitigated.
Isolation is not so strictly enforced; a female may be liberated at
the expiration of two thirds of her sentence; she may also earn four
pounds instead of three, which is the highest sum men can receive,
except the limited number in the Special Class. Corresponding to the
Special Class of male convicts, there is among the females what is
called a Refuge Class. Well-conducted women undergoing their first
term of penal servitude are placed in this class, and nine months
before the date on which they are due for discharge on ordinary
licence, that is to say, nine months before they have finished two
thirds of their sentence, they are released from prison and placed in
some Home for females. Two Homes which receive prisoners of this class
are the Elizabeth Fry Refuge and the London Preventive and Reformatory
Institution. These Homes receive ten shillings a week for the care of
each inmate confided to them by the State, and the time spent there is
used as a gradual course of preparation for the re-entrance of these
unfortunate people into ordinary life. According to this method
females, after a prolonged period of imprisonment, are not thrown all
of a sudden upon the world; they re-enter it by slow and imperceptible
stages, and are thus enabled to commence life afresh under hopeful and
salutary conditions.

Male convicts on their release from penal servitude are, if they
desire it, assisted to obtain employment by Discharged Prisoners' Aid
Societies. The way in which assistance is rendered by the Royal
Society, Charing Cross, which may be considered as a type of most of
these societies, is as follows:--

"The convicts on their discharge are accompanied to the office of the
Society by a warder in plain clothes. They are there received by the
Secretary and the member of the Committee who, according to a fixed
rota, attends daily for this purpose. The first step is to give them a
plentiful breakfast of white bread, bacon and hot coffee. When this is
finished they are invited to come forward and state their hopes and
intentions as to the future. Full particulars of the nature of the
crime, the sentence, and the antecedents of the convict have been
previously received from the prison, and this information is, of
course, of the greatest value as a guide to dealing with the
particular case. After friendly discussion with the convict at one or
more interviews, and further inquiry, if need be, by the officers of
the Society, the course to be taken in each case is decided upon and
carried out as soon as possible, either by the officers of the Society
or through other agency. In cases of emigration and other cases where
it is advisable, the gratuities received from Government are
supplemented by donations from the funds of the Society; and, if not
already supplied by the prison authorities, a respectable suit of
clothes of a character fitted for the work on which the recipient is
to be employed is provided.

"The cases of men or women who elect to remain in or near the
Metropolis are usually dealt with directly by members of the Committee
and officers of the Society; others prefer to seek work for
themselves; but, meanwhile, respectable lodgings are provided till
work is obtained. Others who prefer a sea life are sent to the care of
agents until ships can be found for them--a few selected cases are
sent abroad." In the case of persons proceeding to seek work at a
distance from London, the Royal Society communicates with Discharged
Prisoners' Aid Societies in the country, and these Societies take such
cases in hand.

Another admirable Society for dealing with discharged convicts is the
St Giles' Mission, Brook St. Holborn. This Society provides a home for
the person whose sentence has expired; it is managed by a man (Mr.
Wheatley) possessed of an unsurpassed knowledge of the work; and it is
year by year rendering effective service to the convict population.
Some idea of the work accomplished by Societies such as those just
mentioned may be gathered from the fact that about two thirds of the
discharged convicts are annually passing through their hands; the
other third declining or not requiring assistance by such methods.
What is wanted to perfect the working of the institutions we are now
describing is increased public support; even now the Royal Society was
able to state in one of its reports, "that no discharged convict, who
is physically capable and willing to work, has any excuse for
relapsing into crime."

This brief sketch of the manner in which a sentence of penal servitude
is carried into effect will afford some idea of the nature of this
method of punishment. We shall now proceed to describe another mode of
dealing with offenders against the fundamental order of society. In
addition to convict establishments there exists throughout the United
Kingdom a large number of places of confinement called Local Prisons.
In England and Wales there are about sixty Local Prisons; in Scotland
there are about twenty; in Ireland there are about eighteen. In
Scotland and Ireland persons sentenced to a few days' imprisonment are
often confined in police cells, in England all convicted offenders
serve their sentence, however short, in a regular Local Prison.

Before 1877 the Local Prisons of England and Scotland were under the
control and administration of the County Magistrates, and almost every
county had then its own prison. One of the chief defects of this
system was the multiplication of prisons; one of its chief virtues was
that local power kept alive local interest in a way which is
impossible with highly centralised machinery. Where prisons are small
and numerous, as was to some extent the case under the old system, it
is difficult to conduct them so economically; on the other hand, the
herding of great masses of criminals together in huge establishments
is not without corresponding evils. It is now being pointed out by
specialists on the Continent and in America that huge prisons destroy
the individuality of the prisoner; his own personality is lost amid
the hundreds who surround him; he sinks into the position of a mere
unit, and is obliged to be treated as such by the officials in charge
of him. Under such a system it becomes almost impossible to
individualise prisoners; there is no time for it; as a result, the
influence of reformative agencies descends to a minimum and only the
punitive side of justice comes home to the offender. At one time the
value of Reformatory Schools was seriously impaired by herding too
many lads together under one roof; it is now seen that the success of
these institutions is marred by making them too large; it is accepted
as an established maxim that the smaller the school the better the
results. The same principle holds true with respect to prisons.

When the County Magistrates were deprived of their powers by the last
government of Lord Beaconsfield, these powers were in England vested
in the Home Secretary; in Scotland they were latterly vested in the
Secretary for Scotland; in Ireland they are vested in the Chief
Secretary. Under each of these Parliamentary heads there is a body
called the Prison Commissioners or Prison Board. These Commissioners
are centred in London for England; in Edinburgh for Scotland; in
Dublin for Ireland. Under them is a body of Prison Inspectors, and
last of all there comes the actual working staff of the Local Prisons,
consisting of warders, schoolmasters, clerks, governors, chaplains,
and doctors.

Wherein does the Local Prison system as worked by this staff differ
from the system in operation in convict prisons? Perhaps the
difference will be best expressed by saying that work in association
is the centre of the convict system, while work in solitude is the
central idea of the Local Prison system. This definition is not
absolutely correct, for convicts, as we have seen, are subjected to
nine months' solitary confinement at the outset of their sentence, and
in some Local Prisons a certain amount of work in common is performed,
but, taken as a whole, work in common is the central principle of the
one; work in solitude the central principle of the other.

Work in solitude means that the prisoner is shut up in an apartment by
himself which is called his cell. Each cell is provided with an
adequate supply of air and light, and is heated in the winter up to a
sufficiently high temperature for health and comfort. The cell
contains a bed and other personal requisites; it also contains a copy
of the prison rules. Before the prisoner is finally allocated to a
certain cell he is seen by all the superior officers of the prison.
His state of health is inquired into, so as to determine the nature of
his work, and if he is not too old to learn, and has received a
sentence of sufficient length to make it worth while instructing him,
his educational capabilities are specially tested. The seclusion of
the cell is varied by a short service in the prison chapel every
morning and an hour's exercise in the forenoon. It is further varied
in the case of young boys by daily attendance at the prison school.

The cellular system is an application of the old monastic system to
the treatment of criminals. The first cellular prison was built in
Rome by Pope Clement XI. at the commencement of the eighteenth
century; its design was taken from a monastery. The idea passed from
Rome to the Puritans of Pennsylvania; and it has now taken root in all
parts of the civilised world. The believers in the cellular system say
that it prevents prisoners from contaminating each other; it prevents
the hardened criminal from getting hold of the comparative novice;
according to this system, although the offender is in a prison, the
only persons he is permitted to speak to are those whose lives are
free from crime. A prison system which has the negative value of
hindering men from becoming worse is worthy of high consideration, and
if the chief object of imprisonment is the punishment of criminals the
cellular system will not be easily surpassed. On the other hand, if
the purpose of imprisonment is not only to punish but also to prepare
the offender for the duties of society, the system of solitary
confinement will not effectually accomplish this task. On this point
let me refer to the words of M. Prins, the eminent Director General of
Belgian prisons: "Can we teach a man sociability," he says, "by giving
him a cell only, that is to say, the opposite of social life, by
taking away from him the very appearance of moral discipline; by
regulating from morning till night the smallest details of his day,
all his movements and all his thoughts? Is not this to place him
outside the conditions of existence, and to unteach him that liberty
for which we pretend he is being prepared?... Assuredly, let us not
forget that prisons contain incorrigible and corrupt recidivists, the
residuum of large towns who must undoubtedly be isolated from other
men; but they also contain offenders resembling in great part men of
their own class living outside.... If it was a question of making
these men good scholars, good workmen, good soldiers, should we accept
the method of prolonged cellular isolation? And how can that which is
condemned by the experience of ordinary life become useful on the day
some tribunal pronounces a sentence of imprisonment? The physiological
and moral inconveniences of prolonged solitude are evident in other
ways; and attempts are made to combat them by great humanity in
external things. So much is this the case, that for fear of being
cruel to the good, the bad are also pampered by an exaggerated
philanthropy which reaches absurd heights."

A compromise between the absolute seclusion of the cellular system,
and the system of free association, is now being advocated by some
students of prison discipline. Prisoners, it is contended, should be
carefully classified according to their previous character and the
nature of their offence, and also according to the disposition they
manifest in prison. Prisoners sentenced to a term of imprisonment
ranging from three months to two years should during the first three
months remain in solitary confinement for purposes of observation as
to diligence and character. At the end of that period a man, if he
showed fitness for it, would be placed in association during his
working hours, and in his cell during the remainder of the day. In
this way his social instincts would not be so completely stifled as
they are at present; he would not be so entirely left to the vacuity
of his own mind; he would not be so readily led to the indulgence of
disgusting vices ruinous to body and mind. In countries where prisons
are on a large scale such a system as this might easily be adopted,
and it would, if properly managed, be productive of beneficial
results. In small prisons it would be applicable on a limited scale,
the smallness of the prison population preventing proper
classification.

But all prison systems, however excellent in theory, are comparatively
useless unless conducted in an enlightened spirit by competent and
sagacious officials. The best of systems if worked, as sometimes
happens, by a mere martinet, with no horizon beyond insisting on the
letter of official regulations, will be productive of no good
whatever, and, on the other hand, an indifferent system will achieve
excellent results with a competent person at the head of it. This was
admirably pointed out by the head of the Danish Prison Department at
the Stockholm Prison Congress. "Give me," he said, "the best possible
regulations and a bad director, and you will have no success. But give
me a good director, and, even with mediocre regulations, I will answer
for it that everything will go on marvellously." In a recent handbook
on prison management by Herr Krohne, an eminent prison director in the
German service, the qualifications requisite for successful prison
work are clearly laid down.

The successful management of a prison, he says, "demands special
knowledge and ability. This knowledge should first of all consist in a
comprehensive general education, so that the head of a prison may be
able to form a competent opinion in all those branches of knowledge
which bear upon the punishment of crime. He thus stands on a footing
of equality with his subordinates. If he is deficient in this
knowledge he will not be able to carry out the sentences of the law
efficiently, and the maintenance of his official authority will be
encumbered with difficulties. He must also possess an understanding of
the economic and social causes of crime as well as of its individual
causes. An understanding of its economic and social causes supposes
that he should be acquainted with the principles of sociology and
political economy; an understanding of its individual causes supposes
that he should know something of psychology. The historical,
philosophic, and legal aspects of criminal jurisprudence as well as
its formal contents ought not to be unknown ground. In the domain of
prison science he should be thoroughly at home. He ought to be
acquainted with the historical development of punishment by
imprisonment, as well as with the nature of the various prison systems
in existence among modern civilised communities. He ought to have a
clear understanding of the aim and object of imprisonment, and be
thoroughly cognisant of the legal and administrative arrangements by
which it is effected, more especially those of his own State. He
should possess a competent knowledge of all matters and regulations
bearing upon prison administration, so that his own arrangements may
be based upon a ripened judgment.

"This knowledge in the head of a prison should show itself in his
manner of dealing with prisoners. This task demands a high degree of
pedagogic skill, and a force of character which is able, easily and
quickly, to bend the will of others to his own. He should also possess
the power of setting every branch of the administration to rights
whenever anything happens to have gone wrong. He must have a quick eye
for all that is being done; he must see everything; he must hear
everything; nothing should escape him; and still he ought to leave
independence and initiative to every officer in his own department. He
should respect and bear with the individual characteristics of every
officer, especially the superior officers, so that they may be able to
perform their duties with pleasure. In this way all officers will be
able to do their work in his spirit rather than according to his
orders. In order to succeed in this, the head of a prison should
consult with the other officials on all important matters; a daily
conference is best for this purpose. He should hear and weigh their
opinions even when the ultimate decision rests entirely in his hands.
Above all he must understand how to keep peace among the officials, so
that through their harmonious co-operation the objects of a prison may
be more certainly attained.

"A good prison chief," Herr Krohne continues, "is not matured or
educated, but discovered. On this account, the selection of persons
ought not to be narrowed down to any definite class or profession.
Experience has shown that able prison governors have been drawn from
all callings; from the law, from public offices, from the army, from
medicine, from the Church, from trade, from agriculture, from
merchants and manufacturers. From each of these occupations a man may
bring knowledge and ability which makes him suitable for the position.
His preparatory studies will teach him much, but he will learn most
from actual practice, and he will never finish learning, however
experienced he may become. But the root of the matter which can never
be taught is a heart for the miserable; a determination in spite of
failures and disappointments to despair of no man and nothing."[46]

    [46] _Lehrbuch der Gefängnishunde von K. Krohne
    Strafanstalts-director_, pp. 534-6.

Italy up to the present time is almost the only country in which
prison officers receive any preliminary training for their duties. As
a result of this, it not infrequently happens, as Mr. Clay has shown,
that an inexperienced person suddenly placed in absolute charge of a
number of prisoners will in a few days destroy almost all the
reformative work of months and perhaps years. The late Baron von
Holtzendorff was of a similar opinion, holding that one man can in a
short time undo the work of ten. So much has this been felt, that Dr.
von Jageman and several other eminent prison authorities on the
Continent maintain that no man should be placed in charge of prisoners
till he has had some previous training in the nature of his duties. It
has been truly pointed out that the value of imprisonment depends to
an enormous extent on the qualifications of the person placed in
immediate charge of the convicted men. Others are with them
occasionally, he is with them all day long, and unless he comes to his
task with a full knowledge of the delicate and difficult nature of the
duties he has to perform, he will probably exercise a mischievous and
irritating influence on the prisoners committed to his charge. On the
other hand, a well-instructed officer can work wonders in the way of
good, while insisting with inflexible firmness on the rules of
discipline, he is able at the same time by tact and kindliness to
diffuse a moralising atmosphere around him. Some men can do this by
instinct, but the majority require to be taught; it is therefore most
essential that every person entrusted with the control of prisoners
should have some previous theoretical instruction in his duties. After
all, those who can do most real good to prisoners are the warders
immediately in charge of them. Visits from persons outside who take an
interest in the outcast and fallen, are, according to French
experience, comparatively worthless.[47] These visits are well meant,
but they are not paid by the class of people to which the prisoner as
a rule belongs; the gulf between the visitor and the visited is too
great for the establishment of that inner sympathy on which the
permanent success of moralising efforts so greatly depends, and it is
easy for such a visitor to do more harm than good. On the other hand,
if you have a competent and well-instructed class of warders, if you
have these men trained to regard their duties from an elevated point
of view, you possess in them a body of men who are not separated from
prisoners by impassable barriers; you have comparatively little in the
way of social antecedents to estrange the prisoner from the person in
charge of him: such being the case it is easy for the two men to
understand each other, and is, therefore a relatively simple matter
for the one to influence the other for good.

    [47] _Revue des Deux-Mondes, Avril_, 15, 1887.

What is to be done with offenders when their term of punishment has
expired? This is a question which modern society finds it exceedingly
difficult to solve. What is the use of punishing a delinquent for
offences against the law if, the moment his sentence is completed, he
is sent back again into the surroundings which led to his fall. So
long as his surroundings are the same, his acts will be the same,
unless his mind has passed through a revolution during detention in
gaol. The latter event, it must be admitted, sometimes does happen,
although it is not easy in these days to get the world to believe it.
And when it does happen it is marvellous to see how men, through their
own unaided efforts, will redeem their character and wipe out the blot
upon their life. But many offenders pass through little or no change
of mind, and unless delivered from their surroundings they will
continue to fall. Here, however, comes in the difficulty. Many of
these people love their surroundings; they have no desire to change; a
life of squalor among squalid companions is not distasteful to them;
on the contrary, they will refuse to leave old haunts no matter what
inducements are offered them elsewhere. It is hardly possible to do
anything with these offenders, and they unfortunately constitute at
least one fourth of the criminal population. Such persons return again
and again to prisons; and the manager of an important Prisoners' Aid
Society in a great northern city, says, that to aid them "is a mere
waste of money, if not an encouragement to vice."[48] How to deal with
persons of this description is a most tantalising problem. More
vigorous methods of punishment are sometimes advocated as the proper
manner of deterring these habitual and incorrigible offenders, but if
we consider the constitution and antecedents of most of them, it
becomes perfectly certain that such means will not effect the end in
view. As a matter of fact, most of them are not adapted to the
conditions of existence which prevail in a free society. Some of them
might have passed through life fairly well in a more primitive stage
of social development, as, for example, in the days of slavery or
serfdom, but they are manifestly out of place in an age of
unrestricted freedom, when a man may work or remain idle just as he
chooses. A society based upon the principle of individual liberty is a
society of which the members are supposed to be gifted with the
virtues of prudence, industry, and self-control; virtues of this
nature are indeed essential to the existence of such a form of
society. Unfortunately, a certain portion of its members do not
possess them even in an elementary degree, and no amount of seclusion
in prison will ever confer these qualities upon them. Imprisonment, to
be followed by liberty, however rigorous it is made, is accordingly no
solution of the difficulty; the only effective way of dealing with the
incorrigible vagrant, drunkard, and thief, is by some system of
permanent seclusion in a penal colony. All men are not fitted for
freedom, and so long as society acts on the supposition that they are,
it will never get rid of the incorrigible criminal.

    [48] At a recent meeting of the Statistical Society, Mr. Murray
    Browne gave some interesting information respecting the work of
    Prisoners' Aid Societies among habitual offenders. "A question,"
    he said, "had been addressed to all Discharged Prisoners' Aid
    Societies asking what was their experience with regard to
    prisoners who had been four times arrested but not sentenced to
    penal servitude, and had been arrested during a given period, say
    a year. How many of them has turned out (a) satisfactory, (b)
    unsatisfactory, (c) re-convicted? Detailed replies were received
    from fifteen different societies, not all working in the same way,
    or with the same machinery, giving a total of 253 such cases. Of
    these only 95 were reported as satisfactory, 55 were reported as
    unsatisfactory, 66 were re-convicted, 37 being unknown or
    unaccounted for."

It has also to be remembered that a considerable proportion of
incorrigible offenders are not only mentally but also physically
unfitted to earn their living in a free community. Almost always
without a trade, and very often the children of diseased and
degenerate parents, the only kind of work which they can turn to is
rude manual labour, and this is exactly the kind of work they have not
the requisite physical strength to perform. It is only in skilled
trades that the physically weak have a chance at all, and if a feeble
person is not a skilled artisan he will, unless possessed of superior
mental gifts, find it rather a hard matter to earn a comfortable
livelihood. Should it be the case that such a person is below the
average in body and mind, to earn a livelihood becomes almost an
impossibility. Now, this is exactly the position of many habitual
criminals, and more especially of that large class of them which is
being continually convicted and reconvicted of petty offences. What
can be said of them, except to repeat that they are unfit to take a
part in working the modern industrial machine; what can be done with
them except to seclude them in such a way that they will be no longer
able to injure those who can work it.

Outside the ranks of the incorrigible and incapable there exists a
large class of offenders who are perfectly able to earn a honest
living in the world. In many cases it happens that such men require no
assistance on their liberation from prison; they can resume work
immediately their sentence has expired. All that is needed is to send
them back to the district they were tried in, and this is what is
always done if a man cannot reach his destination by mid-day on the
morning of his liberation. But in a certain number of cases discharged
prisoners require more than this; they require tools, or clothes, or
property redeemed from pledge, or a lodging, or to be sent a long
distance home, or to be emigrated. In each and all of these cases,
persons who are not incorrigible criminals are assisted to the best of
their ability and the extent of their funds by Discharged Prisoners'
Aid Societies. One or more of these admirable institutions is attached
to every Local Prison, and every year a vast amount of quiet,
conscientious work is performed. These societies are voluntary
agencies formed for the relief of discharged prisoners. Their funds
are derived partly from private subscriptions and donations, partly
from ancient bequests, and partly from a small sum annually voted by
Parliament. They are conducted on the most economic principles, the
gentlemen who form the committee or who act as secretaries and
treasurers being mostly magistrates and men of substance, who gladly
give their time and services for nothing. The only person who has to
be paid is an agent whose duty it is to see that the recommendations
of the committee with respect to assisting the discharged prisoners
are carried into effect.

A glance at the work of one of these societies will be the best way of
forming a conception of their usefulness as a whole. For this purpose
let us select the Surrey and South London Discharged Prisoners' Aid
Society. In the prison in which the work of this excellent society is
conducted, 17 per cent. of the prison population applied for aid in
1887, and 10 per cent. were assisted, the 7 per cent. refused
assistance were habitual offenders, and had often been previously
helped. Of the number assisted, consisting of 969 persons, 54 were
sent to sea, 2 were assisted to emigrate, 913 were assisted in the way
of redemption of tools, purchase of stock, purchase of clothing, and
so on. In 1888, 929 persons were assisted, 54 were sent to sea, 4 were
helped to emigrate, and 871 aided in other ways. In 1889, assistance
was rendered in 1009 cases of these 36 were sent to sea, and 973
otherwise aided. The average cost per head of sending cases to sea is
three pounds, fourteen shillings; the average cost in other cases is
half a guinea.

What is being done by the Surrey Society is only a sample of the
assistance rendered to discharged prisoners all over England. It ought
also to be stated that some of these Aid Societies undertake to look
after the destitute families of persons committed to prison, and cases
innumerable might be mentioned in which prisoners' wives and children
have been assisted and kept out of the workhouse until the release of
the bread-winner. Other societies again provide permanent homes for
destitute offenders on their discharge from prison. All that is
required of persons making use of those homes is, that they shall earn
as much as will cover a portion of the expense of providing them with
food and shelter. For this purpose work is always provided for them,
or if they prefer it, they may find occupation outside and make the
home a sort of temporary resting-place. It is hardly necessary to add
that Prisoners' Aid Societies could effect much more if they were
better supported by the public. The organisation is there; the men to
work it are there; the only impediment to their labours is a lack of
funds. If the possession of adequate funds enabled all the Prisoners'
Aid Societies to establish Homes for discharged prisoners, those
institutions might be made of the greatest service to the cause of
justice generally. It would then be easy to get a return from them of
the number of persons whose criminal life was due to sheer indolence,
and magistrates would have far less hesitation in dealing with them
than they do now. At the present time, it is sometimes difficult to
know whether an offender is willing to work if he had the opportunity,
but the existence of prisoners' homes would soon solve the question.
Reference to a man's record in one of these institutions would at once
place the magistrate in full possession of the facts, and he would be
able to give judgment with a knowledge of the offender he does not now
possess. In this way many cruel mistakes might be avoided; and, on the
other hand, many hardened offenders dealt with in a more effective
manner.

The difficulty sometimes encountered by discharged prisoners in
finding employment, as well as many other evils inseparable from
imprisonment, has, in recent years, led an increasing number of
jurists to the conclusion that every other method of punishment
should, when the case at all admits of it, be exhausted before the
gaol is resorted to. "The very first principle of enlightened
penology," says Mayhew, "is to endeavour to keep people out of prison
as long as possible, rather than thrust them into it for the most
trivial offences." In many instances it is quite sufficient punishment
for a first offender in a petty case to be publicly rebuked in the
police court. Such a rebuke preceded, as it generally is, by a night's
confinement in the police cells, is just as effective as a deterrent
and far less likely to do permanent harm than a sentence of
imprisonment. It was something of this kind which Bacon had in view,
when he says, respecting criminal courts: "Let there be power also to
inflict a note or mark; such, I mean, as shall not extend to actual
punishment, but may end either in admonition only, or in a light
disgrace; punishing the offender as it were with a blush."[49] A
certain amount of progress has been made of late in this direction,
but there is still ample room for more. On the other hand, experience
has shown that light punishments are of no avail against habitual
offenders. For the last few years this system has been in operation in
the borough of Liverpool, with the result that the number of known
thieves apprehended for indictable crimes has almost doubled within a
comparatively short period. According to the Chief Constable's Report,
the numbers were, in--

1885    1886    1887    1888    1889
 377     470     533     596     731

These figures show that habitual criminals will not be deterred by
light sentences, but rather emboldened in their sinister career.



THE END.





BUCCANEERS AND PIRATES OF OUR COASTS

by

FRANK R. STOCKTON

Illustrated







[Illustration: "The pirates climbed up the sides of the man-of-war as if
they had been twenty-nine cats."--Frontispiece.]


[Illustration]




Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers
New York
by arrangement with The Macmillan Company
Copyright, 1897-1898,
By the Century Co.
Copyright, 1898, 1926,
By the MacMillan Company.
All rights reserved--no part of this book
may be reproduced in any form without
permission in writing from the publisher,
except by a reviewer who wishes to quote
brief passages in connection with a review
written for inclusion in magazine or
newspaper.
Set up and electrotyped July, 1898. Reprinted November,
1898; September, 1905; May, 1906; April, October, 1908;
October, 1910; March, 1913; September, 1914; January,
1915; October, 1917.
Printed in the United States of America




FOREWORD


Tempting boys to be what they should be--giving them in wholesome form
what they want--that is the purpose and power of Scouting. To help
parents and leaders of youth secure _books boys like best_ that are also
best for boys, the Boy Scouts of America organized EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY.
The books included, formerly sold at prices ranging from $1.50 to $2.00
but, by special arrangement with the several publishers interested, are
now sold in the EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY Edition at $1.00 per volume.

The books of EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY were selected by the Library Commission
of the Boy Scouts of America, consisting of George F. Bowerman,
Librarian, Public Library of the District of Columbia; Harrison W.
Craver, Director, Engineering Societies Library, New York City; Claude
G. Leland, Superintendent, Bureau of Libraries, Board of Education, New
York City; Edward F. Stevens, Librarian, Pratt Institute Free Library,
Brooklyn, N.Y., and Franklin K. Mathiews, Chief Scout Librarian. Only
such books were chosen by the Commission as proved to be, by _a nation
wide canvas_, most in demand by the boys themselves. Their popularity is
further attested by the fact that in the EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY Edition,
more than a million and a quarter copies of these books have already
been sold.

We know so well, are reminded so often of the worth of the good book and
great, that too often we fail to observe or understand the influence for
good of a boy's recreational reading. Such books may influence him for
good or ill as profoundly as his play activities, of which they are a
vital part. The needful thing is to find stories in which the heroes
have the characteristics boys so much admire--unquenchable courage,
immense resourcefulness, absolute fidelity, conspicuous greatness. We
believe the books of EVERY BOY'S LIBRARY measurably well meet this
challenge.

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA,

        [signed] James E. West

        Chief Scout Executive.




Contents


Chapter                                                  Page

I.      The Bold Buccaneers                                 1

II.     Some Masters in Piracy                              7

III.    Pupils in Piracy                                   16

IV.     Peter the Great                                    23

V.      The Story of a Pearl Pirate                        31

VI.     The Surprising Adventures of Bartholemy Portuguez  39

VII.    The Pirate who could not Swim                      49

VIII.   How Bartholemy rested Himself                      59

IX.     A Pirate Author                                    65

X.      The Story of Roc, the Brazilian                    72

XI.     A Buccaneer Boom                                   89

XII.    The Story of L'Olonnois the Cruel                  94

XIII.   A Resurrected Pirate                              100

XIV.    Villany on a Grand Scale                          109

XV.     A Just Reward                                     119

XVI.    A Pirate Potentate                                132

XVII.   How Morgan was helped by Some Religious People    145

XVIII.  A Piratical Aftermath                             153

XIX.    A Tight Place for Morgan                          159

XX.     The Story of a High-Minded Pirate                 171

XXI.    Exit Buccaneer; Enter Pirate                      192

XXII.   The Great Blackbeard comes upon the Stage         200

XXIII.  A True-Hearted Sailor draws his Sword             210

XXIV.   A Greenhorn under the Black Flag                  217

XXV.    Bonnet again to the Front                         224

XXVI.   The Battle of the Sand Bars                       233

XXVII.  A Six Weeks' Pirate                               243

XXVIII. The Story of Two Women Pirates                    253

XXIX.   A Pirate from Boyhood                             263

XXX.    A Pirate of the Gulf                              277

XXXI.   The Pirate of the Buried Treasure                 291

XXXII.  The Real Captain Kidd                             309


[Illustration: The Haunts of "The Brethren of the Coast"]




Buccaneers and Pirates of Our Coasts




Chapter I

The Bold Buccaneers


When I was a boy I strongly desired to be a pirate, and the reason for
this was the absolute independence of that sort of life. Restrictions of
all sorts had become onerous to me, and in my reading of the adventures
of the bold sea-rovers of the main, I had unconsciously selected those
portions of a pirate's life which were attractive to me, and had totally
disregarded all the rest.

In fact, I had a great desire to become what might be called a marine
Robin Hood. I would take from the rich and give to the poor; I would run
my long, low, black craft by the side of the merchantman, and when I had
loaded my vessel with the rich stuffs and golden ingots which composed
her cargo, I would sail away to some poor village, and make its
inhabitants prosperous and happy for the rest of their lives by a
judicious distribution of my booty.

I would always be as free as a sea-bird. My men would be devoted to me,
and my word would be their law. I would decide for myself whether this
or that proceeding would be proper, generous, and worthy of my unlimited
power; when tired of sailing, I would retire to my island,--the position
of which, in a beautiful semi-tropic ocean, would be known only to
myself and to my crew,--and there I would pass happy days in the company
of my books, my works of art, and all the various treasures I had taken
from the mercenary vessels which I had overhauled.

Such was my notion of a pirate's life. I would kill nobody; the very
sight of my black flag would be sufficient to put an end to all thought
of resistance on the part of my victims, who would no more think of
fighting me, than a fat bishop would have thought of lifting his hand
against Robin Hood and his merry men; and I truly believe that I
expected my conscience to have a great deal more to do in the way of
approval of my actions, than it had found necessary in the course of my
ordinary school-boy life.

I mention these early impressions because I have a notion that a great
many people--and not only young people--have an idea of piracy not
altogether different from that of my boyhood. They know that pirates
are wicked men, that, in fact, they are sea-robbers or maritime
murderers, but their bold and adventurous method of life, their bravery,
daring, and the exciting character of their expeditions, give them
something of the same charm and interest which belong to the robber
knights of the middle ages. The one mounts his mailed steed and clanks
his long sword against his iron stirrup, riding forth into the world
with a feeling that he can do anything that pleases him, if he finds
himself strong enough. The other springs into his rakish craft, spreads
his sails to the wind, and dashes over the sparkling main with a feeling
that he can do anything he pleases, provided he be strong enough.

The first pirates who made themselves known in American waters were the
famous buccaneers; these began their career in a very commonplace and
unobjectionable manner, and the name by which they were known had
originally no piratical significance. It was derived from the French
word _boucanier_, signifying "a drier of beef."

Some of the West India islands, especially San Domingo, were almost
overrun with wild cattle of various kinds, and this was owing to the
fact that the Spaniards had killed off nearly all the natives, and so
had left the interior of the islands to the herds of cattle which had
increased rapidly. There were a few settlements on the seacoast, but
the Spaniards did not allow the inhabitants of these to trade with any
nation but their own, and consequently the people were badly supplied
with the necessaries of life.

But the trading vessels which sailed from Europe to that part of the
Caribbean Sea were manned by bold and daring sailors, and when they knew
that San Domingo contained an abundance of beef cattle, they did not
hesitate to stop at the little seaports to replenish their stores. The
natives of the island were skilled in the art of preparing beef by
smoking and drying it,--very much in the same way in which our Indians
prepare "jerked meat" for winter use.

But so many vessels came to San Domingo for beef that there were not
enough people on the island to do all the hunting and drying that was
necessary, so these trading vessels frequently anchored in some quiet
cove, and the crews went on shore and devoted themselves to securing a
cargo of beef,--not only enough for their own use, but for trading
purposes; thus they became known as "beef-driers," or buccaneers.

When the Spaniards heard of this new industry which had arisen within
the limits of their possessions, they pursued the vessels of the
buccaneers wherever they were seen, and relentlessly destroyed them and
their crews. But there were not enough Spanish vessels to put down the
trade in dried beef; more European vessels--generally English and
French--stopped at San Domingo; more bands of hunting sailors made their
way into the interior. When these daring fellows knew that the Spaniards
were determined to break up their trade, they became more determined
that it should not be broken up, and they armed themselves and their
vessels so that they might be able to make a defence against the Spanish
men-of-war.

Thus gradually and almost imperceptibly a state of maritime warfare grew
up in the waters of the West Indies between Spain and the beef-traders
of other nations; and from being obliged to fight, the buccaneers became
glad to fight, provided that it was Spain they fought. True to her
policy of despotism and cruelty when dealing with her American
possessions, Spain waged a bitter and bloody war against the buccaneers
who dared to interfere with the commercial relations between herself and
her West India colonies, and in return, the buccaneers were just as
bitter and savage in their warfare against Spain. From defending
themselves against Spanish attacks, they began to attack Spaniards
whenever there was any chance of success, at first only upon the sea,
but afterwards on land. The cruelty and ferocity of Spanish rule had
brought them into existence, and it was against Spain and her
possessions that the cruelty and ferocity which she had taught them were
now directed.

When the buccaneers had begun to understand each other and to effect
organizations among themselves, they adopted a general name,--"The
Brethren of the Coast." The outside world, especially the Spanish world,
called them pirates, sea-robbers, buccaneers,--any title which would
express their lawless character, but in their own denomination of
themselves they expressed only their fraternal relations; and for the
greater part of their career, they truly stood by each other like
brothers.




Chapter II

Some Masters in Piracy


From the very earliest days of history there have been pirates, and it
is, therefore, not at all remarkable that, in the early days of the
history of this continent, sea-robbers should have made themselves
prominent; but the buccaneers of America differed in many ways from
those pirates with whom the history of the old world has made us
acquainted.

It was very seldom that an armed vessel set out from an European port
for the express purpose of sea-robbery in American waters. At first
nearly all the noted buccaneers were traders. But the circumstances
which surrounded them in the new world made of them pirates whose evil
deeds have never been surpassed in any part of the globe.

These unusual circumstances and amazing temptations do not furnish an
excuse for the exceptionally wicked careers of the early American
pirates; but we are bound to remember these causes or we could not
understand the records of the settlement of the West Indies. The
buccaneers were fierce and reckless fellows who pursued their daring
occupation because it was profitable, because they had learned to like
it, and because it enabled them to wreak a certain amount of vengeance
upon the common enemy. But we must not assume that they inaugurated the
piratical conquests and warfare which existed so long upon our eastern
seacoasts.

Before the buccaneers began their careers, there had been great masters
of piracy who had opened their schools in the Caribbean Sea; and in
order that the condition of affairs in this country during parts of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries may be clearly understood, we will
consider some of the very earliest noted pirates of the West Indies.

When we begin a judicial inquiry into the condition of our
fellow-beings, we should try to be as courteous as we can, but we must
be just; consequently a man's fame and position must not turn us aside,
when we are acting as historical investigators.

Therefore, we shall be bold and speak the truth, and although we shall
take off our hats and bow very respectfully, we must still assert that
Christopher Columbus was the first who practised piracy in American
waters.

When he sailed with his three little ships to discover unknown lands, he
was an accredited explorer for the court of Spain, and was bravely
sailing forth with an honest purpose, and with the same regard for law
and justice as is possessed by any explorer of the present day. But when
he discovered some unknown lands, rich in treasure and outside of all
legal restrictions, the views and ideas of the great discoverer
gradually changed. Being now beyond the boundaries of civilization, he
also placed himself beyond the boundaries of civilized law. Robbery,
murder, and the destruction of property, by the commanders of naval
expeditions, who have no warrant or commission for their conduct, is the
same as piracy, and when Columbus ceased to be a legalized explorer, and
when, against the expressed wishes, and even the prohibitions, of the
royal personages who had sent him out on this expedition, he began to
devastate the countries he had discovered, and to enslave and
exterminate their peaceable natives, then he became a master in piracy,
from whom the buccaneers afterward learned many a valuable lesson.

It is not necessary for us to enter very deeply into the consideration
of the policy of Columbus toward the people of the islands of the West
Indies. His second voyage was nothing more than an expedition for the
sake of plunder. He had discovered gold and other riches in the West
Indies and he had found that the people who inhabited the islands were
simple-hearted, inoffensive creatures, who did not know how to fight and
who did not want to fight. Therefore, it was so easy to sail his ships
into the harbors of defenceless islands, to subjugate the natives, and
to take away the products of their mines and soil, that he commenced a
veritable course of piracy.

The acquisition of gold and all sorts of plunder seemed to be the sole
object of this Spanish expedition; natives were enslaved, and subjected
to the greatest hardships, so that they died in great numbers. At one
time three hundred of them were sent as slaves to Spain. A pack of
bloodhounds, which Columbus had brought with him for the purpose, was
used to hunt down the poor Indians when they endeavored to escape from
the hands of the oppressors, and in every way the island of Hayti, the
principal scene of the actions of Columbus, was treated as if its
inhabitants had committed a dreadful crime by being in possession of the
wealth which the Spaniards desired for themselves.

Queen Isabella was greatly opposed to these cruel and unjust
proceedings. She sent back to their native land the slaves which
Columbus had shipped to Spain, and she gave positive orders that no more
of the inhabitants were to be enslaved, and that they were all to be
treated with moderation and kindness. But the Atlantic is a wide ocean,
and Columbus, far away from his royal patron, paid little attention to
her wishes and commands; without going further into the history of this
period, we will simply mention the fact that it was on account of his
alleged atrocities that Columbus was superseded in his command, and sent
back in chains to Spain.

There was another noted personage of the sixteenth century who played
the part of pirate in the new world, and thereby set a most shining
example to the buccaneers of those regions. This was no other than Sir
Francis Drake, one of England's greatest naval commanders.

It is probable that Drake, when he started out in life, was a man of
very law-abiding and orderly disposition, for he was appointed by Queen
Elizabeth a naval chaplain, and, it is said, though there is some doubt
about this, that he was subsequently vicar of a parish. But by nature he
was a sailor, and nothing else, and after having made several voyages in
which he showed himself a good fighter, as well as a good commander, he
undertook, in 1572, an expedition against the Spanish settlements in the
West Indies, for which he had no legal warrant whatever.

Spain was not at war with England, and when Drake sailed with four small
ships into the port of the little town of Nombre de Dios in the middle
of the night, the inhabitants of the town were as much astonished as the
people of Perth Amboy would be if four armed vessels were to steam into
Raritan Bay, and endeavor to take possession of the town. The peaceful
Spanish townspeople were not at war with any civilized nation, and they
could not understand why bands of armed men should invade their streets,
enter the market-place, fire their calivers, or muskets, into the air,
and then sound a trumpet loud enough to wake up everybody in the place.
Just outside of the town the invaders had left a portion of their men,
and when these heard the trumpet in the market-place, they also fired
their guns; all this noise and hubbub so frightened the good people of
the town, that many of them jumped from their beds, and without stopping
to dress, fled away to the mountains. But all the citizens were not such
cowards, and fourteen or fifteen of them armed themselves and went out
to defend their town from the unknown invaders.

Beginners in any trade or profession, whether it be the playing of the
piano, the painting of pictures, or the pursuit of piracy, are often
timid and distrustful of themselves; so it happened on this occasion
with Francis Drake and his men, who were merely amateur pirates, and
showed very plainly that they did not yet understand their business.

When the fifteen Spanish citizens came into the market-place and found
there the little body of armed Englishmen, they immediately fired upon
them, not knowing or caring who they were. This brave resistance seems
to have frightened Drake and his men almost as much as their trumpets
and guns had frightened the citizens, and the English immediately
retreated from the town. When they reached the place where they had left
the rest of their party, they found that these had already run away, and
taken to the boats. Consequently Drake and his brave men were obliged to
take off some of their clothes and to wade out to the little ships. The
Englishmen secured no booty whatever, and killed only one Spaniard, who
was a man who had been looking out of a window to see what was the
matter.

Whether or not Drake's conscience had anything to do with the bungling
manner in which he made this first attempt at piracy, we cannot say, but
he soon gave his conscience a holiday, and undertook some very
successful robbing enterprises. He received information from some
natives, that a train of mules was coming across the Isthmus of Panama
loaded with gold and silver bullion, and guarded only by their drivers;
for the merchants who owned all this treasure had no idea that there was
any one in that part of the world who would commit a robbery upon them.
But Drake and his men soon proved that they could hold up a train of
mules as easily as some of the masked robbers in our western country
hold up a train of cars. All the gold was taken, but the silver was too
heavy for the amateur pirates to carry.

Two days after that, Drake and his men came to a place called "The House
of Crosses," where they killed five or six peaceable merchants, but were
greatly disappointed to find no gold, although the house was full of
rich merchandise of various kinds. As his men had no means of carrying
away heavy goods, he burned up the house and all its contents and went
to his ships, and sailed away with the treasure he had already obtained.

Whatever this gallant ex-chaplain now thought of himself, he was
considered by the Spaniards as an out-and-out pirate, and in this
opinion they were quite correct. During his great voyage around the
world, which he began in 1577, he came down upon the Spanish-American
settlements like a storm from the sea. He attacked towns, carried off
treasure, captured merchant-vessels,--and in fact showed himself to be a
thoroughbred and accomplished pirate of the first class.

It was in consequence of the rich plunder with which his ships were now
loaded, that he made his voyage around the world. He was afraid to go
back the way he came, for fear of capture, and so, having passed the
Straits of Magellan, and having failed to find a way out of the Pacific
in the neighborhood of California, he doubled the Cape of Good Hope, and
sailed along the western coast of Africa to European waters.

This grand piratical expedition excited great indignation in Spain,
which country was still at peace with England, and even in England there
were influential people who counselled the Queen that it would be wise
and prudent to disavow Drake's actions, and compel him to restore to
Spain the booty he had taken from his subjects. But Queen Elizabeth was
not the woman to do that sort of thing. She liked brave men and brave
deeds, and she was proud of Drake. Therefore, instead of punishing him,
she honored him, and went to take dinner with him on board his ship,
which lay at Deptford.

So Columbus does not stand alone as a grand master of piracy. The famous
Sir Francis Drake, who became vice-admiral of the fleet which defeated
the Spanish Armada, was a worthy companion of the great Genoese.

These notable instances have been mentioned because it would be unjust
to take up the history of those resolute traders who sailed from
England, France, and Holland, to the distant waters of the western world
for the purpose of legitimate enterprise and commerce, and who
afterwards became thorough-going pirates, without trying to make it
clear that they had shining examples for their notable careers.




Chapter III

Pupils in Piracy


After the discoveries of Columbus, the Spanish mind seems to have been
filled with the idea that the whole undiscovered world, wherever it
might be, belonged to Spain, and that no other nation had any right
whatever to discover anything on the other side of the Atlantic, or to
make any use whatever of lands which had been discovered. In fact, the
natives of the new countries, and the inhabitants of all old countries
except her own, were considered by Spain as possessing no rights
whatever. If the natives refused to pay tribute, or to spend their days
toiling for gold for their masters, or if vessels from England or France
touched at one of their settlements for purposes of trade, it was all
the same to the Spaniards; a war of attempted extermination was waged
alike against the peaceful inhabitants of Hispaniola, now Hayti, and
upon the bearded and hardy seamen from Northern Europe. Under this
treatment the natives weakened and gradually disappeared; but the
buccaneers became more and more numerous and powerful.

The buccaneers were not unlike that class of men known in our western
country as cowboys. Young fellows of good families from England and
France often determined to embrace a life of adventure, and possibly
profit, and sailed out to the West Indies to get gold and hides, and to
fight Spaniards. Frequently they dropped their family names and assumed
others more suitable to roving freebooters, and, like the bold young
fellows who ride over our western plains, driving cattle and shooting
Indians, they adopted a style of dress as free and easy, but probably
not quite so picturesque, as that of the cowboy. They soon became a very
rough set of fellows, in appearance as well as action, endeavoring in
every way to let the people of the western world understand that they
were absolutely free and independent of the manners and customs, as well
as of the laws of their native countries.

So well was this independence understood, that when the buccaneers
became strong enough to inflict some serious injury upon the settlements
in the West Indies, and the Spanish court remonstrated with Queen
Elizabeth on account of what had been done by some of her subjects, she
replied that she had nothing to do with these buccaneers, who, although
they had been born in England, had ceased for the time to be her
subjects, and the Spaniards must defend themselves against them just as
if they were an independent nation.

But it is impossible for men who have been brought up in civilized
society, and who have been accustomed to obey laws, to rid themselves
entirely of all ideas of propriety and morality, as soon as they begin a
life of lawlessness. So it happened that many of the buccaneers could
not divest themselves of the notions of good behavior to which they had
been accustomed from youth. For instance, we are told of a captain of
buccaneers, who, landing at a settlement on a Sunday, took his crew to
church. As it is not at all probable that any of the buccaneering
vessels carried chaplains, opportunities of attending services must have
been rare. This captain seems to have wished to show that pirates in
church know what they ought to do just as well as other people; it was
for this reason that, when one of his men behaved himself in an improper
and disorderly manner during the service, this proper-minded captain
arose from his seat and shot the offender dead.

There was a Frenchman of that period who must have been a warm-hearted
philanthropist, because, having read accounts of the terrible atrocities
of the Spaniards in the western lands, he determined to leave his home
and his family, and become a buccaneer, in order that he might do what
he could for the suffering natives in the Spanish possessions. He
entered into the great work which he had planned for himself with such
enthusiasm and zeal, that in the course of time he came to be known as
"The Exterminator," and if there had been more people of his
philanthropic turn of mind, there would soon have been no inhabitants
whatever upon the islands from which the Spaniards had driven out the
Indians.

There was another person of that day,--also a Frenchman,--who became
deeply involved in debt in his own country, and feeling that the
principles of honor forbade him to live upon and enjoy what was really
the property of others, he made up his mind to sail across the Atlantic,
and become a buccaneer. He hoped that if he should be successful in his
new profession, and should be enabled to rob Spaniards for a term of
years, he could return to France, pay off all his debts, and afterward
live the life of a man of honor and respectability.

Other ideas which the buccaneers brought with them from their native
countries soon showed themselves when these daring sailors began their
lives as regular pirates; among these, the idea of organization was very
prominent. Of course it was hard to get a number of free and
untrammelled crews to unite and obey the commands of a few officers. But
in time the buccaneers had recognized leaders, and laws were made for
concerted action. In consequence of this the buccaneers became a
formidable body of men, sometimes superior to the Spanish naval and
military forces.

It must be remembered that the buccaneers lived in a very peculiar age.
So far as the history of America is concerned, it might be called the
age of blood and gold. In the newly discovered countries there were no
laws which European nations or individuals cared to observe. In the West
Indies and the adjacent mainlands there were gold and silver, and there
were also valuable products of other kinds, and when the Spaniards
sailed to their part of the new world, these treasures were the things
for which they came. The natives were weak and not able to defend
themselves. All the Spaniards had to do was to take what they could
find, and when they could not find enough they made the poor Indians
find it for them. Here was a part of the world, and an age of the world,
wherein it was the custom for men to do what they pleased, provided they
felt themselves strong enough, and it was not to be supposed that any
one European nation could expect a monopoly of this state of mind.

Therefore it was that while the Spaniards robbed and ruined the natives
of the lands they discovered, the English, French, and Dutch buccaneers
robbed the robbers. Great vessels were sent out from Spain, carrying
nothing in the way of merchandise to America, but returning with all the
precious metals and valuable products of the newly discovered regions,
which could in any way be taken from the unfortunate natives. The gold
mines of the new world had long been worked, and yielded handsome
revenues, but the native method of operating them did not satisfy the
Spaniards, who forced the poor Indians to labor incessantly at the
difficult task of digging out the precious metals, until many of them
died under the cruel oppression. Sometimes the Indians were kept six
months under ground, working in the mines; and at one time, when it was
found that the natives had died off, or had fled from the neighborhood
of some of the rich gold deposits, it was proposed to send to Africa and
get a cargo of negroes to work the mines.

Now it is easy to see that all this made buccaneering a very tempting
occupation. To capture a great treasure ship, after the Spaniards had
been at so much trouble to load it, was a grand thing, according to the
pirate's point of view, and although it often required reckless bravery
and almost superhuman energy to accomplish the feats necessary in this
dangerous vocation, these were qualities which were possessed by nearly
all the sea-robbers of our coast; the stories of some of the most
interesting of these wild and desperate fellows,--men who did not
combine piracy with discoveries and explorations, but who were
out-and-out sea-robbers, and gained in that way all the reputation they
ever possessed,--will be told in subsequent chapters.




Chapter IV

Peter the Great


Very prominent among the early regular buccaneers was a Frenchman who
came to be called Peter the Great. This man seems to have been one of
those adventurers who were not buccaneers in the earlier sense of the
word (by which I mean they were not traders who touched at Spanish
settlements to procure cattle and hides, and who were prepared to fight
any Spaniards who might interfere with them), but they were men who came
from Europe on purpose to prey upon Spanish possessions, whether on land
or sea. Some of them made a rough sort of settlement on the island of
Tortuga, and then it was that Peter the Great seems to have come into
prominence. He gathered about him a body of adherents, but although he
had a great reputation as an individual pirate, it seems to have been a
good while before he achieved any success as a leader.

The fortunes of Peter and his men must have been at a pretty low ebb
when they found themselves cruising in a large, canoe-shaped boat not
far from the island of Hispaniola. There were twenty-nine of them in
all, and they were not able to procure a vessel suitable for their
purpose. They had been a long time floating about in an aimless way,
hoping to see some Spanish merchant-vessel which they might attack and
possibly capture, but no such vessel appeared. Their provisions began to
give out, the men were hungry, discontented, and grumbling. In fact,
they were in almost as bad a condition as were the sailors of Columbus
just before they discovered signs of land, after their long and weary
voyage across the Atlantic.

When Peter and his men were almost on the point of despair, they
perceived, far away upon the still waters, a large ship. With a great
jump, hope sprang up in the breast of every man. They seized the oars
and pulled in the direction of the distant craft. But when they were
near enough, they saw that the vessel was not a merchantman, probably
piled with gold and treasure, but a man-of-war belonging to the Spanish
fleet. In fact, it was the vessel of the vice-admiral. This was an
astonishing and disheartening state of things. It was very much as if a
lion, hearing the approach of probable prey, had sprung from the thicket
where he had been concealed, and had beheld before him, not a fine, fat
deer, but an immense and scrawny elephant.

But the twenty-nine buccaneers in the crew were very hungry. They had
not come out upon those waters to attack men-of-war, but, more than
that, they had not come out to perish by hunger and thirst. There could
be no doubt that there was plenty to eat and to drink on that tall
Spanish vessel, and if they could not get food and water they could not
live more than a day or two longer.

Under the circumstances it was not long before Peter the Great made up
his mind that if his men would stand by him, he would endeavor to
capture that Spanish war-vessel; when he put the question to his crew
they all swore that they would follow him and obey his orders as long as
life was left in their bodies. To attack a vessel armed with cannon, and
manned by a crew very much larger than their little party, seemed almost
like throwing themselves upon certain death. But still, there was a
chance that in some way they might get the better of the Spaniards;
whereas, if they rowed away again into the solitudes of the ocean, they
would give up all chance of saving themselves from death by starvation.
Steadily, therefore, they pulled toward the Spanish vessel, and
slowly--for there was but little wind--she approached them.

The people in the man-of-war did not fail to perceive the little boat
far out on the ocean, and some of them sent to the captain and reported
the fact. The news, however, did not interest him, for he was engaged in
playing cards in his cabin, and it was not until an hour afterward that
he consented to come on deck and look out toward the boat which had been
sighted, and which was now much nearer.

Taking a good look at the boat, and perceiving that it was nothing more
than a canoe, the captain laughed at the advice of some of his officers,
who thought it would be well to fire a few cannon-shot and sink the
little craft. The captain thought it would be a useless proceeding. He
did not know anything about the people in the boat, and he did not very
much care, but he remarked that if they should come near enough, it
might be a good thing to put out some tackle and haul them and their
boat on deck, after which they might be examined and questioned whenever
it should suit his convenience. Then he went down to his cards.

If Peter the Great and his men could have been sure that if they were to
row alongside the Spanish vessel they would have been quietly hauled on
deck and examined, they would have been delighted at the opportunity.
With cutlasses, pistols, and knives, they were more than ready to
demonstrate to the Spaniards what sort of fellows they were, and the
captain would have found hungry pirates uncomfortable persons to
question.

But it seemed to Peter and his crew a very difficult thing indeed to get
themselves on board the man-of-war, so they curbed their ardor and
enthusiasm, and waited until nightfall before approaching nearer. As
soon as it became dark enough they slowly and quietly paddled toward the
great ship, which was now almost becalmed. There were no lights in the
boat, and the people on the deck of the vessel saw and heard nothing on
the dark waters around them.

When they were very near the man-of-war, the captain of the
buccaneers--according to the ancient accounts of this adventure--ordered
his chirurgeon, or surgeon, to bore a large hole in the bottom of their
canoe. It is probable that this officer, with his saws and other
surgical instruments, was expected to do carpenter work when there were
no duties for him to perform in the regular line of his profession. At
any rate, he went to work, and noiselessly bored the hole.

This remarkable proceeding showed the desperate character of these
pirates. A great, almost impossible task was before them, and nothing
but absolute recklessness could enable them to succeed. If his men
should meet with strong opposition from the Spaniards in the proposed
attack, and if any of them should become frightened and try to retreat
to the boat, Peter knew that all would be lost, and consequently he
determined to make it impossible for any man to get away in that boat.
If they could not conquer the Spanish vessel they must die on her decks.

When the half-sunken canoe touched the sides of the vessel, the pirates,
seizing every rope or projection on which they could lay their hands,
climbed up the sides of the man-of-war, as if they had been twenty-nine
cats, and springing over the rail, dashed upon the sailors who were on
deck. These men were utterly stupefied and astounded. They had seen
nothing, they had heard nothing, and all of a sudden they were
confronted with savage fellows with cutlasses and pistols.

Some of the crew looked over the sides to see where these strange
visitors had come from, but they saw nothing, for the canoe had gone to
the bottom. Then they were filled with a superstitious horror, believing
that the wild visitors were devils who had dropped from the sky, for
there seemed no other place from which they could come. Making no
attempt to defend themselves, the sailors, wild with terror, tumbled
below and hid themselves, without even giving an alarm.

The Spanish captain was still playing cards, and whether he was winning
or losing, the old historians do not tell us, but very suddenly a
newcomer took a hand in the game. This was Peter the Great, and he
played the ace of trumps. With a great pistol in his hand, he called
upon the Spanish captain to surrender. That noble commander glanced
around. There was a savage pirate holding a pistol at the head of each
of the officers at the table. He threw up his cards. The trick was won
by Peter and his men.

The rest of the game was easy enough. When the pirates spread themselves
over the vessel, the frightened crew got out of sight as well as they
could. Some, who attempted to seize their arms in order to defend
themselves, were ruthlessly cut down or shot, and when the hatches had
been securely fastened upon the sailors who had fled below, Peter the
Great was captain and owner of that tall Spanish man-of-war.

It is quite certain that the first thing these pirates did to celebrate
their victory was to eat a rousing good supper, and then they took
charge of the vessel, and sailed her triumphantly over the waters on
which, not many hours before, they had feared that a little boat would
soon be floating, filled with their emaciated bodies.

This most remarkable success of Peter the Great worked a great change,
of course, in the circumstances of himself and his men. But it worked a
greater change in the career, and possibly in the character of the
captain. He was now a very rich man, and all his followers had plenty of
money. The Spanish vessel was amply supplied with provisions, and there
was also on board a great quantity of gold bullion, which was to be
shipped to Spain. In fact, Peter and his men had booty enough to satisfy
any sensible pirate. Now we all know that sensible pirates, and people
in any sphere of life who are satisfied when they have enough, are very
rare indeed, and therefore it is not a little surprising that the bold
buccaneer, whose story we are now telling, should have proved that he
merited, in a certain way, the title his companions had given him.

Sailing his prize to the shores of Hispaniola, Peter put on shore all
the Spaniards whose services he did not desire. The rest of his
prisoners he compelled to help his men work the ship, and then, without
delay, he sailed away to France, and there he retired entirely from the
business of piracy, and set himself up as a gentleman of wealth and
leisure.




Chapter V

The Story of a Pearl Pirate


The ordinary story of the pirate, or the wicked man in general, no
matter how successful he may have been in his criminal career, nearly
always ends disastrously, and in that way points a moral which doubtless
has a good effect on a large class of people, who would be very glad to
do wrong, provided no harm was likely to come to them in consequence.
But the story of Peter the Great, which we have just told, contains no
such moral. In fact, its influence upon the adventurers of that period
was most unwholesome.

When the wonderful success of Peter the Great became known, the
buccaneering community at Tortuga was wildly excited. Every
bushy-bearded fellow who could get possession of a small boat, and
induce a score of other bushy-bearded fellows to follow him, wanted to
start out and capture a rich Spanish galleon, as the great ships, used
alike for war and commerce, were then called.

But not only were the French and English sailors and traders who had
become buccaneers excited and stimulated by the remarkable good fortune
of their companion, but many people of adventurous mind, who had never
thought of leaving England for purposes of piracy, now became firmly
convinced that there was no business which promised better than that of
a buccaneer, and some of them crossed the ocean for the express purpose
of getting rich by capturing Spanish vessels homeward bound.

As there were not enough suitable vessels in Tortuga for the demands of
the recently stimulated industry, the buccaneer settlers went to other
parts of the West Indies to obtain suitable craft, and it is related
that in about a month after the great victory of Peter the Great, two
large Spanish vessels, loaded with silver bullion, and two other heavily
laden merchantmen were brought into Tortuga by the buccaneers.

One of the adventurers who set out about this time on a cruise after
gold-laden vessels, was a Frenchman who was known to his countrymen as
Pierre François, and to the English as Peter Francis. He was a good
sailor, and ready for any sort of a sea-fight, but for a long time he
cruised about without seeing anything which it was worth while to
attempt to capture. At last, when his provisions began to give out, and
his men became somewhat discontented, Pierre made up his mind that
rather than return to Tortuga empty-handed, he would make a bold and
novel stroke for fortune.

At the mouth of one of the large rivers of the mainland the Spaniards
had established a pearl fishery,--for there was no kind of wealth or
treasure, on the land, under ground, or at the bottom of the sea, that
the Spaniards did not get if it were possible for them to do so.

Every year, at the proper season, a dozen or more vessels came to this
pearl-bank, attended by a man-of-war to protect them from molestation.
Pierre knew all about this, and as he could not find any Spanish
merchantmen to rob, he thought he would go down and see what he could do
with the pearl-fishers. This was something the buccaneers had not yet
attempted, but no one knows what he can do until he tries, and it was
very necessary that this buccaneer captain should try something
immediately.

When he reached the coast near the mouth of the river, he took the masts
out of his little vessel, and rowed quietly toward the pearl-fishing
fleet, as if he had intended to join them on some entirely peaceable
errand; and, in fact, there was no reason whatever why the Spaniards
should suppose that a boat full of buccaneers should be rowing along
that part of the coast.

The pearl-fishing vessels were all at anchor, and the people on board
were quietly attending to their business. Out at sea, some distance
from the mouth of the river, the man-of-war was lying becalmed. The
native divers who went down to the bottom of the sea to bring up the
shellfish which contained the pearls, plunged into the water, and came
up wet and shining in the sun, with no fear whatever of any sharks which
might be swimming about in search of a dinner, and the people on the
vessels opened the oysters and carefully searched for pearls, feeling as
safe from harm as if they were picking olives in their native groves.

But something worse than a shark was quietly making its way over those
tranquil waters, and no banditti who ever descended from Spanish
mountains upon the quiet peasants of a village, equalled in ferocity the
savage fellows who were crouching in the little boat belonging to Pierre
of Tortuga.

This innocent-looking craft, which the pearl-fishers probably thought
was loaded with fruit or vegetables which somebody from the mainland
desired to sell, was permitted, without being challenged or interfered
with, to row up alongside the largest vessel of the fleet, on which
there were some armed men and a few cannon.

As soon as Pierre's boat touched the Spanish vessel, the buccaneers
sprang on board with their pistols and cutlasses, and a savage fight
began. The Spaniards were surprised, but there were a great many more
of them than there were pirates, and they fought hard. However, the man
who makes the attack, and who is at the same time desperate and hungry,
has a great advantage, and it was not long before the buccaneers were
masters of the vessel. Those of the Spaniards who were not killed, were
forced into the service of their captors, and Pierre found himself in
command of a very good vessel.

Now it so happened that the man-of-war was so far away that she knew
nothing of this fight on board one of the fleet which she was there to
watch, and if she had known of it, she would not have been able to give
any assistance, for there was no wind by which she could sail to the
mouth of the river. Therefore, so far as she was concerned, Pierre
considered himself safe.

But although he had captured a Spanish ship, he was not so foolish as to
haul down her flag, and run up his own in her place. He had had very
good success so far, but he was not satisfied. It was quite probable
that there was a rich store of pearls on board the vessel he had taken,
but on the other vessels of the fleet there were many more pearls, and
these he wanted if he could get them. In fact, he conceived the grand
idea of capturing the whole fleet.

But it would be impossible for Pierre to attempt anything on such a
magnificent scale until he had first disposed of the man-of-war, and as
he had now a good strong ship, with a much larger crew than that with
which he had set out,--for the Spanish prisoners would be obliged to man
the guns and help in every way to fight their countrymen,--Pierre
determined to attack the man-of-war.

A land wind began to blow, which enabled him to make very fair headway
out to sea. The Spanish colors were flying from his topmast, and he
hoped to be able, without being suspected of any evil designs, to get so
near to the man-of-war that he might run alongside and boldly board her.

But something now happened which Pierre could not have expected. When
the commander of the war-vessel perceived that one of the fleet under
his charge was leaving her companions and putting out to sea, he could
imagine no reason for such extraordinary conduct, except that she was
taking advantage of the fact that the wind had not yet reached his
vessel, and was trying to run away with the pearls she had on board.
From these ready suspicions we may imagine that, at that time, the
robbers who robbed robbers were not all buccaneers.

Soon after the Spanish captain perceived that one of his fleet was
making his way out of the river, the wind reached his vessel, and he
immediately set all sail and started in pursuit of the rascals, whom he
supposed to be his dishonest countrymen.

The breeze freshened rapidly, and when Pierre and his men saw that the
man-of-war was coming toward them at a good rate of speed, showing
plainly that she had suspicions of them, they gave up all hope of
running alongside of her and boarding her, and concluded that the best
thing they could do would be to give up their plan of capturing the
pearl-fishing fleet, and get away with the ship they had taken, and
whatever it had on board. So they set all sail, and there was a fine
sea-chase.

The now frightened buccaneers were too anxious to get away. They not
only put on all the sail which the vessel could carry, but they put on
more. The wind blew harder, and suddenly down came the mainmast with a
crash. This stopped the chase, and the next act in the performance would
have to be a sea-fight. Pierre and his buccaneers were good at that sort
of thing, and when the man-of-war came up, there was a terrible time on
board those two vessels. But the Spaniards were the stronger, and the
buccaneers were defeated.

There must have been something in the daring courage of this Frenchman
and his little band of followers, which gave him favor in the eyes of
the Spanish captain, for there was no other reason for the good
treatment which the buccaneers received.

They were not put to the sword nor thrown overboard, not sent on shore
and made to work as slaves,--three very common methods of treating
prisoners in those days. But they were all set free, and put on land,
where they might go where they pleased.

This unfortunate result of the bold enterprise undertaken by Pierre
François was deeply deplored, not only at Tortuga, but in England and in
France. If this bold buccaneer had captured the pearl fleet, it would
have been a victory that would have made a hero of him on each side of
the Atlantic, but had he even been able to get away with the one vessel
he had seized, he would have been a rich man, and might have retired to
a life of ease and affluence; the vessel he had captured proved to be
one of the richest laden of the whole fleet, and not only in the heart
of Pierre and his men, but among his sympathizers in Europe and America,
there was great disappointment at the loss of that mainmast, which,
until it cracked, was carrying him forward to fame and fortune.




Chapter VI

The Surprising Adventures of Bartholemy Portuguez


As we have seen that the buccaneers were mainly English, French, and
Dutch sailors, who were united to make a common piratical warfare upon
the Spaniards in the West Indies, it may seem a little strange to find a
man from Portugal who seemed to be on the wrong side of this peculiar
fight which was going on in the new world between the sailors of
Northern and Southern Europe. But although Portugal is such a close
neighbor of Spain, the two countries have often been at war with each
other, and their interests are by no means the same. The only advantage
that Portugal could expect from the newly discovered treasures of the
West were those which her seafaring men, acting with the seafaring men
of other nations, should wrest from Spanish vessels homeward bound.

Consequently, there were Portuguese among the pirates of those days.
Among these was a man named Bartholemy Portuguez, a famous
_flibustier_.

It may be here remarked that the name of buccaneer was chiefly affected
by the English adventurers on our coast, while the French members of the
profession often preferred the name of "flibustier." This word, which
has since been corrupted into our familiar "filibuster," is said to have
been originally a corruption, being nothing more than the French method
of pronouncing the word "freebooters," which title had long been used
for independent robbers.

Thus, although Bartholemy called himself a flibustier, he was really a
buccaneer, and his name came to be known all over the Caribbean Sea.
From the accounts we have of him it appears that he did not start out on
his career of piracy as a poor man. He had some capital to invest in the
business, and when he went over to the West Indies he took with him a
small ship, armed with four small cannon, and manned by a crew of picked
men, many of them no doubt professional robbers, and the others anxious
for practice in this most alluring vocation, for the gold fields of
California were never more attractive to the bold and hardy adventurers
of our country, than were the gold fields of the sea to the buccaneers
and flibustiers of the seventeenth century.

When Bartholemy reached the Caribbean Sea he probably first touched at
Tortuga, the pirates' headquarters, and then sailed out very much as if
he had been a fisherman going forth to see what he could catch on the
sea. He cruised about on the track generally taken by treasure ships
going from the mainland to the Havanas, or the island of Hispaniola, and
when at last he sighted a vessel in the distance, it was not long before
he and his men had made up their minds that if they were to have any
sport that day it would be with what might be called most decidedly a
game fish, for the ship slowly sailing toward them was a large Spanish
vessel, and from her portholes there protruded the muzzles of at least
twenty cannon. Of course, they knew that such a vessel would have a much
larger crew than their own, and, altogether, Bartholemy was very much in
the position of a man who should go out to harpoon a sturgeon, and who
should find himself confronted by a vicious swordfish.

The Spanish merchantmen of that day were generally well armed, for
getting home safely across the Atlantic was often the most difficult
part of the treasure-seeking. There were many of these ships, which,
although they did not belong to the Spanish navy, might almost be
designated as men-of-war; and it was one of these with which our
flibustier had now met.

But pirates and fishermen cannot afford to pick and choose. They must
take what comes to them and make the best of it, and this is exactly
the way in which the matter presented itself to Bartholemy and his men.
They held one of their councils around the mast, and after an address
from their leader, they decided that come what may, they must attack
that Spanish vessel.

So the little pirate sailed boldly toward the big Spaniard, and the
latter vessel, utterly astonished at the audacity of this attack,--for
the pirates' flag was flying,--lay to, head to the wind, and waited, the
gunners standing by their cannon. When the pirates had come near enough
to see and understand the size and power of the vessel they had thought
of attacking, they did not, as might have been expected, put about and
sail away at the best of their vessel's speed, but they kept straight on
their course as if they had been about to fall upon a great, unwieldy
merchantman, manned by common sailors.

Perceiving the foolhardiness of the little vessel, the Spanish commander
determined to give it a lesson which would teach its captain to
understand better the relative power of great vessels and little ones,
so, as soon as the pirates' vessel was near enough, he ordered a
broadside fired upon it. The Spanish ship had a great many people on
board. It had a crew of seventy men, and besides these there were some
passengers, and regular marines, and knowing that the captain had
determined to fire upon the approaching vessel, everybody had gathered
on deck to see the little pirate ship go down.

But the ten great cannon-balls which were shot out at Bartholemy's
little craft all missed their aim, and before the guns could be reloaded
or the great ship be got around so as to deliver her other broadside,
the pirate vessel was alongside of her. Bartholemy had fired none of his
cannon. Such guns were useless against so huge a foe. What he was after
was a hand-to-hand combat on the deck of the Spanish ship.

The pirates were all ready for hot work. They had thrown aside their
coats and shirts as if each of them were going into a prize fight, and,
with their cutlasses in their hands, and their pistols and knives in
their belts, they scrambled like monkeys up the sides of the great ship.
But Spaniards are brave men and good fighters, and there were more than
twice as many of them as there were of the pirates, and it was not long
before the latter found out that they could not capture that vessel by
boarding it. So over the side they tumbled as fast as they could go,
leaving some of their number dead and wounded behind them. They jumped
into their own vessel, and then they put off to a short distance to take
breath and get ready for a different kind of a fight. The triumphant
Spaniards now prepared to get rid of this boat load of half-naked wild
beasts, which they could easily do if they should take better aim with
their cannon than they had done before.

But to their amazement they soon found that they could do nothing with
the guns, nor were they able to work their ship so as to get it into
position for effectual shots. Bartholemy and his men laid aside their
cutlasses and their pistols, and took up their muskets, with which they
were well provided. Their vessel lay within a very short range of the
Spanish ship, and whenever a man could be seen through the portholes, or
showed himself in the rigging or anywhere else where it was necessary to
go in order to work the ship, he made himself a target for the good aim
of the pirates. The pirate vessel could move about as it pleased, for it
required but a few men to manage it, and so it kept out of the way of
the Spanish guns, and its best marksmen, crouching close to the deck,
fired and fired whenever a Spanish head was to be seen.

For five long hours this unequal contest was kept up. It might have
reminded one of a man with a slender rod and a long, delicate line, who
had hooked a big salmon. The man could not pull in the salmon, but, on
the other hand, the salmon could not hurt the man, and in the course of
time the big fish would be tired out, and the man would get out his
landing-net and scoop him in.

Now Bartholemy thought he could scoop in the Spanish vessel. So many of
her men had been shot that the two crews would be more nearly equal. So,
boldly, he ran his vessel alongside the big ship and again boarded her.
Now there was another great fight on the decks. The Spaniards had ceased
to be triumphant, but they had become desperate, and in the furious
combat ten of the pirates were killed and four wounded. But the
Spaniards fared worse than that; more than half of the men who had not
been shot by the pirates went down before their cutlasses and pistols,
and it was not long before Bartholemy had captured the great Spanish
ship.

It was a fearful and a bloody victory he had gained. A great part of his
own men were lying dead or helpless on the deck, and of the Spaniards
only forty were left alive, and these, it appears from the accounts,
must have been nearly all wounded or disabled.

It was a common habit among the buccaneers, as well as among the
Spaniards, to kill all prisoners who were not able to work for them, but
Bartholemy does not seem to have arrived at the stage of depravity
necessary for this. So he determined not to kill his prisoners, but he
put them all into a boat and let them go where they pleased; while he
was left with fifteen men to work a great vessel which required a crew
of five times that number.

But the men who could conquer and capture a ship against such enormous
odds, felt themselves fully capable of working her, even with their
little crew. Before doing anything in the way of navigation they cleared
the decks of the dead bodies, taking from them all watches, trinkets,
and money, and then went below to see what sort of a prize they had
gained. They found it a very good one indeed. There were seventy-five
thousand crowns in money, besides a cargo of cocoa worth five thousand
more, and this, combined with the value of the ship and all its
fittings, was a great fortune for those days.

When the victorious pirates had counted their gains and had mended the
sails and rigging of their new ship, they took what they wanted out of
their own vessel, and left her to sink or to float as she pleased, and
then they sailed away in the direction of the island of Jamaica. But the
winds did not suit them, and, as their crew was so very small, they
could not take advantage of light breezes as they could have done if
they had had men enough. Consequently they were obliged to stop to get
water before they reached the friendly vicinity of Jamaica.

They cast anchor at Cape St. Anthony on the west end of Cuba. After a
considerable delay at this place they started out again to resume their
voyage, but it was not long before they perceived, to their horror,
three Spanish vessels coming towards them. It was impossible for a very
large ship, manned by an extremely small crew, to sail away from those
fully equipped vessels, and as to attempting to defend themselves
against the overwhelming power of the antagonists, that was too absurd
to be thought of even by such a reckless fellow as Bartholemy. So, when
the ship was hailed by the Spanish vessels he lay to and waited until a
boat's crew boarded him. With the eye of a nautical man the Spanish
captain of one of the ships perceived that something was the matter with
this vessel, for its sails and rigging were terribly cut up in the long
fight through which it had passed, and of course he wanted to know what
had happened. When he found that the great ship was in the possession of
a very small body of pirates, Bartholemy and his men were immediately
made prisoners, taken on board the Spanish ship, stripped of everything
they possessed, even their clothes, and shut up in the hold. A crew from
the Spanish ships was sent to man the vessel which had been captured,
and then the little fleet set sail for San Francisco in Campeachy.

An hour had worked a very great change in the fortunes of Bartholemy and
his men; in the fine cabin of their grand prize they had feasted and
sung, and had gloried over their wonderful success, and now, in the
vessel of their captor, they were shut up in the dark, to be enslaved or
perhaps executed.

But it is not likely that any one of them either despaired or repented;
these are sentiments very little in use by pirates.




Chapter VII

The Pirate who could not Swim


When the little fleet of Spanish vessels, including the one which had
been captured by Bartholemy Portuguez and his men, were on their way to
Campeachy, they met with very stormy weather so that they were
separated, and the ship which contained Bartholemy and his companions
arrived first at the port for which they were bound.

The captain, who had Bartholemy and the others in charge, did not know
what an important capture he had made; he supposed that these pirates
were ordinary buccaneers, and it appears that it was his intention to
keep them as his own private prisoners, for, as they were all very
able-bodied men, they would be extremely useful on a ship. But when his
vessel was safely moored, and it became known in the town that he had a
company of pirates on board, a great many people came from shore to see
these savage men, who were probably looked upon very much as if they
were a menagerie of wild beasts brought from foreign lands.

Among the sightseers who came to the ship was a merchant of the town who
had seen Bartholemy before, and who had heard of his various exploits.
He therefore went to the captain of the vessel and informed him that he
had on board one of the very worst pirates in the whole world, whose
wicked deeds were well known in various parts of the West Indies, and
who ought immediately to be delivered up to the civil authorities. This
proposal, however, met with no favor from the Spanish captain, who had
found Bartholemy a very quiet man, and could see that he was a very
strong one, and he did not at all desire to give up such a valuable
addition to his crew. But the merchant grew very angry, for he knew that
Bartholemy had inflicted great injury on Spanish commerce, and as the
captain would not listen to him, he went to the Governor of the town and
reported the case. When this dignitary heard the story he immediately
sent a party of officers to the ship, and commanded the captain to
deliver the pirate leader into their charge. The other men were left
where they were, but Bartholemy was taken away and confined in another
ship. The merchant, who seemed to know a great deal about him, informed
the authorities that this terrible pirate had been captured several
times, but that he had always managed to escape, and, therefore, he was
put in irons, and preparations were made to execute him on the next day;
for, from what he had heard, the Governor considered that this pirate
was no better than a wild beast, and that he should be put to death
without even the formality of a trial.

But there was a Spanish soldier on board the ship who seemed to have had
some pity, or perhaps some admiration, for the daring pirate, and he
thought that if he were to be hung the next day it was no more than
right to let him know it, so that when he went in to take some food to
Bartholemy he told him what was to happen.

Now this pirate captain was a man who always wanted to have a share in
what was to happen, and he immediately racked his brain to find out what
he could do in this case. He had never been in a more desperate
situation, but he did not lose heart, and immediately set to work to
free himself from his irons, which were probably very clumsy affairs. At
last, caring little how much he scratched and tore his skin, he
succeeded in getting rid of his fetters, and could move about as freely
as a tiger in a cage. To get out of this cage was Bartholemy's first
object. It would be comparatively easy, because in the course of time
some one would come into the hold, and the athletic buccaneer thought
that he could easily get the better of whoever might open the hatch.
But the next act in this truly melodramatic performance would be a great
deal more difficult; for in order to escape from the ship it would be
absolutely necessary for Bartholemy to swim to shore, and he did not
know how to swim, which seems a strange failing in a hardy sailor with
so many other nautical accomplishments. In the rough hold where he was
shut up, our pirate, peering about, anxious and earnest, discovered two
large, earthen jars in which wine had been brought from Spain, and with
these he determined to make a sort of life-preserver. He found some
pieces of oiled cloth, which he tied tightly over the open mouths of the
jars and fastened them with cords. He was satisfied that this unwieldy
contrivance would support him in the water.

Among other things he had found in his rummagings about the hold was an
old knife, and with this in his hand he now sat waiting for a good
opportunity to attack his sentinel.

This came soon after nightfall. A man descended with a lantern to see
that the prisoner was still secure,--let us hope that it was not the
soldier who had kindly informed him of his fate,--and as soon as he was
fairly in the hold Bartholemy sprang upon him. There was a fierce
struggle, but the pirate was quick and powerful, and the sentinel was
soon dead. Then, carrying his two jars, Bartholemy climbed swiftly and
noiselessly up the short ladder, came out on deck in the darkness, made
a rush toward the side of the ship, and leaped overboard. For a moment
he sank below the surface, but the two air-tight jars quickly rose and
bore him up with them. There was a bustle on board the ship, there was
some random firing of muskets in the direction of the splashing which
the watch had heard, but none of the balls struck the pirate or his
jars, and he soon floated out of sight and hearing. Kicking out with his
legs, and paddling as well as he could with one hand while he held on to
the jars with the other, he at last managed to reach the land, and ran
as fast as he could into the dark woods beyond the town.

Bartholemy was now greatly in fear that, when his escape was discovered,
he would be tracked by bloodhounds,--for these dogs were much used by
the Spaniards in pursuing escaping slaves or prisoners,--and he
therefore did not feel safe in immediately making his way along the
coast, which was what he wished to do. If the hounds should get upon his
trail, he was a lost man. The desperate pirate, therefore, determined to
give the bloodhounds no chance to follow him, and for three days he
remained in a marshy forest, in the dark recesses of which he could
hide, and where the water, which covered the ground, prevented the dogs
from following his scent. He had nothing to eat except a few roots of
water-plants, but he was accustomed to privation, and these kept him
alive. Often he heard the hounds baying on the dry land adjoining the
marsh, and sometimes he saw at night distant torches, which he was sure
were carried by men who were hunting for him.

But at last the pursuit seemed to be given up; and hearing no more dogs
and seeing no more flickering lights, Bartholemy left the marsh and set
out on his long journey down the coast. The place he wished to reach was
called Golpho Triste, which was forty leagues away, but where he had
reason to suppose he would find some friends. When he came out from
among the trees, he mounted a small hill and looked back upon the town.
The public square was lighted, and there in the middle of it he saw the
gallows which had been erected for his execution, and this sight,
doubtless, animated him very much during the first part of his journey.

The terrible trials and hardships which Bartholemy experienced during
his tramp along the coast were such as could have been endured only by
one of the strongest and toughest of men. He had found in the marsh an
old gourd, or calabash, which he had filled with fresh water,--for he
could expect nothing but sea-water during his journey,--and as for
solid food he had nothing but the raw shellfish which he found upon the
rocks; but after a diet of roots, shellfish must have been a very
agreeable change, and they gave him all the strength and vigor he
needed. Very often he found streams and inlets which he was obliged to
ford, and as he could see that they were always filled with alligators,
the passage of them was not very pleasant. His method of getting across
one of these narrow streams, was to hurl rocks into the water until he
had frightened away the alligators immediately in front of him, and
then, when he had made for himself what seemed to be a free passage, he
would dash in and hurry across.

At other times great forests stretched down to the very coast, and
through these he was obliged to make his way, although he could hear the
roars and screams of wild beasts all about him. Any one who is afraid to
go down into a dark cellar to get some apples from a barrel at the foot
of the stairs, can have no idea of the sort of mind possessed by
Bartholemy Portuguez. The animals might howl around him and glare at him
with their shining eyes, and the alligators might lash the water into
foam with their great tails, but he was bound for Golpho Triste and was
not to be stopped on his way by anything alive.

But at last he came to something not alive, which seemed to be an
obstacle which would certainly get the better of him. This was a wide
river, flowing through the inland country into the sea. He made his way
up the shore of this river for a considerable distance, but it grew but
little narrower, and he could see no chance of getting across. He could
not swim and he had no wine-jars now with which to buoy himself up, and
if he had been able to swim he would probably have been eaten up by
alligators soon after he left the shore. But a man in his situation
would not be likely to give up readily; he had done so much that he was
ready to do more if he could only find out what to do.

Now a piece of good fortune happened to him, although to an ordinary
traveller it might have been considered a matter of no importance
whatever. On the edge of the shore, where it had floated down from some
region higher up the river, Bartholemy perceived an old board, in which
there were some long and heavy rusty nails. Greatly encouraged by this
discovery the indefatigable traveller set about a work which resembled
that of the old woman who wanted a needle, and who began to rub a
crow-bar on a stone in order to reduce it to the proper size. Bartholemy
carefully knocked all the nails out of the board, and then finding a
large flat stone, he rubbed down one of them until he had formed it
into the shape of a rude knife blade, which he made as sharp as he
could. Then with these tools he undertook the construction of a raft,
working away like a beaver, and using the sharpened nails instead of his
teeth. He cut down a number of small trees, and when he had enough of
these slender trunks he bound them together with reeds and osiers, which
he found on the river bank. So, after infinite labor and trial he
constructed a raft which would bear him on the surface of the water.
When he had launched this he got upon it, gathering up his legs so as to
keep out of reach of the alligators, and with a long pole pushed himself
off from shore. Sometimes paddling and sometimes pushing his pole
against the bottom, he at last got across the river and took up his
journey upon dry land.

But our pirate had not progressed very far upon the other side of the
river before he met with a new difficulty of a very formidable
character. This was a great forest of mangrove trees, which grow in
muddy and watery places and which have many roots, some coming down from
the branches, and some extending themselves in a hopeless tangle in the
water and mud. It would have been impossible for even a stork to walk
through this forest, but as there was no way of getting around it
Bartholemy determined to go through it, even if he could not walk. No
athlete of the present day, no matter if he should be a most
accomplished circus-man, could reasonably expect to perform the feat
which this bold pirate successfully accomplished. For five or six
leagues he went through that mangrove forest, never once setting his
foot upon the ground,--by which is meant mud, water, and roots,--but
swinging himself by his hands and arms, from branch to branch, as if he
had been a great ape, only resting occasionally, drawing himself upon a
stout limb where he might sit for a while and get his breath. If he had
slipped while he was swinging from one limb to another and had gone down
into the mire and roots beneath him, it is likely that he would never
have been able to get out alive. But he made no slips. He might not have
had the agility and grace of a trapeze performer, but his grasp was
powerful and his arms were strong, and so he swung and clutched, and
clutched and swung, until he had gone entirely through the forest and
had come out on the open coast.




Chapter VIII

How Bartholemy rested Himself


It was full two weeks from the time that Bartholemy began his most
adventurous and difficult journey before he reached the little town of
Golpho Triste, where, as he had hoped, he found some of his buccaneer
friends. Now that his hardships and dangers were over, and when, instead
of roots and shellfish, he could sit down to good, plentiful meals, and
stretch himself upon a comfortable bed, it might have been supposed that
Bartholemy would have given himself a long rest, but this hardy pirate
had no desire for a vacation at this time. Instead of being worn out and
exhausted by his amazing exertions and semi-starvation, he arrived among
his friends vigorous and energetic and exceedingly anxious to recommence
business as soon as possible. He told them of all that had happened to
him, what wonderful good fortune had come to him, and what terrible bad
fortune had quickly followed it, and when he had related his adventures
and his dangers he astonished even his piratical friends by asking them
to furnish him with a small vessel and about twenty men, in order that
he might go back and revenge himself, not only for what had happened to
him, but for what would have happened if he had not taken his affairs
into his own hands.

To do daring and astounding deeds is part of the business of a pirate,
and although it was an uncommonly bold enterprise that Bartholemy
contemplated, he got his vessel and he got his men, and away he sailed.
After a voyage of about eight days he came in sight of the little
seaport town, and sailing slowly along the coast, he waited until
nightfall before entering the harbor. Anchored at a considerable
distance from shore was the great Spanish ship on which he had been a
prisoner, and from which he would have been taken and hung in the public
square; the sight of the vessel filled his soul with a savage fury known
only to pirates and bull dogs.

As the little vessel slowly approached the great ship, the people on
board the latter thought it was a trading-vessel from shore, and allowed
it to come alongside, such small craft seldom coming from the sea. But
the moment Bartholemy reached the ship he scrambled up its side almost
as rapidly as he had jumped down from it with his two wine-jars a few
weeks before, and every one of his crew, leaving their own vessel to
take care of itself, scrambled up after him.

Nobody on board was prepared to defend the ship. It was the same old
story; resting quietly in a peaceful harbor, what danger had they to
expect? As usual the pirates had everything their own way; they were
ready to fight, and the others were not, and they were led by a man who
was determined to take that ship without giving even a thought to the
ordinary alternative of dying in the attempt. The affair was more of a
massacre than a combat, and there were people on board who did not know
what was taking place until the vessel had been captured.

As soon as Bartholemy was master of the great vessel he gave orders to
slip the cable and hoist the sails, for he was anxious to get out of
that harbor as quickly as possible. The fight had apparently attracted
no attention in the town, but there were ships in the port whose company
the bold buccaneer did not at all desire, and as soon as possible he got
his grand prize under way and went sailing out of the port.

Now, indeed, was Bartholemy triumphant; the ship he had captured was a
finer one and a richer one than that other vessel which had been taken
from him. It was loaded with valuable merchandise, and we may here
remark that for some reason or other all Spanish vessels of that day
which were so unfortunate as to be taken by pirates, seemed to be richly
laden.

If our bold pirate had sung wild pirate songs, as he passed the flowing
bowl while carousing with his crew in the cabin of the Spanish vessel he
had first captured, he now sang wilder songs, and passed more flowing
bowls, for this prize was a much greater one than the first. If
Bartholemy could have communicated his great good fortune to the other
buccaneers in the West Indies, there would have been a boom in piracy
which would have threatened great danger to the honesty and integrity of
the seafaring men of that region.

But nobody, not even a pirate, has any way of finding out what is going
to happen next, and if Bartholemy had had an idea of the fluctuations
which were about to occur in the market in which he had made his
investments he would have been in a great hurry to sell all his stock
very much below par. The fluctuations referred to occurred on the ocean,
near the island of Pinos, and came in the shape of great storm waves,
which blew the Spanish vessel with all its rich cargo, and its
triumphant pirate crew, high up upon the cruel rocks, and wrecked it
absolutely and utterly. Bartholemy and his men barely managed to get
into a little boat, and row themselves away. All the wealth and
treasure which had come to them with the capture of the Spanish vessel,
all the power which the possession of that vessel gave them, and all the
wild joy which came to them with riches and power, were lost to them in
as short a space of time as it had taken to gain them.

In the way of well-defined and conspicuous ups and downs, few lives
surpassed that of Bartholemy Portuguez. But after this he seems, in the
language of the old English song, "All in the downs." He had many
adventures after the desperate affair in the bay of Campeachy, but they
must all have turned out badly for him, and, consequently, very well, it
is probable, for divers and sundry Spanish vessels, and, for the rest of
his life, he bore the reputation of an unfortunate pirate. He was one of
those men whose success seemed to have depended entirely upon his own
exertions. If there happened to be the least chance of his doing
anything, he generally did it; Spanish cannon, well-armed Spanish crews,
manacles, imprisonment, the dangers of the ocean to a man who could not
swim, bloodhounds, alligators, wild beasts, awful forests impenetrable
to common men, all these were bravely met and triumphed over by
Bartholemy.

But when he came to ordinary good fortune, such as any pirate might
expect, Bartholemy the Portuguese found that he had no chance at all.
But he was not a common pirate, and was, therefore, obliged to be
content with his uncommon career. He eventually settled in the island of
Jamaica, but nobody knows what became of him. If it so happened that he
found himself obliged to make his living by some simple industry, such
as the selling of fruit upon a street corner, it is likely he never
disposed of a banana or an orange unless he jumped at the throat of a
passer-by and compelled him to purchase. As for sitting still and
waiting for customers to come to him, such a man as Bartholemy would not
be likely to do anything so commonplace.




Chapter IX

A Pirate Author


In the days which we are considering there were all sorts of pirates,
some of whom gained much reputation in one way and some in another, but
there was one of them who had a disposition different from that of any
of his fellows. He was a regular pirate, but it is not likely that he
ever did much fighting, for, as he took great pride in the brave deeds
of the Brethren of the Coast, he would have been sure to tell us of his
own if he had ever performed any. He was a mild-mannered man, and,
although he was a pirate, he eventually laid aside the pistol, the
musket, and the cutlass, and took up the pen,--a very uncommon weapon
for a buccaneer.

This man was John Esquemeling, supposed by some to be a Dutchman, and by
others a native of France. He sailed to the West Indies in the year
1666, in the service of the French West India Company. He went out as a
peaceable merchant clerk, and had no more idea of becoming a pirate
than he had of going into literature, although he finally did both.

At that time the French West India Company had a colonial establishment
on the island of Tortuga, which was principally inhabited, as we have
seen before, by buccaneers in all their various grades and stages, from
beef-driers to pirates. The French authorities undertook to supply these
erratic people with the goods and provisions which they needed, and
built storehouses with everything necessary for carrying on the trade.
There were plenty of purchasers, for the buccaneers were willing to buy
everything which could be brought from Europe. They were fond of good
wine, good groceries, good firearms, and ammunition, fine cutlasses, and
very often good clothes, in which they could disport themselves when on
shore. But they had peculiar customs and manners, and although they were
willing to buy as much as the French traders had to sell, they could not
be prevailed upon to pay their bills. A pirate is not the sort of a man
who generally cares to pay his bills. When he gets goods in any way, he
wants them charged to him, and if that charge includes the features of
robbery and murder, he will probably make no objection. But as for
paying good money for what is received, that is quite another thing.

That this was the state of feeling on the island of Tortuga was
discovered before very long by the French mercantile agents, who then
applied to the mother country for assistance in collecting the debts due
them, and a body of men, who might be called collectors, or deputy
sheriffs, was sent out to the island; but although these officers were
armed with pistols and swords, as well as with authority, they could do
nothing with the buccaneers, and after a time the work of endeavoring to
collect debts from pirates was given up. And as there was no profit in
carrying on business in this way, the mercantile agency was also given
up, and its officers were ordered to sell out everything they had on
hand, and come home. There was, therefore, a sale, for which cash
payments were demanded, and there was a great bargain day on the island
of Tortuga. Everything was disposed of,--the stock of merchandise on
hand, the tables, the desks, the stationery, the bookkeepers, the
clerks, and the errand boys. The living items of the stock on hand were
considered to be property just as if they had been any kind of
merchandise, and were sold as slaves.

Now poor John Esquemeling found himself in a sad condition. He was
bought by one of the French officials who had been left on the island,
and he described his new master as a veritable fiend. He was worked
hard, half fed, treated cruelly in many ways, and to add to his misery,
his master tantalized him by offering to set him free upon the payment
of a sum of money equal to about three hundred dollars. He might as well
have been asked to pay three thousand or three million dollars, for he
had not a penny in the world.

At last he was so fortunate as to fall sick, and his master, as
avaricious as he was cruel, fearing that this creature he owned might
die, and thus be an entire loss to him, sold him to a surgeon, very much
as one would sell a sick horse to a veterinary surgeon, on the principle
that he might make something out of the animal by curing him.

His new master treated Esquemeling very well, and after he had taken
medicine and food enough to set him upon his legs, and had worked for
the surgeon about a year, that kind master offered him his liberty if he
would promise, as soon as he could earn the money, to pay him one
hundred dollars, which would be a profit to his owner, who had paid but
seventy dollars for him. This offer, of course, Esquemeling accepted
with delight, and having made the bargain, he stepped forth upon the
warm sands of the island of Tortuga a free and happy man. But he was as
poor as a church mouse. He had nothing in the world but the clothes on
his back, and he saw no way in which he could make money enough to keep
himself alive until he had paid for himself. He tried various ways of
support, but there was no opening for a young business man in that
section of the country, and at last he came to the conclusion that there
was only one way by which he could accomplish his object, and he
therefore determined to enter into "the wicked order of pirates or
robbers at sea."

It must have been a strange thing for a man accustomed to pens and ink,
to yard-sticks and scales, to feel obliged to enroll himself into a
company of bloody, big-bearded pirates, but a man must eat, and
buccaneering was the only profession open to our ex-clerk. For some
reason or other, certainly not on account of his bravery and daring,
Esquemeling was very well received by the pirates of Tortuga. Perhaps
they liked him because he was a mild-mannered man and so different from
themselves. Nobody was afraid of him, every one felt superior to him,
and we are all very apt to like people to whom we feel superior.

As for Esquemeling himself, he soon came to entertain the highest
opinion of his pirate companions. He looked upon the buccaneers who had
distinguished themselves as great heroes, and it must have been
extremely gratifying to those savage fellows to tell Esquemeling all the
wonderful things they had done. In the whole of the West Indies there
was no one who was in the habit of giving such intelligent attention to
the accounts of piratical depredations and savage sea-fights, as was
Esquemeling and if he had demanded a salary as a listener there is no
doubt that it would have been paid to him.

It was not long before his intense admiration of the buccaneers and
their performances began to produce in him the feeling that the history
of these great exploits should not be lost to the world, and so he set
about writing the lives and adventures of many of the buccaneers with
whom he became acquainted.

He remained with the pirates for several years, and during that time
worked very industriously getting material together for his history.
When he returned to his own country in 1672, having done as much
literary work as was possible among the uncivilized surroundings of
Tortuga, he there completed a book, which he called, "The Buccaneers of
America, or The True Account of the Most Remarkable Assaults Committed
of Late Years Upon the Coasts of the West Indies by the Buccaneers,
etc., by John Esquemeling, One of the Buccaneers, Who Was Present at
Those Tragedies."

From this title it is probable that our literary pirate accompanied his
comrades on their various voyages and assaults, in the capacity of
reporter, and although he states he was present at many of "those
tragedies," he makes no reference to any deeds of valor or cruelty
performed by himself, which shows him to have been a wonderfully
conscientious historian. There are persons, however, who doubt his
impartiality, because, as he liked the French, he always gave the
pirates of that nationality the credit for most of the bravery displayed
on their expeditions, and all of the magnanimity and courtesy, if there
happened to be any, while the surliness, brutality, and extraordinary
wickednesses were all ascribed to the English. But be this as it may,
Esquemeling's history was a great success. It was written in Dutch and
was afterwards translated into English, French, and Spanish. It
contained a great deal of information regarding buccaneering in general,
and most of the stories of pirates which we have already told, and many
of the surprising narrations which are to come, have been taken from the
book of this buccaneer historian.




Chapter X

The Story of Roc, the Brazilian


Having given the history of a very plain and quiet buccaneer, who was a
reporter and writer, and who, if he were now living, would be eligible
as a member of an Authors' Club, we will pass to the consideration of a
regular out-and-out pirate, one from whose mast-head would have floated
the black flag with its skull and cross-bones if that emblematic piece
of bunting had been in use by the pirates of the period.

This famous buccaneer was called Roc, because he had to have a name, and
his own was unknown, and "the Brazilian," because he was born in Brazil,
though of Dutch parents. Unlike most of his fellow-practitioners he did
not gradually become a pirate. From his early youth he never had an
intention of being anything else. As soon as he grew to be a man he
became a bloody buccaneer, and at the first opportunity he joined a
pirate crew, and had made but a few voyages when it was perceived by his
companions that he was destined to become a most remarkable sea-robber.
He was offered the command of a ship with a well-armed crew of marine
savages, and in a very short time after he had set out on his first
independent cruise he fell in with a Spanish ship loaded with silver
bullion; having captured this, he sailed with his prize to Jamaica,
which was one of the great resorts of the English buccaneers. There his
success delighted the community, his talents for the conduct of great
piratical operations soon became apparent, and he was generally
acknowledged as the Head Pirate of the West Indies.

He was now looked upon as a hero even by those colonists who had no
sympathy with pirates, and as for Esquemeling, he simply worshipped the
great Brazilian desperado. If he had been writing the life and times of
Alexander the Great, Julius Cæsar, or Mr. Gladstone, he could not have
been more enthusiastic in his praises. And as in The Arabian Nights the
roc is described as the greatest of birds, so, in the eyes of the
buccaneer biographer, this Roc was the greatest of pirates. But it was
not only in the mind of the historian that Roc now became famous; the
better he became known, the more general was the fear and respect felt
for him, and we are told that the mothers of the islands used to put
their children to sleep by threatening them with the terrible Roc if
they did not close their eyes. This story, however, I regard with a
great deal of doubt; it has been told of Saladin and many other wicked
and famous men, but I do not believe it is an easy thing to frighten a
child into going to sleep. If I found it necessary to make a youngster
take a nap, I should say nothing of the condition of affairs in Cuba or
of the persecutions of the Armenians.

This renowned pirate from Brazil must have been a terrible fellow to
look at. He was strong and brawny, his face was short and very wide,
with high cheek-bones, and his expression probably resembled that of a
pug dog. His eyebrows were enormously large and bushy, and from under
them he glared at his mundane surroundings. He was not a man whose
spirit could be quelled by looking him steadfastly in the eye. It was
his custom in the daytime to walk about, carrying a drawn cutlass,
resting easily upon his arm, edge up, very much as a fine gentleman
carries his high silk hat, and any one who should impertinently stare or
endeavor to quell his high spirits in any other way, would probably have
felt the edge of that cutlass descending rapidly through his physical
organism.

He was a man who insisted upon being obeyed, and if any one of his crew
behaved improperly, or was even found idle, this strict and inexorable
master would cut him down where he stood. But although he was so strict
and exacting during the business sessions of his piratical year, by
which I mean when he was cruising around after prizes, he was very much
more disagreeable when he was taking a vacation. On his return to
Jamaica after one of his expeditions it was his habit to give himself
some relaxation after the hardships and dangers through which he had
passed, and on such occasions it was a great comfort to Roc to get
himself thoroughly drunk. With his cutlass waving high in the air, he
would rush out into the street and take a whack at every one whom he
met. As far as was possible the citizens allowed him to have the street
to himself, and it was not at all likely that his visits to Jamaica were
looked forward to with any eager anticipations.

Roc, it may be said, was not only a bloody pirate, but a blooded one; he
was thoroughbred. From the time he had been able to assert his
individuality he had been a pirate, and there was no reason to suppose
that he would ever reform himself into anything else. There were no
extenuating circumstances in his case; in his nature there was no alloy,
nor moderation, nor forbearance. The appreciative Esquemeling, who might
be called the Boswell of the buccaneers, could never have met his hero
Roc, when that bushy-bearded pirate was running "amuck" in the streets,
but if he had, it is not probable that his book would have been written.
He assures us that when Roc was not drunk he was esteemed, but at the
same time feared; but there are various ways of gaining esteem, and
Roc's method certainly succeeded very well in the case of his literary
associate.

As we have seen, the hatred of the Spaniards by the buccaneers began
very early in the settlement of the West Indies, and in fact, it is very
likely that if there had been no Spaniards there would never have been
any buccaneers; but in all the instances of ferocious enmity toward the
Spaniards there has been nothing to equal the feelings of Roc, the
Brazilian, upon that subject. His dislike to everything Spanish arose,
he declared, from cruelties which had been practised upon his parents by
people of that nation, and his main principle of action throughout all
his piratical career seems to have been that there was nothing too bad
for a Spaniard. The object of his life was to wage bitter war against
Spanish ships and Spanish settlements. He seldom gave any quarter to his
prisoners, and would often subject them to horrible tortures in order to
make them tell where he could find the things he wanted. There is
nothing horrible that has ever been written or told about the buccaneer
life, which could not have been told about Roc, the Brazilian. He was a
typical pirate.

[Illustration: "In a small boat filled with some of his trusty men, he
rowed quietly into the port."--p. 77.]

Roc was very successful, in his enterprises, and took a great deal of
valuable merchandise to Jamaica, but although he and his crew were
always rich men when they went on shore, they did not remain in that
condition very long. The buccaneers of that day were all very
extravagant, and, moreover, they were great gamblers, and it was not
uncommon for them to lose everything they possessed before they had been
on shore a week. Then there was nothing for them to do but to go on
board their vessels and put out to sea in search of some fresh prize. So
far Roc's career had been very much like that of many other Companions
of the Coast, differing from them only in respect to intensity and
force, but he was a clever man with ideas, and was able to adapt himself
to circumstances.

He was cruising about Campeachy without seeing any craft that was worth
capturing, when he thought that it would be very well for him to go out
on a sort of marine scouting expedition and find out whether or not
there were any Spanish vessels in the bay which were well laden and
which were likely soon to come out. So, with a small boat filled with
some of his trusty men, he rowed quietly into the port to see what he
could discover. If he had had Esquemeling with him, and had sent that
mild-mannered observer into the harbor to investigate into the state of
affairs, and come back with a report, it would have been a great deal
better for the pirate captain, but he chose to go himself, and he came
to grief. No sooner did the people on the ships lying in the harbor
behold a boat approaching with a big-browed, broad-jawed mariner sitting
in the stern, and with a good many more broad-backed, hairy mariners
than were necessary, pulling at the oars, than they gave the alarm. The
well-known pirate was recognized, and it was not long before he was
captured. Roc must have had a great deal of confidence in his own
powers, or perhaps he relied somewhat upon the fear which his very
presence evoked. But he made a mistake this time; he had run into the
lion's jaw, and the lion had closed his teeth upon him.

When the pirate captain and his companions were brought before the
Governor, he made no pretence of putting them to trial. Buccaneers were
outlawed by the Spanish, and were considered as wild beasts to be killed
without mercy wherever caught. Consequently Roc and his men were thrown
into a dungeon and condemned to be executed. If, however, the Spanish
Governor had known what was good for himself, he would have had them
killed that night.

During the time that preparations were going on for making examples of
these impertinent pirates, who had dared to enter the port of Campeachy,
Roc was racking his brains to find some method of getting out of the
terrible scrape into which he had fallen. This was a branch of the
business in which a capable pirate was obliged to be proficient; if he
could not get himself out of scrapes, he could not expect to be
successful. In this case there was no chance of cutting down sentinels,
or jumping overboard with a couple of wine-jars for a life-preserver, or
of doing any of those ordinary things which pirates were in the habit of
doing when escaping from their captors. Roc and his men were in a
dungeon on land, inside of a fortress, and if they escaped from this,
they would find themselves unarmed in the midst of a body of Spanish
soldiers. Their stout arms and their stout hearts were of no use to them
now, and they were obliged to depend upon their wits if they had any.
Roc had plenty of wit, and he used it well. There was a slave, probably
not a negro nor a native, but most likely some European who had been
made prisoner, who came in to bring him food and drink, and by the means
of this man the pirate hoped to play a trick upon the Governor. He
promised the slave that if he would help him,--and he told him it would
be very easy to do so,--he would give him money enough to buy his
freedom and to return to his friends, and this, of course, was a great
inducement to the poor fellow, who may have been an Englishman or a
Frenchman in good circumstances at home. The slave agreed to the
proposals, and the first thing he did was to bring some
writing-materials to Roc, who thereupon began the composition of a
letter upon which he based all his hopes of life and freedom.

When he was coming into the bay, Roc had noticed a large French vessel
that was lying at some distance from the town, and he wrote his letter
as if it had come from the captain of this ship. In the character of
this French captain he addressed his letter to the Governor of the town,
and in it he stated that he had understood that certain Companions of
the Coast, for whom he had great sympathy,--for the French and the
buccaneers were always good friends,--had been captured by the Governor,
who, he heard, had threatened to execute them. Then the French captain,
by the hand of Roc, went on to say that if any harm should come to these
brave men, who had been taken and imprisoned when they were doing no
harm to anybody, he would swear, in his most solemn manner, that never,
for the rest of his life, would he give quarter to any Spaniard who
might fall into his hands, and he, moreover, threatened that any kind of
vengeance which should become possible for the buccaneers and French
united, to inflict upon the Spanish ships, or upon the town of
Campeachy, should be taken as soon as possible after he should hear of
any injury that might be inflicted upon the unfortunate men who were
then lying imprisoned in the fortress.

When the slave came back to Roc, the letter was given to him with very
particular directions as to what he was to do with it. He was to
disguise himself as much as possible, so that he should not be
recognized by the people of the place, and then in the night he was to
make his way out of the town, and early in the morning he was to return
as if he had been walking along the shore of the harbor, when he was to
state that he had been put on shore from the French vessel in the
offing, with a letter which he was to present to the Governor.

The slave performed his part of the business very well. The next day,
wet and bedraggled, from making his way through the weeds and mud of the
coast, he presented himself at the fortress with his letter, and when he
was allowed to take it to the Governor, no one suspected that he was a
person employed about the place. Having fulfilled his mission, he
departed, and when seen again he was the same servant whose business it
was to carry food to the prisoners.

The Governor read the letter with a disquieted mind; he knew that the
French ship which was lying outside the harbor was a powerful vessel and
he did not like French ships, anyway. The town had once been taken and
very badly treated by a little fleet of French and English buccaneers,
and he was very anxious that nothing of the kind should happen again.
There was no great Spanish force in the harbor at that time, and he did
not know how many buccaneering vessels might be able to gather together
in the bay if it should become known that the great pirate Roc had been
put to death in Campeachy. It was an unusual thing for a prisoner to
have such powerful friends so near by, and the Governor took Roc's case
into most earnest consideration. A few hours' reflection was sufficient
to convince him that it would be very unsafe to tamper with such a
dangerous prize as the pirate Roc, and he determined to get rid of him
as soon as possible. He felt himself in the position of a man who has
stolen a baby-bear, and who hears the roar of an approaching parent
through the woods; to throw away the cub and walk off as though he had
no idea there were any bears in that forest would be the inclination of
a man so situated, and to get rid of the great pirate without provoking
the vengeance of his friends was the natural inclination of the
Governor.

Now Roc and his men were treated well, and having been brought before
the Governor, were told that in consequence of their having committed no
overt act of disorder they would be set at liberty and shipped to
England, upon the single condition that they would abandon piracy and
agree to become quiet citizens in whatever respectable vocation they
might select.

To these terms Roc and his men agreed without argument. They declared
that they would retire from the buccaneering business, and that nothing
would suit them better than to return to the ways of civilization and
virtue. There was a ship about to depart for Spain, and on this the
Governor gave Roc and his men free passage to the other side of the
ocean. There is no doubt that our buccaneers would have much preferred
to have been put on board the French vessel; but as the Spanish Governor
had started his prisoners on the road to reform, he did not wish to
throw them into the way of temptation by allowing them to associate with
such wicked companions as Frenchmen, and Roc made no suggestion of the
kind, knowing very well how greatly astonished the French captain would
be if the Governor were to communicate with him on the subject.

On the voyage to Spain Roc was on his good behavior, and he was a man
who knew how to behave very well when it was absolutely necessary: no
doubt there must have been many dull days on board ship when he would
have been delighted to gamble, to get drunk, and to run "amuck" up and
down the deck. But he carefully abstained from all these recreations,
and showed himself to be such an able-bodied and willing sailor that the
captain allowed him to serve as one of the crew. Roc knew how to do a
great many things; not only could he murder and rob, but he knew how to
turn an honest penny when there was no other way of filling his purse.
He had learned among the Indians how to shoot fish with bow and arrows,
and on this voyage across the Atlantic he occupied all his spare time in
sitting in the rigging and shooting the fish which disported themselves
about the vessel. These fish he sold to the officers, and we are told
that in this way he earned no less than five hundred crowns, perhaps
that many dollars. If this account is true, fish must have been very
costly in those days, but it showed plainly that if Roc had desired to
get into an honest business, he would have found fish-shooting a
profitable occupation. In every way Roc behaved so well that for his
sake all his men were treated kindly and allowed many privileges.

But when this party of reformed pirates reached Spain and were allowed
to go where they pleased, they thought no more of the oaths they had
taken to abandon piracy than they thought of the oaths which they had
been in the habit of throwing right and left when they had been
strolling about on the island of Jamaica. They had no ship, and not
enough money to buy one, but as soon as they could manage it they sailed
back to the West Indies, and eventually found themselves in Jamaica, as
bold and as bloody buccaneers as ever they had been.

Not only did Roc cast from him every thought of reformation and a
respectable life, but he determined to begin the business of piracy on a
grander scale than ever before. He made a compact with an old French
buccaneer, named Tributor, and with a large company of buccaneers he
actually set out to take a town. Having lost everything he possessed,
and having passed such a long time without any employment more
profitable than that of shooting fish with a bow and arrows, our doughty
pirate now desired to make a grand strike, and if he could take a town
and pillage it of everything valuable it contained, he would make a very
good fortune in a very short time, and might retire, if he chose, from
the active practice of his profession.

The town which Roc and Tributor determined to attack was Merida, in
Yucatan, and although this was a bold and rash undertaking, the two
pirates were bold and rash enough for anything. Roc had been a prisoner
in Merida, and on account of his knowledge of the town he believed that
he and his followers could land upon the coast, and then quietly advance
upon the town without their approach being discovered. If they could do
this, it would be an easy matter to rush upon the unsuspecting garrison,
and, having annihilated these, make themselves masters of the town.

But their plans did not work very well; they were discovered by some
Indians, after they had landed, who hurried to Merida and gave notice of
the approach of the buccaneers. Consequently, when Roc and his
companions reached the town they found the garrison prepared for them,
cannons loaded, and all the approaches guarded. Still the pirates did
not hesitate; they advanced fiercely to the attack just as they were
accustomed to do when they were boarding a Spanish vessel, but they soon
found that fighting on land was very different from fighting at sea. In
a marine combat it is seldom that a party of boarders is attacked in the
rear by the enemy, although on land such methods of warfare may always
be expected; but Roc and Tributor did not expect anything of the kind,
and they were, therefore, greatly dismayed when a party of horsemen from
the town, who had made a wide détour through the woods, suddenly charged
upon their rear. Between the guns of the garrison and the sabres of the
horsemen the buccaneers had a very hard time, and it was not long before
they were completely defeated. Tributor and a great many of the pirates
were killed or taken, and Roc, the Brazilian, had a terrible fall.

This most memorable fall occurred in the estimation of John Esquemeling,
who knew all about the attack on Merida, and who wrote the account of
it. But he had never expected to be called upon to record that his
great hero, Roc, the Brazilian, saved his life, after the utter defeat
of himself and his companions, by ignominiously running away. The loyal
chronicler had as firm a belief in the absolute inability of his hero to
fly from danger as was shown by the Scottish Douglas, when he stood, his
back against a mass of stone, and invited his enemies to "Come one, come
all." The bushy-browed pirate of the drawn cutlass had so often
expressed his contempt for a soldier who would even surrender, to say
nothing of running away, that Esquemeling could scarcely believe that
Roc had retreated from his enemies, deserted his friends, and turned his
back upon the principles which he had always so truculently proclaimed.

But this downfall of a hero simply shows that Esquemeling, although he
was a member of the piratical body, and was proud to consider himself a
buccaneer, did not understand the true nature of a pirate. Under the
brutality, the cruelty, the dishonesty, and the recklessness of the
sea-robbers of those days, there was nearly always meanness and
cowardice. Roc, as we have said in the beginning of this sketch, was a
typical pirate; under certain circumstances he showed himself to have
all those brave and savage qualities which Esquemeling esteemed and
revered, and under other circumstances he showed those other qualities
which Esquemeling despised, but which are necessary to make up the true
character of a pirate.

The historian John seems to have been very much cut up by the manner in
which his favorite hero had rounded off his piratical career, and after
that he entirely dropped Roc from his chronicles.

This out-and-out pirate was afterwards living in Jamaica, and probably
engaged in new enterprises, but Esquemeling would have nothing more to
do with him nor with the history of his deeds.




Chapter XI

A Buccaneer Boom


The condition of affairs in the West Indies was becoming very serious in
the eyes of the Spanish rulers. They had discovered a new country, they
had taken possession of it, and they had found great wealth of various
kinds, of which they were very much in need. This wealth was being
carried to Spain as fast as it could be taken from the unfortunate
natives and gathered together for transportation, and everything would
have gone on very well indeed had it not been for the most culpable and
unwarranted interference of that lawless party of men, who might almost
be said to amount to a nationality, who were continually on the alert to
take from Spain everything she could take from America. The English,
French, and Dutch governments were generally at peace with Spain, but
they sat by quietly and saw their sailor subjects band themselves
together and make war upon Spanish commerce,--a very one-sided commerce,
it is true.

It was of no use for Spain to complain of the buccaneers to her sister
maritime nations. It is not certain that they could have done anything
to interfere with the operations of the sea-robbers who originally
sailed from their coasts, but it is certain they did not try to do
anything. Whatever was to be done, Spain must do herself. The pirates
were as slippery as they were savage, and although the Spaniards made a
regular naval war upon them, they seemed to increase rather than to
diminish. Every time that a Spanish merchantman was taken, and its gold
and silver and valuable goods carried off to Tortuga or Jamaica, and
divided among a lot of savage and rollicking fellows, the greater became
the enthusiasm among the Brethren of the Coast, and the wider spread the
buccaneering boom. More ships laden almost entirely with stalwart men,
well provided with arms, and very badly furnished with principles, came
from England and France, and the Spanish ships of war in the West Indies
found that they were confronted by what was, in many respects, a regular
naval force.

The buccaneers were afraid of nothing; they paid no attention to the
rules of war,--a little ship would attack a big one without the
slightest hesitation, and more than that, would generally take it,--and
in every way Spain was beginning to feel as if she were acting the part
of provider to the pirate seamen of every nation.

Finding that she could do nothing to diminish the number of the
buccaneering vessels, Spain determined that she would not have so many
richly laden ships of her own upon these dangerous seas; consequently, a
change was made in regard to the shipping of merchandise and the
valuable metals from America to her home ports. The cargoes were
concentrated, and what had previously been placed upon three ships was
crowded into the holds and between the decks of one great vessel, which
was so well armed and defended as to make it almost impossible for any
pirate ship to capture it. In some respects this plan worked very well,
although when the buccaneers did happen to pounce upon one of these
richly laden vessels, in such numbers and with such swift ferocity, that
they were able to capture it, they rejoiced over a prize far more
valuable than anything the pirate soul had ever dreamed of before. But
it was not often that one of these great ships was taken, and for a time
the results of Spanish robbery and cruelty were safely carried to Spain.

But it was very hard to get the better of the buccaneers; their lives
and their fortunes depended upon this boom, and if in one way they could
not get the gold out of the Spaniards, which the latter got out of the
natives, they would try another. When the miners in the gold fields find
they can no longer wash out with their pans a paying quantity of the
precious metal, they go to work on the rocks and break them into pieces
and crush them into dust; so, when the buccaneers found it did not pay
to devote themselves to capturing Spanish gold on its transit across the
ocean, many of them changed their methods of operation and boldly
planned to seize the treasures of their enemy before it was put upon the
ships.

Consequently, the buccaneers formed themselves into larger bodies
commanded by noted leaders, and made attacks upon the Spanish
settlements and towns. Many of these were found nearly defenceless, and
even those which boasted fortifications often fell before the reckless
charges of the buccaneers. The pillage, the burning, and the cruelty on
shore exceeded that which had hitherto been known on the sea. There is
generally a great deal more in a town than there is in a ship, and the
buccaneers proved themselves to be among the most outrageous, exacting,
and cruel conquerors ever known in the world. They were governed by no
laws of warfare; whatever they chose to do they did. They respected
nobody, not even themselves, and acted like wild beasts, without the
disposition which is generally shown by a wild beast, to lie down and go
to sleep when he has had enough.

There were times when it seemed as though it would be safer for a man
who had a regard for his life and comfort, to sail upon a pirate ship
instead of a Spanish galleon, or to take up his residence in one of the
uncivilized communities of Tortuga or Jamaica, instead of settling in a
well-ordered Spanish-American town with its mayor, its officials, and
its garrison.

It was a very strange nation of marine bandits which had thus sprung
into existence on these faraway waters; it was a nation of grown-up men,
who existed only for the purpose of carrying off that which other people
were taking away; it was a nation of second-hand robbers, who carried
their operations to such an extent that they threatened to do away
entirely with that series of primary robberies to which Spain had
devoted herself. I do not know that there were any companies formed in
those days for the prosecution of buccaneering, but I am quite sure that
if there had been, their shares would have gone up to a very high
figure.




Chapter XII

The Story of L'Olonnois the Cruel


In the preceding chapter we have seen that the buccaneers had at last
become so numerous and so formidable that it was dangerous for a Spanish
ship laden with treasure from the new world to attempt to get out of the
Caribbean Sea into the Atlantic, and that thus failing to find enough
richly laden vessels to satisfy their ardent cravings for plunder, the
buccaneers were forced to make some change in their methods of criminal
warfare; and from capturing Spanish galleons, they formed themselves
into well-organized bodies and attacked towns.

Among the buccaneer leaders who distinguished themselves as land pirates
was a thoroughbred scoundrel by the name of Francis L'Olonnois, who was
born in France. In those days it was the custom to enforce servitude
upon people who were not able to take care of themselves. Unfortunate
debtors and paupers of all classes were sold to people who had need of
their services. The only difference sometimes between master and
servant depended entirely upon the fact that one had money, and the
other had none. Boys and girls were sold for a term of years, somewhat
as if they had been apprentices, and it so happened that the boy
L'Olonnois was sold to a master who took him to the West Indies. There
he led the life of a slave until he was of age, and then, being no
longer subject to ownership, he became one of the freest and most
independent persons who ever walked this earth.

He began his career on the island of Hispaniola, where he took up the
business of hunting and butchering cattle; but he very soon gave up this
life for that of a pirate, and enlisted as a common sailor on one of
their ships. Here he gave signs of such great ability as a brave and
unscrupulous scoundrel that one of the leading pirates on the island of
Tortuga gave him a ship and a crew, and set him up in business on his
own account. The piratical career of L'Olonnois was very much like that
of other buccaneers of the day, except that he was so abominably cruel
to the Spanish prisoners whom he captured that he gained a reputation
for vile humanity, surpassing that of any other rascal on the western
continent. When he captured a prisoner, it seemed to delight his soul as
much to torture and mutilate him before killing him as to take away
whatever valuables he possessed. His reputation for ingenious
wickedness spread all over the West Indies, so that the crews of Spanish
ships, attacked by this demon, would rather die on their decks or sink
to the bottom in their ships than be captured by L'Olonnois.

All the barbarities, the brutalities, and the fiendish ferocity which
have ever been attributed to the pirates of the world were united in the
character of this inhuman wretch, who does not appear to be so good an
example of the true pirate as Roc, the Brazilian. He was not so brave,
he was not so able, and he was so utterly base that it would be
impossible for any one to look upon him as a hero. After having attained
in a very short time the reputation of being the most bloody and wicked
pirate of his day, L'Olonnois was unfortunate enough to be wrecked upon
the coast, not far from the town of Campeachy. He and his crew got
safely to shore, but it was not long before their presence was
discovered by the people of the town, and the Spanish soldiers thereupon
sallied out and attacked them. There was a fierce fight, but the
Spaniards were the stronger, and the buccaneers were utterly defeated.
Many of them were killed, and most of the rest wounded or taken
prisoners.

Among the wounded was L'Olonnois, and as he knew that if he should be
discovered he would meet with no mercy, he got behind some bushes,
scooped up several handfuls of sand, mixed it with his blood, and with
it rubbed his face so that it presented the pallor of a corpse. Then he
lay down among the bodies of his dead companions, and when the Spaniards
afterwards walked over the battlefield, he was looked upon as one of the
common pirates whom they had killed.

When the soldiers had retired into the town with their prisoners, the
make-believe corpse stealthily arose and made his way into the woods,
where he stayed until his wounds were well enough for him to walk about.
He divested himself of his great boots, his pistol belt, and the rest of
his piratical costume, and, adding to his scanty raiment a cloak and hat
which he had stolen from a poor cottage, he boldly approached the town
and entered it. He looked like a very ordinary person, and no notice was
taken of him by the authorities. Here he found shelter and something to
eat, and he soon began to make himself very much at home in the streets
of Campeachy.

It was a very gay time in the town, and, as everybody seemed to be
happy, L'Olonnois was very glad to join in the general rejoicing, and
these hilarities gave him particular pleasure as he found out that he
was the cause of them. The buccaneers who had been captured, and who
were imprisoned in the fortress, had been interrogated over and over
again by the Spanish officials in regard to L'Olonnois, their commander,
and, as they had invariably answered that he had been killed, the
Spanish were forced to believe the glad tidings, and they celebrated the
death of the monster as the greatest piece of public good fortune which
could come to their community. They built bonfires, they sang songs
about the death of the black-hearted buccaneer, and services of
thanksgiving were held in their churches.

All this was a great delight to L'Olonnois, who joined hands with the
young men and women, as they danced around the bonfires; he assisted in
a fine bass voice in the choruses which told of his death and his
dreadful doom, and he went to church and listened to the priests and the
people as they gave thanks for their deliverance from his enormities.

But L'Olonnois did not waste all his time chuckling over the baseless
rejoicings of the people of the town. He made himself acquainted with
some of the white slaves, men who had been brought from England, and
finding some of them very much discontented with their lot, he ventured
to tell them that he was one of the pirates who had escaped, and offered
them riches and liberty if they would join him in a scheme he had
concocted. It would have been easy enough for him to get away from the
town by himself, but this would have been of no use to him unless he
obtained some sort of a vessel, and some men to help him navigate it. So
he proposed to the slaves that they should steal a small boat belonging
to the master of one of them, and in this, under cover of the night, the
little party safely left Campeachy and set sail for Tortuga, which, as
we have told, was then the headquarters of the buccaneers, and "the
common place of refuge of all sorts or wickedness, and the seminary, as
it were, of all manner of pirates."




Chapter XIII

A Resurrected Pirate


When L'Olonnois arrived at Tortuga he caused great astonishment among
his old associates; that he had come back a comparative pauper surprised
no one, for this was a common thing to happen to a pirate, but the
wonder was that he got back at all.

He had no money, but, by the exercise of his crafty abilities, he
managed to get possession of a ship, which he manned with a crew of
about a score of impecunious dare-devils who were very anxious to do
something to mend their fortunes.

Having now become very fond of land-fighting, he did not go out in
search of ships, but directed his vessel to a little village called de
los Cayos, on the coast of Cuba, for here, he thought, was a chance for
a good and easy stroke of business. This village was the abode of
industrious people, who were traders in tobacco, hides, and sugar, and
who were obliged to carry on their traffic in a rather peculiar manner.
The sea near their town was shallow, so that large ships could not
approach very near, and thus the villagers were kept busy carrying goods
and supplies in small boats, backwards and forwards from the town to the
vessels at anchor. Here was a nice little prize that could not get away
from him, and L'Olonnois had plenty of time to make his preparations to
seize it. As he could not sail a ship directly up to the town, he
cruised about the coast at some distance from de los Cayos, endeavoring
to procure two small boats in which to approach the town, but although
his preparations were made as quietly as possible, the presence of his
vessel was discovered by some fishermen. They knew that it was a pirate
ship, and some of them who had seen L'Olonnois recognized that dreaded
pirate upon the deck. Word of the impending danger was taken to the
town, and the people there immediately sent a message by land to Havana,
informing the Governor of the island that the cruel pirate L'Olonnois
was in a ship a short distance from their village, which he undoubtedly
intended to attack.

When the Governor heard this astonishing tale, it was almost impossible
for him to believe it. The good news of the death of L'Olonnois had come
from Campeachy to Havana, and the people of the latter town also
rejoiced greatly. To be now told that this scourge of the West Indies
was alive, and was about to fall upon a peaceful little village on the
island over which he ruled, filled the Governor with rage as well as
amazement, and he ordered a well-armed ship, with a large crew of
fighting men, to sail immediately for de los Cayos, giving the captain
express orders that he was not to come back until he had obliterated
from the face of the earth the whole of the wretched gang with the
exception of the leader. This extraordinary villain was to be brought to
Havana to be treated as the Governor should see fit. In order that his
commands should be executed promptly and effectually, the Governor sent
a big negro slave in the ship, who was charged with the duty of hanging
every one of the pirates except L'Olonnois.

By the time the war-vessel had arrived at de los Cayos, L'Olonnois had
made his preparation to attack the place. He had procured two large
canoes, and in these he had intended to row up to the town and land with
his men. But now there was a change in the state of affairs, and he was
obliged to alter his plans. The ordinary person in command of two small
boats, who should suddenly discover that a village which he supposed
almost defenceless, was protected by a large man-of-war, with cannon and
a well-armed crew, would have altered his plans so completely that he
would have left that part of the coast of Cuba with all possible
expedition. But the pirates of that day seemed to pay very little
attention to the element of odds; if they met an enemy who was weak,
they would fall upon him, and if they met with one who was a good deal
stronger than themselves, they would fall upon him all the same. When
the time came to fight they fought.

Of course L'Olonnois could not now row leisurely up to the town and
begin to pillage it as he had intended, but no intention of giving up
his project entered his mind. As the Spanish vessel was in his way, he
would attack her and get her out of his way if the thing could be done.

In this new state of affairs he was obliged to use stratagem, and he
also needed a larger force than he had with him, and he therefore
captured some men who were fishing along the coast and put them into his
canoes to help work the oars. Then by night he proceeded slowly in the
direction of the Spanish vessel. The man-of-war was anchored not very
far from the town, and when about two o'clock in the morning the watch
on deck saw some canoes approaching they supposed them to be boats from
shore, for, as has been said, such vessels were continually plying about
those shallow waters. The canoes were hailed, and after having given an
account of themselves they were asked if they knew anything about the
pirate ship upon the coast. L'Olonnois understood very well that it
would not do for him or his men to make answer to these inquiries, for
their speech would have shown they did not belong to those parts.
Therefore he made one of his prisoner fishermen answer that they had not
seen a pirate vessel, and if there had been one there, it must have
sailed away when its captain heard the Spanish ship was coming. Then the
canoes were allowed to go their way, but their way was a very different
one from any which could have been expected by the captain of the ship.

They rowed off into the darkness instead of going toward the town, and
waited until nearly daybreak, then they boldly made for the man-of-war,
one canoe attacking her on one side and the other on the other. Before
the Spanish could comprehend what had happened there were more than
twenty pirates upon their decks, the dreaded L'Olonnois at their head.

In such a case as this cannon were of no use, and when the crew tried to
rush upon deck, they found that cutlasses and pistols did not avail very
much better. The pirates had the advantage; they had overpowered the
watch, and were defending the deck against all comers from below. It
requires a very brave sailor to stick his head out of a hatchway when he
sees three or four cutlasses ready to split it open. But there was some
stout fighting on board; the officers came out of their cabins, and some
of the men were able to force their way out into the struggle. The
pirates knew, however, that they were but few and that were their
enemies allowed to get on deck they would prove entirely too strong, and
they fought, each scoundrel of them, like three men, and the savage
fight ended by every Spanish sailor or officer who was not killed or
wounded being forced to stay below decks, where the hatches were
securely fastened down upon them.

L'Olonnois now stood a proud victor on the deck of his prize, and, being
a man of principle, he determined to live up to the distinguished
reputation which he had acquired in that part of the world. Baring his
muscular and hairy right arm, he clutched the handle of his sharp and
heavy cutlass and ordered the prisoners to be brought up from below, one
at a time, and conducted to the place where he stood. He wished to give
Spain a lesson which would make her understand that he was not to be
interfered with in the execution of his enterprises, and he determined
to allow himself the pleasure of personally teaching this lesson.

As soon as a prisoner was brought to L'Olonnois he struck off his head,
and this performance he continued, beginning with number one, and going
on until he had counted ninety. The last one brought to him was the
negro slave. This man, who was not a soldier, was desperately frightened
and begged piteously for his life. L'Olonnois, finding that the man was
willing to tell everything he knew, questioned him about the sending of
this vessel from Havana, and when the poor fellow had finished by
telling that he had come there, not of his own accord, but simply for
the purpose of obeying his master, to hang all the pirates except their
leader, that great buccaneer laughed, and, finding he could get nothing
more from the negro, cut off his head likewise, and his body was tumbled
into the sea after those of his companions.

Now there was not a Spaniard left on board the great ship except one
man, who had been preserved from the fate of the others because
L'Olonnois had some correspondence to attend to, and he needed a
messenger to carry a letter. The pirate captain went into the cabin,
where he found writing-materials ready to his hand, and there he
composed a letter to the Governor of Havana, a part of which read as
follows: "I shall never henceforward give quarter unto any Spaniard
whatsoever. And I have great hopes that I shall execute on your own
person the very same punishment I have done to them you sent against me.
Thus I have retaliated the kindness you designed unto me and my
companions."

When this message was received by the dignified official who filled the
post of Governor of Cuba, he stormed and fairly foamed at the mouth. To
be utterly foiled and discomfited by this resurrected pirate, and to be
afterwards addressed in terms of such unheard-of insolence and abuse,
was more than he could bear, and, in the presence of many of his
officials and attendants, he swore a terrible oath that after that hour
he would never again give quarter to any buccaneer, no matter when or
where he was captured, or what he might be doing at the time. Every man
of the wretched band should die as soon as he could lay hands upon him.

But when the inhabitants of Havana and the surrounding villages heard of
this terrible resolution of their Governor they were very much
disturbed. They lived in constant danger of attack, especially those who
were engaged in fishing or maritime pursuits, and they feared that when
it became known that no buccaneer was to receive quarter, the Spanish
colonists would be treated in the same way, no matter where they might
be found and taken. Consequently, it was represented to the Governor
that his plan of vengeance would work most disastrously for the Spanish
settlers, for the buccaneers could do far more damage to them than he
could possibly do to these dreadful Brethren of the Coast, and that,
unless he wished to bring upon them troubles greater than those of
famine or pestilence, they begged that he would retract his oath.

When the high dignitary had cooled down a little, he saw that there was
a good deal of sense in what the representative of the people had said
to him, and he consequently felt obliged, in consideration of the public
safety, to take back what he had said, and to give up the purpose, which
would have rendered unsafe the lives of so many peaceable people.

L'Olonnois was now the possessor of a fine vessel which had not been in
the least injured during the battle in which it had been won. But his
little crew, some of whom had been killed and wounded, was insufficient
to work such a ship upon an important cruise on the high seas, and he
also discovered, much to his surprise, that there were very few
provisions on board, for when the vessel was sent from Havana it was
supposed she would make but a very short cruise. This savage swinger of
the cutlass thereupon concluded that he would not try to do any great
thing for the present, but, having obtained some booty and men from the
woe-begone town of de los Cayos, he sailed away, touching at several
other small ports for the purpose of pillage, and finally anchoring at
Tortuga.




Chapter XIV

Villany on a Grand Scale


When L'Olonnois landed on the disreputable shores of Tortuga, he was
received by all circles of the vicious society of the island with loud
acclamation. He had not only taken a fine Spanish ship, he had not only
bearded the Governor of Havana in his fortified den, but he had struck
off ninety heads with his own hand. Even people who did not care for him
before reverenced him now. In all the annals of piracy no hero had ever
done such a deed as this, and the best records of human butchering had
been broken.

Now grand and ambitious ideas began to swell the head of this champion
slaughterer, and he conceived the plan of getting up a grand expedition
to go forth and capture the important town of Maracaibo, in New
Venezuela. This was an enterprise far above the ordinary aims of a
buccaneer, and it would require more than ordinary force to accomplish
it. He therefore set himself to work to enlist a large number of men and
to equip a fleet of vessels, of which he was to be chief commander or
admiral. There were a great many unemployed pirates in Tortuga at that
time, and many a brawny rascal volunteered to sail under the flag of the
daring butcher of the seas.

But in order to equip a fleet, money was necessary as well as men,
and therefore L'Olonnois thought himself very lucky when he succeeded
in interesting the principal piratical capitalist of Tortuga in his
undertaking. This was an old and seasoned buccaneer by the name of
Michael de Basco, who had made money enough by his piratical exploits
to retire from business and live on his income. He held the position
of Mayor of the island and was an important man among his
fellow-miscreants. When de Basco heard of the great expedition which
L'Olonnois was about to undertake, his whole soul was fired and he could
not rest tamely in his comfortable quarters when such great things were
to be done, and he offered to assist L'Olonnois with funds and join in
the expedition if he were made commander of the land forces. This offer
was accepted gladly, for de Basco had a great reputation as a fighter in
Europe as well as in America.

When everything had been made ready, L'Olonnois set sail for Maracaibo
with a fleet of eight ships. On the way they captured two Spanish
vessels, both of which were rich prizes, and at last they arrived
before the town which they intended to capture.

Maracaibo was a prosperous place of three or four thousand inhabitants;
they were rich people living in fine houses, and many of them had
plantations which extended out into the country. In every way the town
possessed great attractions to piratical marauders, but there were
difficulties in the way; being such an important place, of course it had
important defences. On an island in the harbor there was a strong fort,
or castle, and on another island a little further from the town there
was a tall tower, on the top of which a sentinel was posted night and
day to give notice of any approaching enemy. Between these two islands
was the only channel by which the town could be approached from the sea.
But in preparing these defences the authorities had thought only of
defending themselves against ordinary naval forces and had not
anticipated the extraordinary naval methods of the buccaneers who used
to be merely sea-robbers, who fell upon ships after they had left their
ports, but who now set out to capture not only ships at sea but towns on
land.

L'Olonnois had too much sense to run his ships close under the guns of
the fortress, against which he could expect to do nothing, for the
buccaneers relied but little upon their cannon, and so they paid no
more attention to the ordinary harbor than if it had not been there, but
sailed into a fresh-water lake at some distance from the town, and out
of sight of the tower. There L'Olonnois landed his men, and, advancing
upon the fort from the rear, easily crossed over to the little island
and marched upon the fort. It was very early in the morning. The
garrison was utterly amazed by this attack from land, and although they
fought bravely for three hours, they were obliged to give up the defence
of the walls, and as many of them as could do so got out of the fort and
escaped to the mainland and the town.

L'Olonnois now took possession of the fort, and then, with the greater
part of his men, he returned to his ships, brought them around to the
entrance of the bay, and then boldly sailed with his whole fleet under
the very noses of the cannon and anchored in the harbor in front of the
town.

When the citizens of Maracaibo heard from the escaping garrison that the
fort had been taken, they were filled with horror and dismay, for they
had no further means of defence. They knew that the pirates had come
there for no other object than to rob, pillage, and cruelly treat them,
and consequently as many as possible hurried away into the woods and the
surrounding country with as many of their valuables as they could carry.
They resembled the citizens of a town attacked by the cholera or the
plague, and in fact, they would have preferred a most terrible
pestilence to this terrible scourge of piracy from which they were about
to suffer.

As soon as L'Olonnois and his wild pirates had landed in the city they
devoted themselves entirely to eating and drinking and making themselves
merry. They had been on short commons during the latter part of their
voyage, and they had a royal time with the abundance of food and wine
which they found in the houses of the town. The next day, however, they
set about attending to the business which had brought them there, and
parties of pirates were sent out into the surrounding country to find
the people who had run away and to take from them the treasures they had
carried off. But although a great many of the poor, miserable,
unfortunate citizens were captured and brought back to the town, there
was found upon them very little money, and but few jewels or ornaments
of value. And now L'Olonnois began to prove how much worse his presence
was than any other misfortune which could have happened to the town. He
tortured the poor prisoners, men, women, and children, to make them tell
where they had hidden their treasures, sometimes hacking one of them
with his sword, declaring at the same time that if he did not tell where
his money was hidden he would immediately set to work to cut up his
family and his friends.

The cruelties inflicted upon the inhabitants by this vile and beastly
pirate and his men were so horrible that they could not be put into
print. Even John Esquemeling, who wrote the account of it, had not the
heart to tell everything that had happened. But after two weeks of
horror and torture, the pirates were able to get but comparatively
little out of the town, and they therefore determined to go somewhere
else, where they might do better.

At the southern end of Lake Maracaibo, about forty leagues from the town
which the pirates had just desolated and ruined, lay Gibraltar, a
good-sized and prosperous town, and for this place L'Olonnois and his
fleet now set sail; but they were not able to approach unsuspected and
unseen, for news of their terrible doings had gone before them, and
their coming was expected. When they drew near the town they saw the
flag flying from the fort, and they knew that every preparation had been
made for defence. To attack such a place as this was a rash undertaking;
the Spaniards had perhaps a thousand soldiers, and the pirates numbered
but three hundred and eighty, but L'Olonnois did not hesitate. As usual,
he had no thought of bombardment, or any ordinary method of naval
warfare; but at the first convenient spot he landed all his men, and
having drawn them up in a body, he made them an address. He made them
understand clearly the difficult piece of work which was before them;
but he assured them that pirates were so much in the habit of conquering
Spaniards that if they would all promise to follow him and do their
best, he was certain he could take the town. He assured them that it
would be an ignoble thing to give up such a grand enterprise as this
simply because they found the enemy strong and so well prepared to meet
them, and ended by stating that if he saw a man flinch or hold back for
a second, he would pistol him with his own hand. Whereupon the pirates
all shook hands and promised they would follow L'Olonnois wherever he
might lead them.

This they truly did, and L'Olonnois, having a very imperfect knowledge
of the proper way to the town, led them into a wild bog, where this
precious pack of rascals soon found themselves up to their knees in mud
and water, and in spite of all the cursing and swearing which they did,
they were not able to press through the bog or get out of it. In this
plight they were discovered by a body of horsemen from the town, who
began firing upon them. The Spaniards must now have thought that their
game was almost bagged and that all they had to do was to stand on the
edge of the bog and shoot down the floundering fellows who could not get
away from them. But these fellows were bloody buccaneers, each one of
them a great deal harder to kill than a cat, and they did not propose to
stay in the bog to be shot down. With their cutlasses they hewed off
branches of trees and threw these down in the bog, making a sort of rude
roadway by means of which they were able to get out on solid ground. But
here they found themselves confronted by a large body of Spaniards,
entrenched behind earthworks. Cannon and musket were opened upon the
buccaneers, and the noise and smoke were so terrible they could scarcely
hear the commands of their leaders.

Never before, perhaps, had pirates been engaged in such a land battle as
this. Very soon the Spaniards charged from behind their earthworks, and
then L'Olonnois and his men were actually obliged to fly back. If he
could have found any way of retreating to his ships, L'Olonnois would
doubtless have done so, in spite of his doughty words, when he addressed
his men, but this was now impossible, for the Spaniards had felled trees
and had made a barricade between the pirates and their ships. The
buccaneers were now in a very tight place; their enemy was behind
defences and firing at them steadily, without showing any intention of
coming out to give the pirates a chance for what they considered a fair
fight. Every now and then a buccaneer would fall, and L'Olonnois saw
that as it would be utterly useless to endeavor to charge the barricade
he must resort to some sort of trickery or else give up the battle.

Suddenly he passed the word for every man to turn his back and run away
as fast as he could from the earthworks. Away scampered the pirates, and
from the valiant Spaniards there came a shout of victory. The soldiers
could not be restrained from following the fugitives and putting to
death every one of the cowardly rascals. Away went the buccaneers, and
after them, hot and furious, came the soldiers. But as soon as the
Spaniards were so far away from their entrenchments that they could not
get back to them, the crafty L'Olonnois, who ran with one eye turned
behind him, called a halt, his men turned, formed into battle array, and
began an onslaught upon their pursuing enemy, such as these military
persons had never dreamed of in their wildest imagination. We are told
that over two hundred Spaniards perished in a very short time. Before a
furious pirate with a cutlass a soldier with his musket seemed to have
no chance at all, and very soon the Spaniards who were left alive broke
and ran into the woods.

The buccaneers formed into a body and marched toward the town, which
surrendered without firing a gun, and L'Olonnois and his men, who, but
an hour before, had been in danger of being shot down by their enemy as
if they had been rabbits in a pen, now marched boldly into the centre of
the town, pulled down the Spanish flag, and hoisted their own in its
place. They were the masters of Gibraltar. Never had ambitious villany
been more successful.




Chapter XV

A Just Reward


When L'Olonnois and his buccaneers entered the town of Gibraltar they
found that the greater part of the inhabitants had fled, but there were
many people left, and these were made prisoners as fast as they were
discovered. They were all forced to go into the great church, and then
the pirates, fearing that the Spaniards outside of the town might be
reënforced and come back again to attack them, carried a number of
cannon into the church and fortified the building. When this had been
done, they felt safe and began to act as if they had been a menagerie of
wild beasts let loose upon a body of defenceless men, women, and
children. Not only did these wretched men rush into the houses, stealing
everything valuable they could find and were able to carry away, but
when they had gathered together all they could discover they tortured
their poor prisoners by every cruel method they could think of, in order
to make them tell where more treasures were concealed. Many of these
unfortunates had had nothing to hide, and therefore could give no
information to their brutal inquisitors, and others died without telling
what they had done with their valuables. When the town had been
thoroughly searched and sifted, the pirates sent men out into the little
villages and plantations in the country, and even hunters and small
farmers were captured and made to give up everything they possessed
which was worth taking.

For nearly three weeks these outrageous proceedings continued, and to
prove that they were lower than the brute beasts they allowed the
greater number of the prisoners collected in the church, to perish of
hunger. There were not provisions enough in the town for the pirates'
own uses and for these miserable creatures also, and so, with the
exception of a small quantity of mule flesh, which many of the prisoners
could not eat, they got nothing whatever, and slowly starved.

When L'Olonnois and his friends had been in possession of Gibraltar for
about a month, they thought it was time to leave, but their greedy souls
were not satisfied with the booty they had already obtained, and they
therefore sent messages to the Spaniards who were still concealed in the
forests, that unless in the course of two days a ransom of ten thousand
pieces of eight were paid to them, they would burn the town to the
ground. No matter what they thought of this heartless demand, it was
not easy for the scattered citizens to collect such a sum as this, and
the two days passed without the payment of the ransom, and the
relentless pirates promptly carried out their threat and set the town on
fire in various places. When the poor Spaniards saw this and perceived
that they were about to lose even their homes, they sent to the town and
promised that if the pirates would put out the fires they would pay the
money. In the hope of more money, and not in the least moved by any
feeling of kindness, L'Olonnois ordered his men to help put out the
fires, but they were not extinguished until a quarter of the town was
entirely burned and a fine church reduced to ashes.

When the buccaneers found they could squeeze nothing more out of the
town, they went on board their ships, carrying with them all the plunder
and booty they had collected, and among their spoils were about five
hundred slaves, of all ages and both sexes, who had been offered an
opportunity to ransom themselves, but who, of course, had no money with
which to buy their freedom, and who were now condemned to a captivity
worse than anything they had ever known before.

Now the eight ships with their demon crews sailed away over the lake
toward Maracaibo. It was quite possible for them to get out to sea
without revisiting this unfortunate town, but as this would have been a
very good thing for them to do, it was impossible for them to do it; no
chance to do anything wicked was ever missed by these pirates.
Consequently L'Olonnois gave orders to drop anchor near the city, and
then he sent some messengers ashore to inform the already half-ruined
citizens that unless they sent him thirty thousand pieces of eight he
would enter their town again, carry away everything they had left, and
burn the place to the ground. The poor citizens sent a committee to
confer with the pirates, and while the negotiations were going on some
of the conscienceless buccaneers went on shore and carried off from one
of the great churches its images, pictures, and even its bells. It was
at last arranged that the citizens should pay twenty thousand pieces of
eight, which was the utmost sum they could possibly raise, and, in
addition to this, five hundred head of beef-cattle, and the pirates
promised that if this were done they would depart and molest the town no
more. The money was paid, the cattle were put on board the ships, and to
the unspeakable relief of the citizens, the pirate fleet sailed away
from the harbor.

But it would be difficult to express the horror and dismay of those same
citizens when, three days afterward, those pirate ships all came back
again. Black despair now fell upon the town; there was nothing more to
be stolen, and these wretches must have repented that they had left the
town standing, and had returned to burn it down. But when one man came
ashore in a boat bringing the intelligence that L'Olonnois could not get
his largest ship across a bar at the entrance to the lake, and that he
wanted a pilot to show him the channel, then the spirits of the people
went up like one great united rocket, bursting into the most beautiful
coruscations of sparks and colors. There was nothing on earth that they
would be so glad to furnish him as a pilot to show him how to sail away
from their shores. The pilot was instantly sent to the fleet, and
L'Olonnois and his devastating band departed.

They did not go directly to Tortuga, but stopped at a little island near
Hispaniola, which was inhabited by French buccaneers, and this delay was
made entirely for the purpose of dividing the booty. It seems strange
that any principle of right and justice should have been regarded by
these dishonest knaves, even in their relations to each other, but they
had rigid rules in regard to the division of their spoils, and according
to these curious regulations the whole amount of plunder was apportioned
among the officers and crews of the different ships.

Before the regular allotment of shares was made, the claims of the
wounded were fully satisfied according to their established code. For
the loss of a right arm a man was paid about six hundred dollars or six
slaves; for the loss of a left arm, five hundred dollars, or five
slaves; for a missing right leg, five hundred dollars, or five slaves;
for a missing left leg, four hundred dollars, or four slaves; for an eye
or a finger, one hundred dollars, or one slave. Then the rest of the
money and spoils were divided among all the buccaneers without reference
to what had been paid to the wounded. The shares of those who had been
killed were given to friends or acquaintances, who undertook to deliver
them to their families.

The spoils in this case consisted of two hundred and sixty thousand
dollars in money and a great quantity of valuable goods, besides many
slaves and precious stones and jewels. These latter were apportioned
among the men in the most ridiculous manner, the pirates having no idea
of the relative value of the jewels, some of them preferring large and
worthless colored stones to smaller diamonds and rubies. When all their
wickedly gained property had been divided, the pirates sailed to
Tortuga, where they proceeded, without loss of time, to get rid of the
wealth they had amassed. They ate, they drank, they gambled; they
crowded the taverns as taverns have never been crowded before; they sold
their valuable merchandise for a twentieth part of its value to some of
the more level-headed people of the place; and having rioted, gambled,
and committed every sort of extravagance for about three weeks, the
majority of L'Olonnois' rascally crew found themselves as poor as when
they had started off on their expedition. It took them almost as long to
divide their spoils as it did to get rid of them.

As these precious rascals had now nothing to live upon, it was necessary
to start out again and commit some more acts of robbery and ruin; and
L'Olonnois, whose rapacious mind seems to have been filled with a desire
for town-destroying, projected an expedition to Nicaragua, where he
proposed to pillage and devastate as many towns and villages as
possible. His reputation as a successful commander was now so high that
he had no trouble in getting men, for more offered themselves than he
could possibly take.

He departed with seven hundred men and six ships, stopping on the way
near the coast of Cuba, and robbing some poor fishermen of their boats,
which he would need in shallow water. Their voyage was a very long one,
and they were beset by calms, and instead of reaching Nicaragua, they
drifted into the Gulf of Honduras. Here they found themselves nearly out
of provisions, and were obliged to land and scour the country to find
something to eat. Leaving their ships, they began a land march through
the unfortunate region where they now found themselves. They robbed
Indians, they robbed villages; they devastated little towns, taking
everything that they cared for, and burning what they did not want, and
treating the people they captured with viler cruelties than any in which
the buccaneers had yet indulged. Their great object was to take
everything they could find, and then try to make the people confess
where other things were hidden. Men and women were hacked to pieces with
swords; it was L'Olonnois' pleasure, when a poor victim had nothing to
tell, to tear out his tongue with his own hands, and it is said that on
some occasions his fury was so great that he would cut out the heart of
a man and bite at it with his great teeth. No more dreadful miseries
could be conceived than those inflicted upon the peaceful inhabitants of
the country through which these wretches passed. They frequently met
ambuscades of Spaniards, who endeavored to stop their progress; but this
was impossible. The pirates were too strong in number and too savage in
disposition to be resisted by ordinary Christians, and they kept on
their wicked way.

At last they reached a town called San Pedro, which was fairly well
defended, having around it a great hedge of prickly thorns; but thorns
cannot keep out pirates, and after a severe fight the citizens
surrendered, on condition that they should have two hours' truce. This
was given, and the time was occupied by the people in running away into
the woods and carrying off their valuables. But when the two hours had
expired, L'Olonnois and his men entered the town, and instead of
rummaging around to see what they could find, they followed the
unfortunate people into the woods, for they well understood what they
wanted when they asked for a truce, and robbed them of nearly everything
they had taken away.

But the capture of this town was not of much service to L'Olonnois, who
did not find provisions enough to feed his men. Their supplies ran very
low, and it was not long before they were in danger of starvation.
Consequently they made their way by the most direct course to the coast,
where they hoped to be able to get something to eat. If they could find
nothing else, they might at least catch fish. On their way every rascal
of them prepared himself a net, made out of the fibres of a certain
plant, which grew in abundance in those regions, in order that he might
catch himself a supper when he reached the sea.

After a time the buccaneers got back to their fleet and remained on the
coast about three months, waiting for some expected Spanish ships, which
they hoped to capture. They eventually met with one, and after a great
deal of ordinary fighting and stratagem they boarded and took her, but
found her not a very valuable prize.

Now L'Olonnois proposed to his men that they should sail for Guatemala,
but he met with an unexpected obstacle; the buccaneers who had enlisted
under him had expected to make great fortunes in this expedition, but
their high hopes had not been realized. They had had very little booty
and very little food, they were hungry and disappointed and wanted to go
home, and the great majority of them declined to follow L'Olonnois any
farther. But there were some who declared that they would rather die
than go home to Tortuga as poor as when they left it, and so remained
with L'Olonnois on the biggest ship of the fleet, which he commanded.
The smaller vessels now departed for Tortuga, and after some trouble
L'Olonnois succeeded in getting his vessel out of the harbor where it
had been anchored, and sailed for the islands of de las Pertas. Here he
had the misfortune to run his big vessel hopelessly aground.

When they found it absolutely impossible to get their great vessel off
the sand banks, the pirates set to work to break her up and build a boat
out of her planks. This was a serious undertaking, but it was all they
could do. They could not swim away, and their ship was of no use to them
as she was. But when they began to work they had no idea it would take
so long to build a boat. It was several months before the unwieldy craft
was finished, and they occupied part of the time in gardening, planting
French beans, which came to maturity in six weeks, and gave them some
fresh vegetables. They also had some stores and portable stoves on board
their dismantled ship, and made bread from some wheat which was among
their provisions, thus managing to live very well.

L'Olonnois was never intended by nature to be a boat-builder, or
anything else that was useful and honest, and when the boat was finished
it was discovered that it had been planned so badly that it would not
hold them all, so all they could do was to draw lots to see who should
embark in her, for one-half of them would have to stay until the others
came back to release them. Of course L'Olonnois went away in the boat,
and reached the mouth of the Nicaragua River. There his party was
attacked by some Spaniards and Indians, who killed more than half of
them and prevented the others from landing. L'Olonnois and the rest of
his men got safely away, and they might now have sailed back to the
island where they had left their comrades, for there was room enough for
them all in the boat. But they did nothing of the sort, but went to the
coast of Cartagena.

The pirates left on the island were eventually taken off by a
buccaneering vessel, but L'Olonnois had now reached the end of the
string by which the devil had allowed him to gambol on this earth for so
long a time. On the shores where he had now landed he did not find
prosperous villages, treasure houses, and peaceful inhabitants, who
could be robbed and tortured, but instead of these he came upon a
community of Indians, who were called by the Spaniards, Bravos, or wild
men. These people would never have anything to do with the whites. It
was impossible to conquer them or to pacify them by kind treatment. They
hated the white man and would have nothing to do with him. They had
heard of L'Olonnois and his buccaneers, and when they found this
notorious pirate upon their shores they were filled with a fury such as
they had never felt for any others of his race.

These bloody pirates had always conquered in their desperate fights
because they were so reckless and so savage, but now they had fallen
among thoroughbred savages, more cruel and more brutal and pitiless than
themselves. Nearly all the buccaneers were killed, and L'Olonnois was
taken prisoner. His furious captors tore his living body apart, piece by
piece, and threw each fragment into the fire, and when the whole of this
most inhuman of inhuman men had been entirely consumed, they scattered
his ashes to the winds so that not a trace should remain on earth of
this monster. If, in his infancy, he had died of croup, the history of
the human race would have lost some of its blackest pages.




Chapter XVI

A Pirate Potentate


Sometime in the last half of the seventeenth century on a quiet farm in
a secluded part of Wales there was born a little boy baby. His father
was a farmer, and his mother churned, and tended the cows and the
chickens, and there was no reason to imagine that this gentle little
baby, born and reared in this rural solitude, would become one of the
most formidable pirates that the world ever knew. Yet such was the case.

The baby's name was Henry Morgan, and as he grew to be a big boy a
distaste for farming grew with him. So strong was his dislike that when
he became a young man he ran away to the seacoast, for he had a fancy to
be a sailor. There he found a ship bound for the West Indies, and in
this he started out on his life's career. He had no money to pay his
passage, and he therefore followed the usual custom of those days and
sold himself for a term of three years to an agent who was taking out a
number of men to work on the plantations. In the places where these men
were enlisted they were termed servants, but when they got to the new
world they were generally called slaves and treated as such.

When young Morgan reached the Barbadoes he was resold to a planter, and
during his term of service he probably worked a good deal harder and was
treated much more roughly than any of the laborers on his father's farm.
But as soon as he was a free man he went to Jamaica, and there were few
places in the world where a young man could be more free and more
independent than in this lawless island.

Here were rollicking and blustering "flibustiers," and here the young
man determined to study piracy. He was not a sailor and hunter who by
the force of circumstances gradually became a buccaneer, but he
deliberately selected his profession, and immediately set to work to
acquire a knowledge of its practice. There was a buccaneer ship about to
sail from Jamaica, and on this Morgan enlisted. He was a clever fellow
and very soon showed himself to be a brave and able sailor.

After three or four voyages he acquired a reputation for remarkable
coolness in emergencies, and showed an ability to take advantage of
favorable circumstances, which was not possessed by many of his
comrades. These prominent traits in his character became the foundation
of his success. He also proved himself a very good business man, and
having saved a considerable amount of money he joined with some other
buccaneers and bought a ship, of which he took command. This ship soon
made itself a scourge in the Spanish seas; no other buccaneering vessel
was so widely known and so greatly feared, and the English people in
these regions were as proud of the young Captain Morgan as if he had
been a regularly commissioned admiral, cruising against an acknowledged
enemy.

Returning from one of his voyages Morgan found an old buccaneer, named
Mansvelt, in Jamaica, who had gathered together a fleet of vessels with
which he was about to sail for the mainland. This expedition seemed a
promising one to Morgan, and he joined it, being elected vice-admiral of
the fleet of fifteen vessels. Since the successes of L'Olonnois and
others, attacks upon towns had become very popular with the buccaneers,
whose leaders were getting to be tired of the retail branch of their
business; that is, sailing about in one ship and capturing such
merchantmen as it might fall in with.

Mansvelt's expedition took with it not only six hundred fighting
pirates, but one writing pirate, for John Esquemeling accompanied it,
and so far as the fame and reputation of these adventurers was concerned
his pen was mightier than their swords, for had it not been for his
account of their deeds very little about them would have been known to
the world.

The fleet sailed directly for St. Catherine, an island near Costa Rica,
which was strongly fortified by the Spaniards and used by them as a
station for ammunition and supplies, and also as a prison. The pirates
landed upon the island and made a most furious assault upon the
fortifications, and although they were built of stone and well furnished
with cannon, the savage assailants met with their usual good fortune.
They swarmed over the walls and carried the place at the edge of the
cutlass and the mouth of the pistol. In this fierce fight Morgan
performed such feats of valor that even some of the Spaniards who had
been taken prisoners, were forced to praise his extraordinary courage
and ability as a leader.

The buccaneers proceeded to make very good use of their victory. They
captured some small adjoining islands and brought the cannon from them
to the main fortress, which they put in a good condition of defence.
Here they confined all their prisoners and slaves, and supplied the
island with an abundance of stores and provisions.

It is believed that when Mansvelt formed the plan of capturing this
island he did so with the idea of founding there a permanent pirate
principality, the inhabitants of which should not consider themselves
English, French, or Dutch, but plain pirates, having a nationality and
country of their own. Had the seed thus planted by Mansvelt and Morgan
grown and matured, it is not unlikely that the whole of the West Indies
might now be owned and inhabited by an independent nation, whose
founders were the bold buccaneers.

When everything had been made tight and right at St. Catherine, Mansvelt
and Morgan sailed for the mainland, for the purpose of attacking an
inland town called Nata, but in this expedition they were not
successful. The Spanish Governor of the province had heard of their
approach, and met them with a body of soldiers so large that they
prudently gave up the attempt,--a proceeding not very common with them,
but Morgan was not only a dare-devil of a pirate, but a very shrewd
Welshman.

They returned to the ships, and after touching at St. Catherine and
leaving there enough men to defend it, under the command of a Frenchman
named Le Sieur Simon, they sailed for Jamaica. Everything at St.
Catherine was arranged for permanent occupation; there was plenty of
fresh water, and the ground could be cultivated, and Simon was promised
that additional forces should be sent him so that he could hold the
island as a regular station for the assembling and fitting out of pirate
vessels.

The permanent pirate colony never came to anything; no reënforcements
were sent; Mansvelt died, and the Spaniards gathered together a
sufficient force to retake the island of St. Catherine, and make
prisoners of Simon and his men. This was a blow to Morgan, who had had
great hopes of the fortified station he thought he had so firmly
established, but after the project failed he set about forming another
expedition.

He was now recognized as buccaneer-in-chief of the West Indies, and he
very soon gathered together twelve ships and seven hundred men.
Everything was made ready to sail, and the only thing left to be done
was to decide what particular place they should favor with a visit.

There were some who advised an attack upon Havana, giving as a reason
that in that city there were a great many nuns, monks, and priests, and
if they could capture them, they might ask as ransom for them, a sum a
great deal larger than they could expect to get from the pillage of an
ordinary town. But Havana was considered to be too strong a place for a
profitable venture, and after several suggestions had been made, at last
a deserter from the Spanish army, who had joined them, came forward with
a good idea. He told the pirates of a town in Cuba, to which he knew the
way; it was named Port-au-Prince, and was situated so far inland that it
had never been sacked. When the pirates heard that there existed an
entirely fresh and unpillaged town, they were filled with as much
excited delight as if they had been a party of school-boys who had just
been told where they might find a tree full of ripe apples which had
been overlooked by the men who had been gathering the crop.

When Morgan's fleet arrived at the nearest harbor to Port-au-Prince, he
landed his men and marched toward the town, but he did not succeed in
making a secret attack, as he had hoped. One of his prisoners, a
Spaniard, let himself drop overboard as soon as the vessels cast anchor,
and swimming ashore, hurried to Port-au-Prince and informed the Governor
of the attack which was about to be made on the town. Thus prepared,
this able commander knew just what to do. He marched a body of soldiers
along the road by which the pirates must come, and when he found a
suitable spot he caused great trees to be cut down and laid across the
road, thus making a formidable barricade. Behind this his soldiers were
posted with their muskets and their cannon, and when the pirates should
arrive they would find that they would have to do some extraordinary
fighting before they could pass this well-defended barrier.

When Morgan came within sight of this barricade, he understood that the
Spaniards had discovered his approach, and so he called a halt. He had
always been opposed to unnecessary work, and he considered that it would
be entirely unnecessary to attempt to disturb this admirable defence, so
he left the road, marched his men into the woods, led them entirely
around the barricades, and then, after proceeding a considerable
distance, emerged upon a wide plain which lay before the town. Here he
found that he would have to fight his way into the city, and, probably
much to his surprise, his men were presently charged by a body of
cavalry.

Pirates, as a rule, have nothing to do with horses, either in peace or
war, and the Governor of the town no doubt thought that when his
well-armed horsemen charged upon these men, accustomed to fighting on
the decks of ships, and totally unused to cavalry combats, he would soon
scatter and disperse them. But pirates are peculiar fighters; if they
had been attacked from above by means of balloons, or from below by
mines and explosives, they would doubtless have adapted their style of
defence to the method of attack. They always did this, and according to
Esquemeling they nearly always got the better of their enemies; but we
must remember that in cases where they did not succeed, as happened when
they marched against the town of Nata, he says very little about the
affair and amplifies only the accounts of their successes.

But the pirates routed the horsemen, and, after a fight of about four
hours, they routed all the other Spaniards who resisted them, and took
possession of the town. Here they captured a great many prisoners which
they shut up in the churches and then sent detachments out into the
country to look for those who had run away. Then these utterly debased
and cruel men began their usual course after capturing a town; they
pillaged, feasted, and rioted; they gave no thought to the needs of the
prisoners whom they had shut up in the churches, many of whom starved to
death; they tortured the poor people to make them tell where they had
hid their treasures, and nothing was too vile or too wicked for them to
do if they thought they could profit by it. They had come for the
express purpose of taking everything that the people possessed, and
until they had forced from them all that was of the slightest value,
they were not satisfied. Even when the poor citizens seemed to have
given up everything they owned they were informed that if they did not
pay two heavy ransoms, one to protect themselves from being carried away
into slavery, and one to keep their town from being burned, the same
punishments would be inflicted upon them.

For two weeks the pirates waited for the unfortunate citizens to go out
into the country and find some of their townsmen who had escaped with a
portion of their treasure. In those days people did not keep their
wealth in banks as they do now, but every man was the custodian of most
of his own possessions, and when they fled from the visitation of an
enemy they took with them everything of value that they could carry. If
their fortunes had been deposited in banks, it would doubtless have been
more convenient for the pirates.

Before the citizens returned Morgan made a discovery: a negro was
captured who carried letters from the Governor of Santiago, a
neighboring city, to some of the citizens of Port-au-Prince, telling
them not to be in too great a hurry to pay the ransom demanded by the
pirates, because he was coming with a strong force to their assistance.
When Morgan read these letters, he changed his mind, and thought it
would be a wise thing not to stay in that region any longer than could
be helped. So he decided not to wait for the unfortunate citizens to
collect the heavy ransom he demanded, but told them that if they would
furnish him with five hundred head of cattle, and also supply salt and
help prepare the meat for shipment, he would make no further demands
upon them. This, of course, the citizens were glad enough to do, and
when the buccaneers had carried to the ships everything they had stolen,
and when the beef had been put on board, they sailed away.

Morgan directed the course of the fleet to a small island on which he
wished to land in order that they might take an account of stock and
divide the profits. This the pirates always did as soon as possible
after they had concluded one of their nefarious enterprises. But his men
were not at all satisfied with what happened on the island. Morgan
estimated the total value of the booty to be about fifty thousand
dollars, and when this comparatively small sum was divided, many of the
men complained that it would not give them enough to pay their debts in
Jamaica. They were utterly astonished that after having sacked an
entirely fresh town they should have so little, and there is no doubt
that many of them believed that their leader was a man who carried on
the business of piracy for the purpose of enriching himself, while he
gave his followers barely enough to keep them quiet.

There was, however, another cause of discontent among a large body of
the men; it appears that the men were very fond of marrow-bones, and
while they were yet at Port-au-Prince and the prisoners were salting the
meat which was to go on the ships, the buccaneers went about among them
and took the marrow-bones which they cooked and ate while they were
fresh. One of the men, a Frenchman, had selected a very fine bone, and
had put it by his side while he was preparing some other tidbits, when
an Englishman came along, picked up the bone, and carried it away.

Now even in the chronicles of Mother Goose we are told of the intimate
connection between Welshmen, thievery, and marrow-bones; for

    "Taffy was a Welshman,
      Taffy was a thief,
    Taffy came to my house
      And stole a leg of beef.

    "I went to Taffy's house,
      Taffy wasn't home,
    Taffy went to my house,
      And stole a marrow-bone."

What happened to Taffy we do not know, but Morgan was a Welshman, Morgan
was a thief, and one of his men had stolen a marrow-bone; therefore came
trouble. The Frenchman challenged the Englishman; but the latter, being
a mean scoundrel, took advantage of his opponent, unfairly stabbed him
in the back and killed him.

Now all the Frenchmen in the company rose in furious protest, and
Morgan, wishing to pacify them, had the English assassin put in chains,
and promised that he would take him to Jamaica and deliver him to
justice. But the Frenchmen declined to be satisfied; they had received
but very little money after they had pillaged a rich town, and they
believed that their English companions were inclined to take advantage
of them in every way, and consequently the greater part of them banded
together and deliberately deserted Morgan, who was obliged to go back to
Jamaica with not more than half his regular forces, doubtless wishing
that the cattle on the island of Cuba had been able to get along without
marrow-bones.




Chapter XVII

How Morgan was helped by Some Religious People


When the Welsh buccaneer started out on another expedition his company
consisted entirely of Englishmen, and was not nearly so large as it had
been; when he announced to his followers that he intended to attack the
fortified town of Porto Bello, on the mainland, there was a general
murmuring among the men, for Porto Bello was one of the strongest towns
possessed by the Spaniards, and the buccaneers did not believe that
their comparatively small force would be able to take it. But Morgan
made them a speech in which he endeavored to encourage them to follow
him in this difficult undertaking. One of his arguments was, that
although their numbers were small, their hearts were large; but he
produced the greatest effect upon them when he said that as they were
but a few, each man's share of the booty would be much larger than if it
must be divided among a great number. This touched the souls of the
pirates, and they vowed to follow their leader wherever he might take
them.

The buccaneers found Porto Bello a very hard nut to crack; they landed
and marched upon the town, which was defended by several forts or
castles. Even when one of these had been taken by assault, and after it
had been blown up with all its garrison, who had been taken prisoners,
still the town was not intimidated, and the Governor vowed he would
never surrender, but would die fighting to the last. The pirates raged
like demons; they shot down every man they could see at the cannon or
upon the walls, and they made desperate efforts to capture the principal
fort, but they did not succeed, and after a long time Morgan began to
despair. The garrison was strong and well commanded, and whenever the
pirates attempted to scale the wall they were shot down, while fire-pots
full of powder, with stones and other missiles, were hurled upon them.

At last the wily Morgan had an idea. He set his men to work to make some
ladders high enough to reach to the top of the walls, and wide enough to
allow three or four men to go up abreast. If he could get these properly
set up, his crew of desperate tiger-cats could make a combined rush and
get over the walls. But to carry the ladders and place them would be
almost impossible, for the men who bore them would surely be shot down
before they could finish the work. But it was not Morgan's plan that his
men should carry these ladders. He had captured some convents in the
suburbs of the town, with a number of nuns and monks, known as
"religious people," and he now ordered these poor creatures, the women
as well as the men, to take up the ladders and place them against the
walls, believing that the Spanish Governor would not allow his soldiers
to fire at these innocent persons whom the pirates had forced to do
their will.

But the Governor was determined to defend the town no matter who had to
suffer, and so the soldiers fired at the nuns and monks just as though
they were buccaneers or any other enemies. The "religious people" cried
out in terror, and screamed to their friends not to fire upon them; but
the soldiers obeyed the commands of the Governor, while the pirates were
swearing terribly behind them and threatening them with their pistols,
and so the poor nuns and monks had to press forward, many of them
dropping dead or wounded. They continued their work until the ladders
were placed, and then over the walls went the pirates, with yells and
howls of triumph, and not long after that the town was taken. The
Governor died, fighting in the principal fort, and the citizens and
soldiers all united in the most vigorous defence; but it was of no use.
Each pirate seemed to have not only nine lives, but nine arms, each one
wielding a cutlass or aiming a pistol.

When the fighting was over, the second act in the horrible drama took
place as usual. The pirates ate, drank, rioted, and committed all manner
of outrages and cruelties upon the inhabitants, closing the performance
with the customary threat that if the already distressed and
impoverished inhabitants did not pay an enormous ransom, their town
would be burned.

Before the ransom was paid, the Governor of Panama heard what was going
on at Porto Bello, and sent a force to the assistance of the town, but
this time the buccaneers did not hastily retreat, Morgan knew of a
narrow defile through which the Spanish forces must pass, and there he
posted a number of his men, who defended the pass so well that the
Spaniards were obliged to retreat. This Governor must have been a
student of military science; he was utterly astounded when he heard that
this pirate leader, with less than four hundred men, had captured the
redoubtable town of Porto Bello, defended by a strong garrison and
inhabited by citizens who were brave and accustomed to fighting, and,
being anxious to increase his knowledge of improved methods of warfare,
he sent a messenger to Morgan "desiring him to send him some small
pattern of those arms wherewith he had taken with such violence so great
a city." The pirate leader received the messenger with much courtesy,
and sent to the Governor a pistol and a few balls, "desiring him to
accept that slender pattern of the arms wherewith he had taken Porto
Bello, and keep them for a twelvemonth; after which time he promised to
come to Panama and fetch them away."

This courteous correspondence was continued by the Governor returning
the pistol and balls with thanks, and also sending Morgan a handsome
gold ring with the message that he need not trouble himself to come to
Panama; for, if he did, he would meet with very different fortune from
that which had come to him at Porto Bello.

Morgan put the ring on his finger and postponed his reply, and, as soon
as the ransom was paid, he put his booty on board his ships and
departed. When the spoils of Porto Bello came to be counted, it was
found that they were of great value, and each man received a lordly
share.

When Captain Morgan was ready to set out on another expedition, he found
plenty of pirates ready to join him, and he commanded all the ships and
men whom he enlisted to rendezvous at a place called the Isle of Cows. A
fine, large, English ship had recently come to Jamaica from New England,
and this vessel also joined Morgan's forces on the island, where the
pirate leader took this ship as his own, being much the best and largest
vessel of the fleet.

Besides the ships belonging to Morgan, there was in the harbor where
they were now congregated, a fine vessel belonging to some French
buccaneers, and Morgan desired very much that this vessel should join
his fleet, but the French cherished hard feelings against the English,
and would not join them.

Although Morgan was a brave man, his meanness was quite equal to his
courage, and he determined to be revenged upon these Frenchmen who had
refused to give him their aid, and therefore played a malicious trick
upon them. Sometime before, this French vessel, being out of provisions
when upon the high seas, had met an English ship, and had taken from her
such supplies as it had needed. The captain did not pay for these, being
out of money as well as food, not an uncommon thing among buccaneers,
but they gave the English notes of exchange payable in Jamaica; but as
these notes were never honored, the people of the English ship had never
been paid for their provisions.

This affair properly arranged in Morgan's mind, he sent a very polite
note to the captain of the French ship and some of his officers,
inviting them to dine with him on his own vessel. The French accepted
the invitation, but when Morgan received them on board his ship he did
not conduct them down to dinner; instead of that, he began to upbraid
them for the manner in which they had treated an English crew, and then
he ordered them to be taken down below and imprisoned in the hold.
Having accomplished this, and feeling greatly elated by this piece of
sly vengeance, he went into his fine cabin, and he and his officers sat
down to the grand feast he had prepared.

There were fine times on board this great English ship; the pirates were
about to set forth on an important expedition, and they celebrated the
occasion by eating and drinking, firing guns, and all manner of riotous
hilarity. In the midst of the wild festivities--and nobody knew how it
happened--a spark of fire got into the powder magazine, and the ship
blew up, sending the lifeless bodies of three hundred English sailors,
and the French prisoners, high into the air. The only persons on board
who escaped were Morgan and his officers who were in the cabin close to
the stern of the vessel, at some distance from the magazine.

This terrible accident threw the pirate fleet into great confusion for a
time; but Morgan soon recovered himself, and, casting about to see what
was the best thing to be done, it came into his head that he would act
the part of the wolf in the fable of the wolf and the lamb. As there
was no way of finding out how the magazine happened to explode, he took
the ground that the French prisoners whom he had shut up in the hold,
had thrown a lighted match into the magazine, wishing thus to revenge
themselves even though they should, at the same time, lose their own
lives. The people of the French ship bitterly opposed any such view of
the case, but their protestations were of no use; they might declare as
much as they pleased that it was impossible for them to make the waters
muddy, being lower down in the stream than the wolfish pirate who was
accusing them, but it availed nothing. Morgan sprang upon them and their
ship, and sent them to Jamaica, where, upon his false charge, they were
shut up in prison, and so remained for a long time.

Such atrocious wickedness as the treatment of the nuns and monks,
described in this chapter, would never have been countenanced in any
warfare between civilized nations. But Morgan's pirates were not making
war; they were robbers and murderers on a grand scale. They had no right
to call themselves civilized; they were worse than barbarians.

[Illustration: "Morgan began to upbraid them, and ordered them taken
below."--p. 151.]




Chapter XVIII

A Piratical Aftermath


Morgan's destination was the isle of Savona, near which a great Spanish
fleet was expected to pass, and here he hoped to make some rich prizes.
But when he got out to sea he met with contrary and dangerous winds,
which delayed him a long time, and eventually when he arrived at Savona,
after having landed at various places, where he pillaged, murdered, and
burned, according to the extent of his opportunities, he found at least
one-half of his men and ships had not arrived. With the small force
which he now had with him he could not set out to attack a Spanish
fleet, and therefore he was glad to accept the suggestion made to him by
a Frenchman who happened to be in his company.

This man had been with L'Olonnois two years before when that bloody
pirate had sacked the towns of Maracaibo and Gibraltar; he had made
himself perfectly familiar with the fortifications and defences of these
towns, and he told Morgan that it would be easy to take them. To be
sure they had been thoroughly sacked before, and therefore did not offer
the tempting inducements of perfectly fresh towns, such as
Port-au-Prince, but still in two years the inhabitants must have
gathered together some possessions desirable to pirates, and therefore,
although Morgan could not go to these towns with the expectation of
reaping a full harvest, he might at least gather up an aftermath which
would pay him for his trouble.

So away sailed this horde of ravenous scoundrels for the lake of
Maracaibo, at the outer end of which lay the town of Maracaibo, and at
the other extremity the town of Gibraltar. When they had sailed near
enough to the fortifications they anchored out of sight of the
watch-tower and, landing in the night, marched on one of the forts. Here
the career of Morgan came very near closing forever. The Spaniards had
discovered the approach of the pirates, and this fort had been converted
into a great trap in which the citizens hoped to capture and destroy the
pirate leader and his men. Everybody had left the fort, the gates were
open, and a slow-match, communicating with the magazine, had been
lighted just before the last Spaniard had left.

But the oldest and most sagacious of rats would be no more difficult to
entrap than was the wily pirate Morgan. When he entered the open gates
of the fort and found everything in perfect order, he suspected a trick,
and looking about him he soon saw the smouldering match. Instantly he
made a dash at it, seized it and extinguished the fire. Had he been
delayed in this discovery a quarter of an hour longer, he and his men
would have been blown to pieces along with the fort.

Now the pirates pressed on toward the town, but they met with no
resistance. The Spaniards, having failed to blow up their dreaded
enemies, had retreated into the surrounding country and had left the
town. The triumphant pirates spread themselves everywhere. They searched
the abandoned town for people and valuables, and every man who cared to
do so took one of the empty houses for his private residence. They made
the church the common meeting-place where they might all gather together
when it was necessary, and when they had spent the night in eating and
drinking all the good things they could find, they set out the next day
to hunt for the fugitive citizens.

For three weeks Morgan and his men held a devil's carnival in Maracaibo.
To tell of the abominable tortures and cruelties which they inflicted
upon the poor people, whom they dragged from their hiding-places in the
surrounding country, would make our flesh creep and our blood run cold.
When they could do no more evil they sailed away up the lake for
Gibraltar.

It is not necessary to tell the story of the taking of this town. When
Morgan arrived there he found it also entirely deserted. The awful dread
of the human beasts who were coming upon them had forced the inhabitants
to fly. In the whole town only one man was left, and he was an idiot who
had not sense enough to run away. This poor fellow was tortured to tell
where his treasures were hid, and when he consented to take them to the
place where he had concealed his possessions, they found a few broken
earthen dishes, and a little bit of money, about as much as a poor
imbecile might be supposed to possess. Thereupon the disappointed fiends
cruelly killed him.

For five weeks the country surrounding Gibraltar was the scene of a
series of diabolical horrors. The pirates undertook the most hazardous
and difficult expeditions in order to find the people who had hidden
themselves on islands and in the mountains, and although they obtained a
great deal of booty, they met with a good many misfortunes. Some of them
were drowned in swollen streams, and others lost much of their pillage
by rains and storms.

At last, after having closed his vile proceedings in the ordinary pirate
fashion, by threatening to burn the town if he were not paid a ransom,
Morgan thought it time for him to depart, for if the Spaniards should
collect a sufficient force at Maracaibo to keep him from getting out of
the lake, he would indeed be caught in a trap. The ransom was partly
paid and partly promised, and Morgan and his men departed, carrying with
them some hostages for the rest of the ransom due.

When Morgan and his fleet arrived at Maracaibo, they found the town
still deserted, but they also discovered that they were caught in the
trap which they had feared, out of which they saw no way of escaping.
News had been sent the Spanish forces; of the capture and sacking of
Maracaibo, and three large men-of-war now lay in the channel below the
town which led from the lake into the sea. And more than this, the
castle which defended the entrance to the lake, and which the pirates
had found empty when they arrived, was now well manned and supplied with
a great many cannon, so that for once in their lives these wicked
buccaneers were almost discouraged. Their little ships could not stand
against the men-of-war; and in any case they could not pass the castle,
which was now prepared to blow them to pieces if they should come near
enough.

But in the midst of these disheartening circumstances, the pirate leader
showed what an arrogant, blustering dare-devil he was, for, instead of
admitting his discomfiture and trying to make terms with the Spaniards,
he sent a letter to the admiral of the ships, in which he stated that if
he did not allow him a free passage out to sea he would burn every house
in Maracaibo. To this insolent threat, the Spanish admiral replied in a
long letter, in which he told Morgan that if he attempted to leave the
lake he would fire upon his ships, and, if necessary, follow them out to
sea, until not a stick of one of them should be left. But in the great
magnanimity of his soul he declared that he would allow Morgan to sail
away freely, provided he would deliver all the booty he had captured,
together with the prisoners and slaves, and promise to go home and
abandon buccaneering forever. In case he declined these terms, the
admiral declared he would come up the channel in boats filled with his
soldiers and put every pirate to the sword.

When Morgan received this letter, he called his men together in the
public square of the town, and asked them what they would do, and when
these fellows heard that they were asked to give up all their booty,
they unanimously voted that they would perish rather than do such an
unmanly thing as that. So it was agreed that they would fight themselves
out of the lake of Maracaibo, or stay there, dead or alive, as the case
might be.




Chapter XIX

A Tight Place for Morgan


At this important crisis again turned up the man with an idea. This was
an inventive buccaneer, who proposed to Morgan that they should take a
medium-sized ship which they had captured at the other end of the lake,
and make a fire-ship of her. In order that the Spaniards might not
suspect the character of this incendiary craft, he proposed that they
should fit her up like one of the pirate war-vessels, for in this case
the Spaniards would not try to get away from her, but would be glad to
have her come near enough for them to capture her.

Morgan was pleased with this plan, and the fire-ship was prepared with
all haste. All the pitch, tar, and brimstone in the town were put on
board of her, together with other combustibles. On the deck were placed
logs of wood, which were dressed up in coats and hats to look like men,
and by their sides were muskets and cutlasses. Portholes were made, and
in these were placed other logs to represent cannon. Thus this merchant
vessel, now as inflammable as a pine knot, was made to resemble a
somewhat formidable pirate ship. The rest of the fleet was made ready,
the valuables and prisoners and slaves were put on board; and they all
sailed boldly down toward the Spanish vessels, the fire-ship in front.

When the Spanish admiral saw this insignificant fleet approaching, he
made ready to sink it to the bottom, and when the leading vessel made
its way directly toward his own ship, as if with the impudent intention
of boarding her, he did not fire at her, but let her come on. The few
pirates on board the fire-ship ran her up against the side of the great
man-of-war; and after making her fast and applying their matches, they
immediately slipped overboard, and swam to one of their own vessels
before the Spaniards had an idea of what had happened. The fire-ship was
soon ablaze, and as the flames quickly spread, the large vessel took
fire, and the people on board had scarcely time to get out of her before
she sank.

The commander of one of the other ships was so much frightened by what
had occurred in so short a space of time that he ran his vessel aground
and wrecked her, her men jumping out into the water and making for the
land. As for the other ship, the pirates boldly attacked her and
captured her, and as she was a very fine vessel, Morgan left his own
small vessel, in which he had been commanding his fleet, and took
possession of her. Thus, in a very short time, the whole state of
affairs was changed. The Spaniards had no ships at all, and Morgan was
in command of a very fine vessel, in which he led his triumphant fleet.

Victory is a grand thing to a pirate as it is to every human being who
has been engaged in a conflict, but none of the joys of triumph could
equal the sordid rapacity of Morgan and his men. They spent days in
trying to recover the money and plate which were on board the sunken
Spanish ships. The sterns of these projected above water, and a great
deal of valuable treasure was recovered from them. The pirates worked
very hard at this, although they had not the slightest idea how they
were to pass the castle and get away with the plunder after they had
obtained it.

When the wrecks had been stripped of everything of value, the time came
for demanding a ransom for not burning the town and hanging the
prisoners, and as the poor citizens knew very well what they might
expect, they sent word to the admiral, who had escaped to the castle,
begging him to accede to the demands of Morgan, and to let the wretched
pirates go. But the admiral, Don Alonso, was a thoroughbred Spaniard,
and he would listen to no such cowardly suggestion. He would consent to
no ransom being paid, and on no account would he allow the pirates to
pass the channel. The citizens, however, who knew what was good for
them, raised the money, and paid the ransom in coin and cattle, and
Morgan declared that if the admiral would not let him out of the lake,
he would have to attend to that matter himself.

But before he made another bold stroke against the enemy his stingy and
niggardly spirit urged him to defend himself against his friends, and
before endeavoring to leave he ordered a division of the spoils. Many of
the goods taken from the two towns were on board the different vessels
of the fleet, and he was very much afraid that if his comrades, who
commanded the other ships, should be so fortunate as to get out to sea,
they would sail away with the booty they carried, and he would not see
any of it. Therefore, the booty from every ship was brought on board his
own fine vessel, and every man was put through an examination as rigid
as if he had been passing a custom house, and was obliged to prove that
he had not concealed or kept back any money or jewels. The value of the
plunder was very great, and when it had been divided, according to the
scale which Morgan had adopted, the pirate leader felt safe. He now had
his share of the prizes in his own possession, and that to him was more
important than anything else in the world.

The question of getting away was a very serious one; the greater part of
his fleet consisted of small vessels which could not defy the guns of
the fort, and as the stout hearts and brawny arms of his followers could
be of no use to him in this dilemma, Morgan was obliged to fall back
upon his own brains; therefore, he planned a trick.

When everything had been prepared for departure, Morgan anchored his
fleet at a distance from the castle, but not so far away that the
Spaniards could not observe his movements. Then he loaded some boats
with armed men and had them rowed ashore on the side of the channel on
which the castle stood. The boats landed behind a little wood, and there
the men, instead of getting out, crouched themselves down in the bottom
of the boats so that they should not be seen. Then the boats, apparently
empty, were rowed back to the pirate ships, and in a short time, again
full of men sitting, upright, with their muskets and cutlasses, they
went to the shore, and soon afterwards returned apparently empty as
before.

This performance was repeated over and over again, until the people in
the castle were convinced that Morgan was putting his men on shore in
order to make a land attack upon the rear of the castle during the
night. But the Spanish admiral was not to be caught by any such clumsy
stratagem as that, and, therefore, in great haste he had his big cannon
moved to the land side of the fort, and posted there the greater part of
his garrison in order that when the pirates made their assault in the
dead of the night they would meet with a reception for which they had
not bargained.

When it was dark, and the tide began to run out, the pirate vessels
weighed anchor, and they all drifted down toward the castle. Morgan's
spies had perceived some of the extraordinary movements in the Spanish
fortifications, and he therefore drifted down with a good deal of
confidence, although, had his trick been discovered in time it would
have gone very hard with his fleet. It is probable that he had taken all
these chances into consideration and had felt pretty sure that if the
cannon of the fort had been opened upon them it would not have been the
big ship which carried him and his precious load which would have been
sunk by the great guns, and that no matter what happened to the smaller
vessels and the men on board them, he and his own ship would be able to
sail away.

But the Spaniards did not perceive the approach of the drifting fleet,
for they were intrepidly waiting at the back of the castle to make it
very hot for the pirates when they should arrive. Slowly past the great
walls of the fort drifted the fleet of buccaneers, and then, at a
signal, every vessel hoisted its sails, and, with a good wind, sailed
rapidly toward the open sea. The last pirate vessel had scarcely passed
the fort when the Spaniards discovered what was going on, and in great
haste they rolled their cannon back to the water side of the fort and
began firing furiously, but it was of no use.

The pirates sailed on until they were out of danger, and then they
anchored and arranged for putting on shore the greater number of their
prisoners, who were only an encumbrance to them. As a parting insult,
Morgan fired seven or eight of his largest guns at the castle, whose
humiliated occupants did not reply by a single shot.

In order to understand what thoroughly contemptible scoundrels these
pirates were it may be stated that when Morgan and his men reached
Jamaica after a good deal of storm and trouble on the way, they found
there many of their comrades who had not been able to join them at their
rendezvous at Savona. These unfortunate fellows, who had not known where
Morgan had gone and were unable to join him, had endeavored to do some
piratical business of their own, but had had very little luck and a
great many misfortunes. Morgan's men, with their pockets full of money,
jeered and sneered at their poor comrades who had had such hard times,
and without any thought of sharing with them the least portion of their
own vile gains they treated them with contempt and derision.

The buccaneer, Captain Henry Morgan, was now a very great personage, but
with his next expedition, which was a very important one, and in its
extent resembled warfare rather than piracy, we shall have little to do
because his exploits in this case were not performed on our Atlantic
coasts, but over the Isthmus, on the shores of the Pacific.

Morgan raised a great fleet, carrying a little army of two thousand men,
and with this he made his way to the other side of the Isthmus and
attacked the city of Panama, which, of course, he captured. His terrible
deeds at this place resembled those which he performed after the capture
of the smaller towns which we have been considering, except that they
were on a scale of greater magnitude. Nearly the whole of the town of
Panama was burned, and the excesses, cruelties, and pillages of the
conquerors were something almost without parallel.

Before marching overland to Panama, Morgan had recaptured the island of
St. Catherine, which was a very valuable station for his purposes, and
had also taken the castle of Chagres on the mainland near by, and on his
return from the conquest and pillage of the unfortunate city he and his
forces gathered together at Chagres in order to divide the spoils.

Now came great trouble and dissatisfaction; many of the buccaneers
loudly declared that Morgan was taking everything that was really
valuable for his own, especially the precious stones and jewels, and
that they were getting a very small share of the booty of Panama. There
seemed to be good reason for these complaints, for the sum of about two
hundred dollars apiece was all that Morgan's men received after their
terrible hardships and dangers and the pillage of a very rich town. The
murmurings and complaints against Morgan's peculiar methods became
louder and more frequent, and at last the wily Welshman began to be
afraid that serious trouble would come to him if he did not take care of
himself. This, however, he was very capable of doing. Silently and
quietly one night, without giving notice to any of the buccaneers at
Chagres, except a few who were in his secret, Morgan, in his large ship,
sailed away for Jamaica, followed by only a few other vessels,
containing some of his favored companions.

When the great body of the buccaneers, the principal portion of which
were Frenchmen, found that their leader had deserted them, there was a
grand commotion, and if they had been able, the furious men who had had
this trick played upon them, would have followed Morgan to treat him as
they had so often treated the Spaniards. But they could not
follow--Morgan had taken great care that this should not happen. Their
ships were out of order; they had been left very short of provisions and
ammunition, and found that not only were they unable to avenge
themselves on their traitor leader, but that it would be very hard for
them to get away at all.

Poor Esquemeling, the literary pirate, was one of those who was left
behind, and in his doleful state he made the following reflection, which
we quote from his book: "Captain Morgan left us all in such a miserable
condition as might serve for a lively representation of what rewards
attend wickedness at the latter end of life. Whence we ought to have
learned how to regulate and amend our actions for the future."

After Morgan had safely reached Jamaica with all his booty, the idea
renewed itself in his mind of returning to St. Catherine, fortifying the
place and putting it in complete order, and then occupying it as a
station for all pirates, with himself the supreme governor and king of
the buccaneers. But before he had completed his arrangements for doing
this there was a change in the affairs at Jamaica: the king of England,
having listened to the complaints of the Spanish crown, had recalled the
former Governor and put him on trial to answer for the manner in which
he allowed the island to be used by the pirates for their wicked
purposes against a friendly nation, and had sent a new Governor with
orders to allow no buccaneers in Jamaica, and in every way to suppress
piracy in those parts.

Now the shrewd Morgan saw that his present business was likely to become
a very undesirable one, and he accordingly determined to give it up.
Having brutally pillaged and most cruelly treated the Spaniards as long
as he was able to do so, and having cheated and defrauded his friends
and companions to the utmost extent possible, he made up his mind to
reform, and a more thoroughly base and contemptible reformed scoundrel
was never seen on the face of the earth.

Morgan was now a rich man, and he lost no time in becoming very
respectable. He endeavored to win favor with the new Governor, and was
so successful that when that official was obliged to return to England
on account of his health, he left the ex-pirate in charge of the affairs
of the island in the capacity of Deputy-Governor. More than this, King
Charles, who apparently had heard of Morgan's great bravery and ability,
and had not cared to listen to anything else about him, knighted him,
and this preëminent and inhuman water-thief became Sir Henry Morgan.

In his new official capacity Morgan was very severe upon his former
associates, and when any of them were captured and brought before him,
he condemned some to be imprisoned and some to be hung, and in every
way apparently endeavored to break up the unlawful business of
buccaneering.

About this time John Esquemeling betook himself to Europe with all
possible despatch, for he had work to do and things to tell with which
the Deputy-Governor would have no sympathy whatever. He got away safely,
and he wrote his book, and if he had not had this good fortune, the
world would have lost a great part of the story of what happened to the
soft little baby who was born among the quiet green fields of Wales.

Even during the time that he was Deputy-Governor, Morgan was suspected
of sharing in the gains of some buccaneers at the same time that he
punished others, and after the death of Charles II. he was sent to
England and imprisoned, but what eventually became of him we do not
know. If he succeeded in ill-using and defrauding his Satanic Majesty,
there is no record of the fact.




Chapter XX

The Story of a High-Minded Pirate


After having considered the extraordinary performances of so many of
those execrable wretches, the buccaneers, it is refreshing and
satisfactory to find that there were exceptions even to the rules which
governed the conduct and general make-up of the ordinary pirate of the
period, and we are therefore glad enough to tell the story of a man,
who, although he was an out-and-out buccaneer, possessed some peculiar
characteristics which give him a place of his own in the history of
piracy.

In the early part of these sketches we have alluded to a gentleman of
France, who, having become deeply involved in debt, could see no way of
putting himself in a condition to pay his creditors but to go into
business of some kind. He had no mercantile education, he had not
learned any profession, and it was therefore necessary for him to do
something for which a previous preparation was not absolutely essential.

After having carefully considered all the methods of making money which
were open to him under the circumstances, he finally concluded to take
up piracy and literature. Even at the present day it is considered by
many persons that one of these branches of industry is a field of action
especially adapted to those who have not had the opportunity of giving
the time and study necessary in any other method of making a living.

The French gentleman whose adventures we are about to relate was a very
different man from John Esquemeling, who was a literary pirate and
nothing more. Being of a clerkly disposition, the gentle John did not
pretend to use the sabre or the pistol. His part in life was simply to
watch his companions fight, burn, and steal, while his only weapon was
his pen, with which he set down their exploits and thereby murdered
their reputations.

But Monsieur Raveneau de Lussan was both buccaneer and author, and when
he had finished his piratical career he wrote a book in which he gave a
full account of it, thus showing that although he had not been brought
up to a business life, he had very good ideas about money-making.

More than that, he had very good ideas about his own reputation, and
instead of leaving his exploits and adventures to be written up by other
people,--that is, if any one should think it worth while to do so,--he
took that business into his own hands. He was well educated, he had
been brought up in good society, and as he desired to return to that
society it was natural for him to wish to paint his own portrait as a
buccaneer. Pictures of that kind as they were ordinarily executed were
not at all agreeable to the eyes of the cultivated classes of France,
and so M. de Lussan determined to give his personal attention not only
to his business speculations, but to his reputation. He went out as a
buccaneer in order to rob the Spaniards of treasure with which to pay
his honest debts, and, in order to prevent his piratical career being
described in the coarse and disagreeable fashion in which people
generally wrote about pirates, he determined to write his own
adventures.

If a man wishes to appear well before the world, it is often a very good
thing for him to write his autobiography, especially if there is
anything a little shady in his career, and it may be that de Lussan's
reputation as a high-minded pirate depends somewhat on the book he wrote
after he had put down the sword and taken up the pen; but if he gave a
more pleasing color to his proceedings than they really deserved, we
ought to be glad of it. For, even if de Lussan the buccaneer was in some
degree a creature of the imagination of de Lussan the author, we have a
story which is much more pleasing and, in some respects, more romantic
than stories of ordinary pirates could possibly be made unless the
writer of such stories abandoned fact altogether and plunged blindly
into fiction.

Among the good qualities of de Lussan was a pious disposition. He had
always been a religious person, and, being a Catholic, he had a high
regard and veneration for religious buildings, for priests, and for the
services of the church, and when he had crossed the Atlantic in his
ship, the crew of which was composed of desperadoes of various nations,
and when he had landed upon the western continent, he wished still to
conform to the religious manners and customs of the old world.

Having a strong force under his command and possessing, in common with
most of the gentlemen of that period, a good military education, it was
not long after he landed on the mainland before he captured a small
town. The resistance which he met was soon overcome, and our high-minded
pirate found himself in the position of a conqueror with a community at
his mercy. As his piety now raised itself above all his other
attributes, the first thing that he did was to repair to the principal
church of the town, accompanied by all his men, and here, in accordance
with his commands, a Te Deum was sung and services were conducted by the
priests in charge. Then, after having properly performed his religious
duties, de Lussan sent his men through the town with orders to rob the
inhabitants of everything valuable they possessed.

The ransacking and pillaging of the houses continued for some time, but
when the last of his men had returned with the booty they had collected,
the high-minded chief was dissatisfied. The town appeared to be a good
deal poorer than he had expected, and as the collection seemed to be so
very small, de Lussan concluded that in some way or other he must pass
around the hat again. While he was wondering how he should do this he
happened to hear that on a sugar plantation not very far away from the
town there were some ladies of rank who, having heard of the approach of
the pirates, had taken refuge there, thinking that even if the town
should be captured, their savage enemies would not wander into the
country to look for spoils and victims.

But these ladies were greatly mistaken. When de Lussan heard where they
were, he sent out a body of men to make them prisoners and bring them
back to him. They might not have any money or jewels in their
possession, but as they belonged to good families who were probably
wealthy, a good deal of money could be made out of them by holding them
and demanding a heavy ransom for their release. So the ladies were all
brought to town and shut up securely until their friends and relatives
managed to raise enough money to pay their ransom and set them free, and
then, I have no doubt, de Lussan advised them to go to church and offer
up thanks for their happy deliverance.

As our high-minded pirate pursued his plundering way along the coast of
South America, he met with a good many things which jarred upon his
sensitive nature--things he had not expected when he started out on his
new career. One of his disappointments was occasioned by the manners and
customs of the English buccaneers under his command. These were very
different from the Frenchmen of his company, for they made not the
slightest pretence to piety.

When they had captured a town or a village, the Englishmen would go to
the churches, tear down the paintings, chop the ornaments from the
altars with their cutlasses, and steal the silver crucifixes, the
candlesticks, and even the communion services. Such conduct gave great
pain to de Lussan. To rob and destroy the property of churches was in
his eyes a great sin, and he never suffered anything of the kind if he
could prevent it. When he found in any place which he captured a wealthy
religious community or a richly furnished church, he scrupulously
refrained from taking anything or of doing damage to property, and
contented himself with demanding heavy indemnity, which the priests
were obliged to pay as a return for the pious exemption which he granted
them.

But it was very difficult to control the Englishmen. They would rob and
destroy a church as willingly as if it were the home of a peaceful
family, and although their conscientious commander did everything he
could to prevent their excesses, he did not always succeed. If he had
known what was likely to happen, his party would have consisted entirely
of Frenchmen.

Another thing which disappointed and annoyed the gentlemanly de Lussan
was the estimation in which the buccaneers were held by the ladies of
the country through which he was passing. He soon found that the women
in the Spanish settlements had the most horrible ideas regarding the
members of the famous "Brotherhood of the Coast." To be sure, all the
Spanish settlers, and a great part of the natives of the country, were
filled with horror and dismay whenever they heard that a company of
buccaneers was within a hundred miles of their homes, and it is not
surprising that this was the case, for the stories of the atrocities and
cruelties of these desperadoes had spread over the western world.

But the women of the settlements looked upon the buccaneers with greater
fear and abhorrence than the men could possibly feel, for the belief
was almost universal among them that buccaneers were terrible monsters
of cannibal habits who delighted in devouring human beings, especially
if they happened to be young and tender. This ignorance of the true
character of the invaders of the country was greatly deplored by de
Lussan. He had a most profound pity for those simple-minded persons who
had allowed themselves to be so deceived in regard to the real character
of himself and his men, and whenever he had an opportunity, he
endeavored to persuade the ladies who fell in his way that sooner than
eat a woman he would entirely abstain from food.

On one occasion, when politely conducting a young lady to a place of
confinement, where in company with other women of good family she was to
be shut up until their relatives could pay handsome ransoms for their
release, he was very much surprised when she suddenly turned to him with
tears in her eyes, and besought him not to devour her. This astonishing
speech so wounded the feelings of the gallant Frenchman that for a
moment he could not reply, and when he asked her what had put such an
unreasonable fear in her mind, she could only answer that she thought he
looked hungry, and that perhaps he would not be willing to wait
until--And there she stopped, for she could not bring her mind to
say--until she was properly prepared for the table.

"What!" exclaimed the high-minded pirate. "Do you suppose that I would
eat you in the street?" And as the poor girl, who was now crying, would
make him no answer, he fell into a sombre silence which continued until
they had reached their destination.

The cruel aspersions which were cast upon his character by the women of
the country were very galling to the chivalrous soul of this gentleman
of France, and in every way possible he endeavored to show the Spanish
ladies that their opinions of him were entirely incorrect, and even if
his men were rather a hard lot of fellows, they were not cannibals.

The high-minded pirate had now two principal objects before him. One was
to lay his hand upon all the treasure he could find, and the other was
to show the people of the country, especially the ladies, that he was a
gentleman of agreeable manners and a pious turn of mind.

It is highly probable that for some time the hero of this story did not
succeed in his first object as well as he would have liked. A great deal
of treasure was secured, but some of it consisted of property which
could not be easily turned into cash or carried away, and he had with
him a body of rapacious and conscienceless scoundrels who were
continually clamoring for as large a share of the available
spoils--such as jewels, money, and small articles of value--as they
could induce their commander to allow them, and, in consequence of this
greediness of his own men, his share of the plunder was not always as
large as it ought to be.

But in his other object he was very much more successful, and, in proof
of this, we have only to relate an interesting and remarkable adventure
which befell him. He laid siege to a large town, and, as the place was
well defended by fortifications and armed men, a severe battle took
place before it was captured. But at last the town was taken, and de
Lussan and his men having gone to church to give thanks for their
victory,--his Englishmen being obliged to attend the services no matter
what they did afterward,--he went diligently to work to gather from the
citizens their valuable and available possessions. In this way he was
brought into personal contact with a great many of the people of the
town, and among the acquaintances which he made was that of a young
Spanish lady of great beauty.

The conditions and circumstances in the midst of which this lady found
herself after the city had been taken, were very peculiar. She had been
the wife of one of the principal citizens, the treasurer of the town,
who was possessed of a large fortune, and who lived in one of the best
houses in the place; but during the battle with the buccaneers, her
husband, who fought bravely in defence of the place, was killed, and she
now found herself not only a widow, but a prisoner in the hands of those
ruthless pirates whose very name had struck terror into the hearts of
the Spanish settlers. Plunged into misery and despair, it was impossible
for her to foresee what was going to happen to her.

As has been said, the religious services in the church were immediately
followed by the pillage of the town; every house was visited, and the
trembling inhabitants were obliged to deliver up their treasures to the
savage fellows who tramped through their halls and rooms, swearing
savagely when they did not find as much as they expected, and laughing
with wild glee at any unusual discovery of jewels or coin.

The buccaneer officers as well as the men assisted in gathering in the
spoils of the town, and it so happened that M. Raveneau de Lussan, with
his good clothes and his jaunty hat with a feather in it, selected the
house of the late treasurer of the city as a suitable place for him to
make his investigations. He found there a great many valuable articles
and also found the beautiful young widow.

The effect produced upon the mind of the lady when the captain of the
buccaneers entered her house was a very surprising one. Instead of
beholding a savage, brutal ruffian, with ragged clothes and gleaming
teeth, she saw a handsome gentleman, as well dressed as circumstances
would permit, very polite in his manners, and with as great a desire to
transact his business without giving her any more inconvenience than was
necessary, as if he had been a tax-collector or had come to examine the
gas meter. If all the buccaneers were such agreeable men as this one,
she and her friends had been laboring under a great mistake.

De Lussan did not complete his examination of the treasurer's house in
one visit, and during the next two or three days the young widow not
only became acquainted with the character of buccaneers in general, but
she learned to know this particular buccaneer very well, and to find out
what an entirely different man he was from the savage fellows who
composed his company. She was grateful to him for his kind manner of
appropriating her possessions, she was greatly interested in his
society,--for he was a man of culture and information,--and in less than
three days she found herself very much in love with him. There was not a
man in the whole town who, in her opinion, could compare with this
gallant commander of buccaneers.

It was not very long before de Lussan became conscious of the favor he
had found in the eyes of this lady; for as a buccaneer could not be
expected to remain very long in one place, it was necessary, if this
lady wished the captor of her money and treasure to know that he had
also captured her heart, that she must not be slow in letting him know
the state of her affections, and being a young person of a very
practical mind she promptly informed de Lussan that she loved him and
desired him to marry her.

The gallant Frenchman was very much amazed when this proposition was
made to him, which was in the highest degree complimentary. It was very
attractive to him--but he could not understand it. The lady's husband
had been dead but a few days--he had assisted in having the unfortunate
gentleman properly buried--and it seemed to him very unnatural that the
young widow should be in such an extraordinary hurry to prepare a
marriage feast before the funeral baked meats had been cleared from the
table.

There was but one way in which he could explain to himself this
remarkable transition from grief to a new affection. He believed that
the people of this country were like their fruits and their flowers. The
oranges might fall from the trees, but the blossoms would still be
there. Husband and wives or lovers might die, but in the tropical hearts
of these people it was not necessary that new affections should be
formed, for they were already there, and needed only some one to receive
them.

As he did not undertake his present expedition for the purpose of
marrying ladies, no matter how beautiful they might be, it is quite
natural that de Lussan should not accept the proffered hand of the young
widow. But when she came to detail her plans, he found that it would be
well worth his while to carefully consider her project.

The lady was by no means a thoughtless young creature, carried away by a
sudden attachment. Before making known to de Lussan her preference for
him above all other men, she had given the subject her most careful and
earnest consideration, and had made plans which in her opinion would
enable the buccaneer captain and herself to settle the matter to the
satisfaction of all parties.

When de Lussan heard the lady's scheme, he was as much surprised by her
businesslike ability as he had been by the declaration of her affection
for him. She knew very well that he could not marry her and take her
with him. Moreover, she did not wish to go. She had no fancy for such
wild expeditions and such savage companions. Her plans were for peace
and comfort and a happy domestic life. In a word, she desired that the
handsome de Lussan should remain with her.

Of course the gentleman opened his eyes very wide when he heard this,
but she had a great deal to say upon the subject, and she had not
omitted any of the details which would be necessary for the success of
her scheme.

The lady knew just as well as the buccaneer captain knew that the men
under his command would not allow him to remain comfortably in that town
with his share of the plunder, while they went on without a leader to
undergo all sorts of hardships and dangers, perhaps defeat and death. If
he announced his intention of withdrawing from the band, his enraged
companions would probably kill him. Consequently a friendly separation
between himself and his buccaneer followers was a thing not to be
thought of, and she did not even propose it.

Her idea was a very different one. Just as soon as possible, that very
night, de Lussan was to slip quietly out of the town, and make his way
into the surrounding country. She would furnish him with a horse, and
tell him the way he should take, and he was not to stop until he had
reached a secluded spot, where she was quite sure the buccaneers would
not be able to find him, no matter how diligently they might search.
When they had entirely failed in every effort to discover their lost
captain, who they would probably suppose had been killed by wandering
Indians,--for it was impossible that he could have been murdered in the
town without their knowledge,--they would give him up as lost and press
on in search of further adventures.

When the buccaneers were far away, and all danger from their return had
entirely passed, then the brave and polite Frenchman, now no longer a
buccaneer, could safely return to the town, where the young widow would
be most happy to marry him, to lodge him in her handsome house, and to
make over to him all the large fortune and estates which had been the
property of her late husband.

This was a very attractive offer surely, a beautiful woman, and a
handsome fortune. But she offered more than this. She knew that a
gentleman who had once captured and despoiled the town might feel a
little delicacy in regard to marrying and settling there and becoming
one of its citizens, and therefore she was prepared to remove any
objections which might be occasioned by such considerate sentiments on
his part.

She assured him that if he would agree to her plan, she would use her
influence with the authorities, and would obtain for him the position of
city treasurer, which her husband had formerly held. And when he
declared that such an astounding performance must be utterly impossible,
she started out immediately, and having interviewed the Governor of the
town and other municipal officers, secured their signature to a paper in
which they promised that if M. de Lussan would accept the proposals
which the lady had made, he would be received most kindly by the
officers and citizens of the town; that the position of treasurer would
be given to him, and that all the promises of the lady should be made
good.

Now our high-minded pirate was thrown into a great quandary, and
although at first he had had no notion whatever of accepting the
pleasant proposition which had been made to him by the young widow, he
began to see that there were many good reasons why the affection, the
high position, and the unusual advantages which she had offered to him
might perhaps be the very best fortune which he could expect in this
world. In the first place, if he should marry this charming young
creature and settle down as a respected citizen and an officer of the
town, he would be entirely freed from the necessity of leading the life
of a buccaneer, and this life was becoming more and more repugnant to
him every day,--not only on account of the highly disagreeable nature of
his associates and their reckless deeds, but because the country was
becoming aroused, and the resistance to his advances was growing
stronger and stronger. In the next attack he made upon a town or village
he might receive a musket ball in his body, which would end his career
and leave his debts in France unpaid.

More than that, he was disappointed, as has been said before, in regard
to the financial successes he had expected. At that time he saw no
immediate prospect of being able to go home with money enough in his
pocket to pay off his creditors, and if he did not return to his native
land under those conditions, he did not wish to return there at all.
Under these circumstances it seemed to be wise and prudent, that if he
had no reason to expect to be able to settle down honorably and
peaceably in France, to accept this opportunity to settle honorably,
peaceably, and in every way satisfactorily in America.

It is easy to imagine the pitching and the tossing in the mind of our
French buccaneer. The more he thought of the attractions of the fair
widow and of the wealth and position which had been offered him, the
more he hated all thoughts of his piratical crew, and of the dastardly
and cruel character of the work in which they were engaged. If he could
have trusted the officers and citizens of the town, there is not much
doubt that he would have married the widow, but those officers and
citizens were Spaniards, and he was a Frenchman. A week before the
inhabitants of the place had been prosperous, contented, and happy. Now
they had been robbed, insulted, and in many cases ruined, and he was
commander of the body of desperadoes who had robbed and ruined them. Was
it likely that they would forget the injuries which he had inflicted
upon them simply because he had married a wealthy lady of the town and
had kindly consented to accept the office of city treasurer?

It was much more probable that when his men had really left that part of
the country the citizens would forget all their promises to him and
remember only his conduct toward them, and that even if he remained
alive long enough to marry the lady and take the position offered him,
it would not be long before she was again a widow and the office vacant.

So de Lussan shut his eyes to the tempting prospects which were spread
out before him, and preferring rather to be a live buccaneer than a dead
city treasurer, he told the beautiful widow that he could not marry her
and that he must go forth again into the hard, unsympathetic world to
fight, to burn, to steal, and to be polite. Then, fearing that if he
remained he might find his resolution weakened, he gathered together his
men and his pillage, and sadly went away, leaving behind him a joyful
town and a weeping widow.

If the affection of the young Spanish lady for the buccaneer chief was
sufficient to make her take an interest in his subsequent career, she
would probably have been proud of him, for the ladies of those days had
a high opinion of brave men and successful warriors. De Lussan soon
proved that he was not only a good fighter, but that he was also an
able general, and his operations on the western coast of South America
were more like military campaigns than ordinary expeditions of lawless
buccaneers.

He attacked and captured the city of Panama, always an attractive prize
to the buccaneer forces, and after that he marched down the western
coast of South America, conquering and sacking many towns. As he now
carried on his business in a somewhat wholesale way, it could not fail
to bring him in a handsome profit, and in the course of time he felt
that he was able to retire from the active practice of his profession
and to return to France.

But as he was going back into the circles of respectability, he wished
to do so as a respectable man. He discarded his hat and plume, he threw
away his great cutlass and his heavy pistols, and attired in the costume
of a gentleman in society he prepared himself to enter again upon his
old life. He made the acquaintance of some of the French colonial
officers in the West Indies, and obtaining from them letters of
introduction to the Treasurer-General of France, he went home as a
gentleman who had acquired a fortune by successful enterprises in the
new world.

The pirate who not only possesses a sense of propriety and a sensitive
mind, but is also gifted with an ability to write a book in which he
describes his own actions and adventures, is to be credited with unusual
advantages, and as Raveneau de Lussan possessed these advantages, he has
come down to posterity as a high-minded pirate.




Chapter XXI

Exit Buccaneer; Enter Pirate


The buccaneers of the West Indies and South America had grown to be a
most formidable body of reckless freebooters. From merely capturing
Spanish ships, laden with the treasures taken from the natives of the
new world, they had grown strong enough to attack Spanish towns and
cities. But when they became soldiers and marched in little armies, the
patience of the civilized world began to weaken: Panama, for instance,
was an important Spanish city; England was at peace with Spain;
therefore, when a military force composed mainly of Englishmen, and led
by a British subject, captured and sacked the said Spanish city, England
was placed in an awkward position; if she did not interfere with her
buccaneers, she would have a quarrel to settle with Spain.

Therefore it was that a new Governor was sent to Jamaica with strict
orders to use every power he possessed to put down the buccaneers and to
break up their organization, and it was to this end that he set a thief
to catch thieves and empowered the ex-pirate, Morgan, to execute his
former comrades.

But methods of conciliation, as well as threats of punishment, were used
to induce the buccaneers to give up their illegal calling, and liberal
offers were made to them to settle in Jamaica and become law-abiding
citizens. They were promised grants of land and assistance of various
kinds in order to induce them to take up the legitimate callings of
planters and traders.

But these offers were not at all tempting to the Brethren of the Coast;
from pirates _rampant_ to pirates _couchant_ was too great a change, and
some of them, who found it impossible to embark on piratical cruises, on
account of the increasing difficulties of fitting out vessels, returned
to their original avocations of cattle-butchering and beef-drying, and
some, it is said, chose rather to live among the wild Indians and share
their independent lives, than to bind themselves to any form of honest
industry.

The French had also been very active in suppressing the operations of
their buccaneers, and now the Brethren of the Coast, considered as an
organization for preying upon the commerce and settlers of Spain, might
be said to have ceased to exist. But it must not be supposed that
because buccaneering had died out, that piracy was dead. If we tear
down a wasps' nest, we destroy the abode of a fierce and pitiless
community, but we scatter the wasps, and it is likely that each one of
them, in the unrestricted and irresponsible career to which he has been
unwillingly forced, will prove a much more angry and dangerous insect
than he had ever been before.

This is what happened to these buccaneers who would not give up a
piratical life; driven away from Jamaica, from San Domingo, and even
from Tortuga, they retained a resting-place only at New Providence, an
island in the Bahamas, and this they did not maintain very long. Then
they spread themselves all over the watery world. They were no longer
buccaneers, they were no longer brothers of any sort or kind, they no
longer set out merely to pillage and fight the Spaniards, but their
attacks were made upon people of every nation. English ships and French
ships, once safe from them, were a welcome prey to these new pirates,
unrestrained by any kind of loyalty, even by any kind of enmity. They
were more rapacious, they were more cruel, they were more like fiends
than they had ever been before. They were cowardly and they no longer
proceeded against towns which might be defended, nor ran up alongside of
a man-of-war to boldly board her in the very teeth of her guns. They
confined themselves to attacks upon peaceable merchant vessels, often
robbing them and then scuttling them, delighted with the spectacle of a
ship, with all its crew, sinking hopelessly into the sea.

The scene of piratical operations in America was now very much changed.
The successors of the Brothers of the Coast, no longer united by any
bonds of fellowship, but each pirate captain acting independently in his
own wicked way, was coming up from the West Indies to afflict the
seacoast of our country.

The old buccaneers knew all about our southern coast, for they were
among the very first white men who ever set foot on the shores of North
and South Carolina before that region had been settled by colonists, and
when the only inhabitants were the wild Indians. These early buccaneers
often used its bays and harbors as convenient ports of refuge, where
they could anchor, divide spoils, take in fresh water, and stay as long
as they pleased without fear of molestation. It was natural enough that
when the Spanish-hating buccaneer merged into the independent pirate,
who respected no flag, and preyed upon ships of every nation, he should
feel very much at home on the Carolina coasts.

As the country was settled, and Charles Town, now Charleston, grew to be
a port of considerable importance, the pirates felt as much at home in
this region as when it was inhabited merely by Indians. They frequently
touched at little seaside settlements, and boldly sailed into the harbor
of Charles Town. But, unlike the unfortunate citizens of Porto Bello or
Maracaibo, the American colonists were not frightened when they saw a
pirate ship anchored in their harbors, for they knew its crew did not
come as enemies, but as friendly traders.

The early English colonists were not as prosperous as they might have
been if the mother country had not been so anxious to make money out of
them. They were not allowed to import goods from any country but
England, and if they had products or crops to export, they must be sold
to English merchants. For whatever they bought they had to pay the
highest prices, and they could not send into the markets of the world to
get the best value for their own productions.

Therefore it was that a pirate ship was a very welcome visitor in
Charles Town harbor. She was generally loaded with goods, which, as they
were stolen, her captain could afford to sell very cheaply indeed, and
as there was always plenty of Spanish gold on board, her crew was not
apt to haggle very much in regard to the price of the spirits, the
groceries, or the provisions which they bought from the merchants of the
town. This friendly commerce between the pirates and the Carolinians
grew to be so extensive that at one time the larger part of the coin in
circulation in those colonies consisted of Spanish gold pieces, which
had been brought in and used by the pirates for the purchase of goods.

But a pirate is very seldom a person of discretion, who knows when to
leave well enough alone, and so, instead of contenting themselves with
robbing and capturing the vessels belonging to people whom their Charles
Town friends and customers would look upon as foreigners, they boldly
sailed up and down the coast, seeking for floating booty wherever they
might find it, and when a pirate vessel commanded by an English captain
and manned principally by an English crew, fell in with a big
merchantman flying the English flag, they bore down upon that vessel,
just as if it had been French, or Spanish, or Dutch, and if the crew
were impertinent enough to offer any resistance, they were cut down and
thrown overboard.

At last the pirates became so swaggeringly bold and their captains so
enterprising in their illegal trading that the English government took
vigorous measures, not only to break up piracy, but to punish all
colonists who should encourage the freebooters by commercial dealings
with them. At these laws the pirates laughed, and the colonists winced,
and there were many people in Charles Town who vowed that if the King
wanted them to help him put down piracy, he must show them some other
way of getting imported goods at reasonable prices. So the pirates went
on capturing merchantmen whenever they had a chance, and the Carolinians
continued to look forward with interest to the bargain days which always
followed the arrival of a pirate ship. But this state of things did not
last, and the time came when the people of Charles Town experienced a
change of mind. The planters were now growing large quantities of rice,
and this crop became so valuable that the prosperity of the colonies
greatly increased. And now the pirates also became very much interested
in the rice crops, and when they had captured four or five vessels
sailing out of Charles Town heavily laden with rice, the people of that
town suddenly became aware of the true character of a pirate. He was now
in their eyes an unmitigated scoundrel who not only stole goods from all
nations, which he brought to them and sold at low prices, but he
actually stole their goods, their precious rice which they were sending
to England.

The indignant citizens of Charles Town took a bold stand, and such a
bold one it was that when part of a crew of pirates, who had been put
ashore by their comrades on account of a quarrel, made their way to the
town, thinking they could tell a tale of shipwreck and rely upon the
friendship of their old customers, they were taken into custody, and
seven out of the nine were hanged.

The occasional repetition of such acts as this, and the exhibition of
dangling pirates, hung up like scarecrows at the entrance of the
harbors, dampened the ardor of the freebooters a good deal, and for some
years they kept away from the harbor of Charles Town, which had once
been to them such a friendly port.




Chapter XXII

The Great Blackbeard comes upon the Stage


So long as the people of the Carolinas were prosperous and able to
capture and execute pirates who interfered with their trade the Atlantic
sea-robbers kept away from their ports, but this prosperity did not
last. Indian wars broke out, and in the course of time the colonies
became very much weakened and impoverished, and then it was that the
harbor of Charles Town began to be again interesting to the pirates.

About this time one of the most famous of sea-robbers was harassing the
Atlantic coast of North America, and from New England to the West
Indies, he was known as the great pirate Blackbeard. This man, whose
real name was Thatch, was a most terrible fellow in appearance as well
as action. He wore a long, heavy, black beard, which it was his fancy to
separate into tails, each one tied with a colored ribbon, and often
tucked behind his ears. Some of the writers of that day declared that
the sight of this beard would create more terror in any port of the
American seaboard than would the sudden appearance of a fiery comet.
Across his brawny breast he carried a sort of a sling in which hung not
less than three pairs of pistols in leathern holsters, and these, in
addition to his cutlass and a knife or two in his belt, made him a most
formidable-looking fellow.

Some of the fanciful recreations of Blackbeard show him to have been a
person of consistent purpose. Even in his hours of rest when he was not
fighting or robbing, his savage soul demanded some interesting
excitement. Once he was seated at table with his mate and two or three
sailors, and when the meal was over he took up a pair of pistols, and
cocking them put them under the table. This peculiar action caused one
of the sailors to remember very suddenly that he had something to do on
deck, and he immediately disappeared. But the others looked at their
captain in astonishment, wondering what he would do next. They soon
found out; for crossing the pistols, still under the table, he fired
them. One ball hit the mate in the leg, but the other struck no one.
When asked what he meant by this strange action, he replied that if he
did not shoot one of his men now and then they would forget what sort of
a person he was.

At another time he invented a game; he gathered his officers and crew
together and told them that they were going to play that they were
living in the lower regions. Thereupon the whole party followed him down
into the hold. The hatches and all the other openings were closed, and
then Blackbeard began to illuminate the scene with fire and brimstone.
The sulphur burned, the fumes rose, a ghastly light spread over the
countenances of the desperadoes, and very soon some of them began to
gasp and cough and implore the captain to let in some fresh air, but
Blackbeard was bound to have a good game, and he proceeded to burn more
brimstone. He laughed at the gasping fellows about him and declared that
he would be just as willing to breathe the fumes of sulphur as common
air. When at last he threw open the hatches, some of the men were almost
dead, but their stalwart captain had not even sneezed.

In the early part of the eighteenth century Blackbeard made his
headquarters in one of the inlets on the North Carolina coast, and there
he ruled as absolute king, for the settlers in the vicinity seemed to be
as anxious to oblige him as the captains of the merchantmen sailing
along the coast were anxious to keep out of his way. On one of his
voyages Blackbeard went down the coast as far as Honduras, where he took
a good many prizes, and as some of the crews of the captured vessels
enlisted under him he sailed north with a stronger force than ever
before, having a large ship of forty guns, three smaller vessels, and
four hundred men. With this little fleet Blackbeard made for the coast
of South Carolina, and anchored outside the harbor of Charles Town. He
well understood the present condition of the place and was not in the
least afraid that the citizens would hang him up on the shores of the
bay.

Blackbeard began work without delay. Several well-laden ships--the
Carolinians having no idea that pirates were waiting for them--came
sailing out to sea and were immediately captured. One of these was a
very important vessel, for it not only carried a valuable cargo, but a
number of passengers, many of them people of note, who were on their way
to England. One of these was a Mr. Wragg, who was a member of the
Council of the Province. It might have been supposed that when
Blackbeard took possession of this ship, he would have been satisfied
with the cargo and the money which he found on board, and having no use
for prominent citizens, would have let them go their way; but he was a
trader as well as a plunderer, and he therefore determined that the best
thing to do in this case was to put an assorted lot of highly
respectable passengers upon the market and see what he could get for
them. He was not at the time in need of money or provisions, but his men
were very much in want of medicines, so he decided to trade off his
prisoners for pills, potions, plasters, and all sorts of apothecary's
supplies.

He put three of his pirates in a boat, and with them one of the
passengers, a Mr. Marks, who was commissioned as Blackbeard's special
agent, with orders to inform the Governor that if he did not immediately
send the medicines required, amounting in value to about three hundred
pounds, and if he did not allow the pirate crew of the boat to return in
safety, every one of the prisoners would be hanged from the yard-arm of
his ship.

The boat rowed away to the distant town, and Blackbeard waited two days
for its return, and then he grew very angry, for he believed that his
messengers had been taken into custody, and he came very near hanging
Mr. Wragg and all his companions. But before he began to satisfy his
vengeance, news came from the boat. It had been upset in the bay, and
had had great trouble in getting to Charles Town, but it had arrived
there at last. Blackbeard now waited a day or two longer; but as no news
came from Mr. Marks, he vowed he would not be trifled with by the
impudent people of Charles Town, and swore that every man, woman, and
child among the prisoners should immediately prepare to be hanged.

Of course the unfortunate prisoners in the pirate ship were in a
terrible state of mind during the absence of Mr. Marks. They knew very
well that they could expect no mercy from Blackbeard if the errand
should be unsuccessful, and they also knew that the Charles Town people
would not be likely to submit to such an outrageous demand upon them; so
they trembled and quaked by day and by night, and when at last they were
told to get ready to be hanged, every particle of courage left them, and
they proposed to Blackbeard that if he would spare their lives, and that
if it should turn out that their fellow-citizens had decided to
sacrifice them for the sake of a few paltry drugs, they would take up
the cause of the pirates; they would show Blackbeard the best way to
sail into the harbor, and they would join with him and his men in
attacking the city and punishing the inhabitants for their hard-hearted
treatment of their unfortunate fellow-citizens.

This proposition pleased Blackbeard immensely; it would have been like a
new game to take Mr. Wragg to the town and make him fight his
fellow-members of the Council of the Province, and so he rescinded his
order for a general execution, and bade his prisoners prepare to join
with his pirates when he should give the word for an assault upon their
city.

In the meantime there was a terrible stir in Charles Town. When the
Governor and citizens received the insolent and brutal message of
Blackbeard they were filled with rage as well as consternation, and if
there had been any way of going out to sea to rescue their unhappy
fellow-citizens, every able-bodied man in the town would have enlisted
in the expedition. But they had no vessels of war, and they were not
even in a position to arm any of the merchantmen in the harbor. It
seemed to the Governor and his council that there was nothing for them
to do but to submit to the demands of Blackbeard, for they very well
knew that he was a scoundrel who would keep his word, and also that
whatever they did must be done quickly, for there were the three
swaggering pirates in the town, strutting about the streets as if they
owned the place. If this continued much longer, it would be impossible
to keep the infuriated citizens from falling upon these blustering
rascals and bringing their impertinence to a summary end. If this should
happen, it would be a terrible thing, for not only would Mr. Wragg and
his companions be put to death, but the pirates would undoubtedly attack
the town, which was in a very poor position for defence.

Consequently the drugs were collected with all possible haste, and Mr.
Marks and the pirates were sent with them to Blackbeard. We do not know
whether or not that bedizened cutthroat was satisfied with the way
things turned out; for having had the idea of going to Charles Town and
obliging the prisoners to help him confiscate the drugs and chemicals,
he may have preferred this unusual proceeding to a more commonplace
transaction; but as the medicine had arrived he accepted it, and having
secured all possible booty and money from the ships he had captured, and
had stripped his prisoners of the greater part of their clothing, he set
them on shore to walk to Charles Town as well as they could. They had a
miserably difficult time, making their way through the woods and
marshes, for there were women and children among them who were scarcely
equal to the journey. One of the children was a little boy, the son of
Mr. Wragg, who afterward became a very prominent man in the colonies. He
rose to such a high position, not only among his countrymen, but in the
opinion of the English government, that when he died, about the
beginning of the Revolution, a tablet to his memory was placed in
Westminster Abbey, which is, perhaps, the first instance of such an
honor being paid to an American.

Having now provided himself with medicines enough to keep his wild crew
in good physical condition, no matter how much they might feast and
frolic on the booty they had obtained from Charles Town, Blackbeard
sailed back to his North Carolina haunts and took a long vacation,
during which time he managed to put himself on very good terms with the
Governor and officials of the country. He had plenty of money and was
willing to spend it, and so he was allowed to do pretty much as he
pleased, provided he kept his purse open and did not steal from his
neighbors.

But Blackbeard became tired of playing the part of a make-believe
respectable citizen, and having spent the greater part of his money, he
wanted to make some more. Consequently he fitted out a small vessel, and
declaring that he was going on a legitimate commercial cruise, he took
out regular papers for a port in the West Indies and sailed away, as if
he had been a mild-mannered New England mariner going to catch codfish.
The officials of the town of Bath, from which he sailed, came down to
the ship and shook hands with him and hoped he would have good success.

After a moderate absence he returned to Bath, bringing with him a large
French merchant vessel, with no people on board, but loaded with a
valuable cargo of sugar and other goods. This vessel he declared he had
found deserted at sea, and he therefore claimed it as a legitimate
prize. Knowing the character of this bloody pirate, and knowing how very
improbable it was that the captain and all the crew of a valuable
merchant vessel, with nothing whatever the matter with her, would go out
into their boats and row away, leaving their ship to become the
property of any one who might happen along, it may seem surprising that
the officials of Bath appeared to have no doubt of the truth of
Blackbeard's story, and allowed him freely to land the cargo on the
French ship and store it away as his own property.

But people who consort with pirates cannot be expected to have very
lively consciences, and although there must have been persons in the
town with intelligence enough to understand the story of pitiless murder
told by that empty vessel, whose very decks and masts must have been
regarded as silent witnesses that her captain and crew did not leave her
of their own free will, no one in the town interfered with the thrifty
Blackbeard or caused any public suspicion to fall upon the propriety of
his actions.




Chapter XXIII

A True-Hearted Sailor draws his Sword


Feeling now quite sure that he could do what he pleased on shore as well
as at sea, Blackbeard swore more, swaggered more, and whenever he felt
like it, sailed up and down the coast and took a prize or two to keep
the pot boiling for himself and his men.

On one of these expeditions he went to Philadelphia, and having landed,
he walked about to see what sort of a place it was, but the Governor of
the state, hearing of his arrival, quickly arranged to let him know that
the Quaker city allowed no black-hearted pirate, with a ribbon-bedecked
beard, to promenade on Chestnut and Market streets, and promptly issued
a warrant for the sea-robber's arrest. But Blackbeard was too sharp and
too old a criminal to be caught in that way, and he left the city with
great despatch.

The people along the coast of North Carolina became very tired of
Blackbeard and his men. All sorts of depredations were committed on
vessels, large and small, and whenever a ship was boarded and robbed or
whenever a fishing-vessel was laid under contribution, Blackbeard was
known to be at the bottom of the business, whether he personally
appeared or not. To have this busy pirate for a neighbor was extremely
unpleasant, and the North Carolina settlers greatly longed to get rid of
him. It was of no use for them to ask their own State Government to
suppress this outrageous scoundrel, and although their good neighbor,
South Carolina, might have been willing to help them, she was too poor
at that time and had enough to do to take care of herself.

Not knowing, or not caring for the strong feeling of the settlers
against him, Blackbeard continued in his wicked ways, and among other
crimes he captured a small vessel and treated the crew in such a cruel
and atrocious manner that the better class of North Carolinians vowed
they would stand him no longer, and they therefore applied to Governor
Spotswood, of Virginia, and asked his aid in putting down the pirates.
The Virginians were very willing to do what they could for their
unfortunate neighbors. The legislature offered a reward for the capture
of Blackbeard or any of his men; but the Governor, feeling that this was
not enough, determined to do something on his own responsibility, for
he knew very well that the time might come when the pirate vessels would
begin to haunt Virginia waters.

There happened to be at that time two small British men-of-war in
Hampton Roads, and although the Governor had no authority to send these
after the pirates, he fitted out two sloops at his own expense and
manned them with the best fighting men from the war-vessels. One of the
sloops he put under Captain Brand, and the other under Captain Maynard,
both brave and experienced naval officers. All preparations were made
with the greatest secrecy--for if Blackbeard had heard of what was going
on, he would probably have decamped--and then the two sloops went out to
sea with a commission from the Governor to capture Blackbeard, dead or
alive. This was a pretty heavy contract, but Brand and Maynard were
courageous men and did not hesitate to take it.

The Virginians had been informed that the pirate captain and his men
were on a vessel in Ocracoke Inlet, and when they arrived they found, to
their delight, that Blackbeard was there. When the pirates saw the two
armed vessels sailing into the inlet, they knew very well that they were
about to be attacked, and it did not take them long to get ready for a
fight, nor did they wait to see what their enemy was about to do. As
soon as the sloops were near enough, Blackbeard, without waiting for
any preliminary exercises, such as a demand for surrender or any
nonsense of that sort, let drive at the intruders with eight heavily
loaded cannon.

Now the curtain had been rung up, and the play began, and a very lively
play it was. The guns of the Virginians blazed away at the pirate ship,
and they would have sent out boats to board her had not Blackbeard
forestalled them. Boarding was always a favorite method of fighting with
the pirates. They did not often carry heavy cannon, and even when they
did, they had but little fancy for battles at long distances. What they
liked was to meet foes face to face and cut them down on their own
decks. In such combats they felt at home, and were almost always
successful, for there were few mariners or sailors, even in the British
navy, who could stand against these brawny, glaring-eyed dare-devils,
who sprang over the sides of a vessel like panthers, and fought like
bulldogs. Blackbeard had had enough cannonading, and he did not wait to
be boarded. Springing into a boat with about twenty of his men, he rowed
to the vessel commanded by Maynard, and in a few minutes he and his
pirates surged on board her.

Now there followed on the decks of that sloop one of the most fearful
hand-to-hand combats known to naval history. Pirates had often attacked
vessels where they met with strong resistance, but never had a gang of
sea-robbers fallen in with such bold and skilled antagonists as those
who now confronted Blackbeard and his crew. At it they went,--cut, fire,
slash, bang, howl, and shout. Steel clashed, pistols blazed, smoke went
up, and blood ran down, and it was hard in the confusion for a man to
tell friend from foe. Blackbeard was everywhere, bounding from side to
side, as he swung his cutlass high and low, and though many a shot was
fired at him, and many a rush made in his direction, every now and then
a sailor went down beneath his whirling blade.

But the great pirate had not boarded that ship to fight with common men.
He was looking for Maynard, the commander. Soon he met him, and for the
first time in his life he found his match. Maynard was a practised
swordsman, and no matter how hard and how swiftly came down the cutlass
of the pirate, his strokes were always evaded, and the sword of the
Virginian played more dangerously near him. At last Blackbeard, finding
that he could not cut down his enemy, suddenly drew a pistol, and was
about to empty its barrels into the very face of his opponent, when
Maynard sent his sword-blade into the throat of the furious pirate; the
great Blackbeard went down upon his back on the deck, and in the next
moment Maynard put an end to his nefarious career. Their leader dead,
the few pirates who were left alive gave up the fight, and sprang
overboard, hoping to be able to swim ashore, and the victory of the
Virginians was complete.

The strength, toughness, and extraordinary vitality of these feline
human beings, who were known as pirates, has often occasioned
astonishment in ordinary people. Their sun-tanned and hairy bodies
seemed to be made of something like wire, leather, and India rubber,
upon which the most tremendous exertions, and even the infliction of
severe wounds, made but little impression. Before Blackbeard fell, he
received from Maynard and others no less than twenty-five wounds, and
yet he fought fearlessly to the last, and when the panting officer
sheathed his sword, he felt that he had performed a most signal deed of
valor.

When they had broken up the pirate nest in Ocracoke Inlet, the two
sloops sailed to Bath, where they compelled some of the unscrupulous
town officials to surrender the cargo which had been stolen from the
French vessel and stored in the town by Blackbeard; then they sailed
proudly back to Hampton Roads, with the head of the dreaded Blackbeard
dangling from the end of the bowsprit of the vessel he had boarded, and
on whose deck he had discovered the fact, before unknown to him, that a
well-trained, honest man can fight as well as the most reckless
cutthroat who ever decked his beard with ribbons, and swore enmity to
all things good.




Chapter XXIV

A Greenhorn under the Black Flag


Early in the eighteenth century there lived at Bridgetown, in the island
of Barbadoes, a very pleasant, middle-aged gentleman named Major Stede
Bonnet. He was a man in comfortable circumstances, and had been an
officer in the British army. He had retired from military service, and
had bought an estate at Bridgetown, where he lived in comfort and was
respected by his neighbors.

But for some reason or other this quiet and reputable gentleman got it
into his head that he would like to be a pirate. There were some persons
who said that this strange fancy was due to the fact that his wife did
not make his home pleasant for him, but it is quite certain that if a
man wants an excuse for robbing and murdering his fellow-beings he ought
to have a much better one than the bad temper of his wife. But besides
the general reasons why Major Bonnet should not become a pirate, and
which applied to all men as well as himself, there was a special reason
against his adoption of the profession of a sea-robber, for he was an
out-and-out landsman and knew nothing whatever of nautical matters. He
had been at sea but very little, and if he had heard a boatswain order
his man to furl the keel, to batten down the shrouds, or to hoist the
forechains to the topmast yard, he would have seen nothing out of the
way in these commands. He was very fond of history, and very well read
in the literature of the day. He was accustomed to the habits of good
society, and knew a great deal about farming and horses, cows and
poultry, but if he had been compelled to steer a vessel, he would not
have known how to keep her bow ahead of her stern.

But notwithstanding this absolute incapacity for such a life, and the
absence of any of the ordinary motives for abandoning respectability and
entering upon a career of crime, Major Bonnet was determined to become a
pirate, and he became one. He had money enough to buy a ship and to fit
her out and man her, and this he quietly did at Bridgetown, nobody
supposing that he was going to do anything more than start off on some
commercial cruise. When everything was ready, his vessel slipped out of
the harbor one night, and after he was sailing safely on the rolling sea
he stood upon the quarter-deck and proclaimed himself a pirate. It might
not be supposed that this was necessary, for the seventy men on board
his ship were all desperate cutthroats, of various nationalities, whom
he had found in the little port, and who knew very well what was
expected of them when they reached the sea. But if Stede Bonnet had not
proclaimed himself a pirate, it is possible that he might not have
believed, himself, that he was one, and so he ran up the black flag,
with its skeleton or skull and cross-bones, he girded on a great
cutlass, and, folding his arms, he ordered his mate to steer the vessel
to the coast of Virginia.

Although Bonnet knew so little about ships and the sea, and had had no
experience in piracy, his men were practised seamen, and those of them
who had not been pirates before were quite ready and very well fitted to
become such; so when this green hand came into the waters of Virginia he
actually took two or three vessels and robbed them of their cargoes,
burning the ships, and sending the crews on shore.

This had grown to be a common custom among the pirates, who, though
cruel and hard-hearted, had not the inducements of the old buccaneers to
torture and murder the crews of the vessels which they captured. They
could not hate human beings in general as the buccaneers hated the
Spaniards, and so they were a little more humane to their prisoners,
setting them ashore on some island or desert coast, and letting them
shift for themselves as best they might. This was called marooning, and
was somewhat less heartless than the old methods of getting rid of
undesirable prisoners by drowning or beheading them.

As Bonnet had always been rather conventional in his ideas and had
respected the customs of the society in which he found himself, he now
adopted all the piratical fashions of the day, and when he found himself
too far from land to put the captured crew on shore, he did not hesitate
to make them "walk the plank," which was a favorite device of the
pirates whenever they had no other way of disposing of their prisoners.
The unfortunate wretches, with their hands tied behind them, were
compelled, one by one, to mount a plank which was projected over the
side of the vessel and balanced like a see-saw, and when, prodded by
knives and cutlasses, they stepped out upon this plank, of course it
tipped up, and down they went into the sea. In this way, men, women, and
children slipped out of sight among the waves as the vessel sailed
merrily on.

In one branch of his new profession Bonnet rapidly became proficient. He
was an insatiable robber and a cruel conqueror. He captured merchant
vessels all along the coast as high up as New England, and then he came
down again and stopped for a while before Charles Town harbor, where he
took a couple of prizes, and then put into one of the North Carolina
harbors, where it was always easy for a pirate vessel to refit and get
ready for further adventures.

Bonnet's vessel was named the _Revenge_, which was about as ill suited
to the vessel as her commander was ill fitted to sail her, for Bonnet
had nobody to revenge himself upon unless, indeed, it were his scolding
wife. But a good many pirate ships were then called the _Revenge_, and
Bonnet was bound to follow the fashion, whatever it might be.

Very soon after he had stood upon the quarter-deck and proclaimed
himself a pirate his men had discovered that he knew no more about
sailing than he knew about painting portraits, and although there were
under-officers who directed all the nautical operations, the mass of the
crew conceived a great contempt for a landsman captain. There was much
grumbling and growling, and many of the men would have been glad to
throw Bonnet overboard and take the ship into their own hands. But when
any symptoms of mutiny showed themselves, the pirates found that
although they did not have a sailor in command over them, they had a
very determined and relentless master. Bonnet knew that the captain of a
pirate ship ought to be the most severe and rigid man on board, and so,
at the slightest sign of insubordination, his grumbling men were put in
chains or flogged, and it was Bonnet's habit at such times to strut
about the deck with loaded pistols, threatening to blow out the brains
of any man who dared to disobey him. Recognizing that although their
captain was no sailor he was a first-class tyrant, the rebellious crew
kept their grumbling to themselves and worked his ship.

Bonnet now pointed the bow of the _Revenge_ southward--that is, he
requested somebody else to see that it was done--and sailed to the Bay
of Honduras, which was a favorite resort of the pirates about that time.
And here it was that he first met with the famous Captain Blackbeard.
There can be no doubt that our amateur pirate was very glad indeed to
become acquainted with this well-known professional, and they soon
became good friends. Blackbeard was on the point of organizing an
expedition, and he proposed that Bonnet and his vessel should join it.
This invitation was gladly accepted, and the two pirate captains started
out on a cruise together. Now the old reprobate, Blackbeard, knew
everything about ships and was a good navigator, and it was not long
before he discovered that his new partner was as green as grass in
regard to all nautical affairs. Consequently, after having thought the
matter over for a time, he made up his mind that Bonnet was not at all
fit to command such a fine vessel as the one he owned and had fitted
out, and as pirates make their own laws, and perhaps do not obey them
if they happen not to feel like it, Blackbeard sent for Bonnet to come
on board his ship, and then, in a manner as cold-blooded as if he had
been about to cut down a helpless prisoner, Blackbeard told Bonnet that
he was not fit to be a pirate captain, that he intended to keep him on
board his own vessel, and that he would send somebody to take charge of
the _Revenge_.

This was a fall indeed, and Bonnet was almost stunned by it. An hour
before he had been proudly strutting about on the deck of a vessel which
belonged to him, and in which he had captured many valuable prizes, and
now he was told he was to stay on Blackbeard's ship and make himself
useful in keeping the log book, or in doing any other easy thing which
he might happen to understand. The green pirate ground his teeth and
swore bitterly inside of himself, but he said nothing openly; on
Blackbeard's ship Blackbeard's decisions were not to be questioned.




Chapter XXV

Bonnet again to the Front


It must not be supposed that the late commander of the _Revenge_
continued to be satisfied, as he sat in the cabin of Blackbeard's vessel
and made the entries of the day's sailing and various performances. He
obeyed the orders of his usurping partner because he was obliged to do
so, but he did not hate Blackbeard any the less because he had to keep
quiet about it. He accompanied his pirate chief on various cruises,
among which was the famous expedition to the harbor of Charles Town
where Blackbeard traded Mr. Wragg and his companions for medicines.

Having a very fine fleet under him, Blackbeard did a very successful
business for some time, but feeling that he had earned enough for the
present, and that it was time for him to take one of his vacations, he
put into an inlet in North Carolina, where he disbanded his crew. So
long as he was on shore spending his money and having a good time, he
did not want to have a lot of men about him who would look to him to
support them when they had spent their portion of the spoils. Having no
further use for Bonnet, he dismissed him also, and did not object to his
resuming possession of his own vessel. If the green pirate chose to go
to sea again and perhaps drown himself and his crew, it was a matter of
no concern to Blackbeard.

But this was a matter of very great concern to Stede Bonnet, and he
proceeded to prove that there were certain branches of the piratical
business in which he was an adept, and second to none of his
fellow-practitioners. He wished to go pirating again, and saw a way of
doing this which he thought would be far superior to any of the common
methods. It was about this time that King George of England, very
desirous of breaking up piracy, issued a proclamation in which he
promised pardon to any pirate who would appear before the proper
authorities, renounce his evil practices, and take an oath of
allegiance. It also happened that very soon after this proclamation had
been issued, England went to war with Spain. Being a man who kept
himself posted in the news of the world, so far as it was possible,
Bonnet saw in the present state of affairs a very good chance for him to
play the part of a wolf in sheep's clothing, and he proceeded to begin
his new piratical career by renouncing piracy. So leaving the _Revenge_
in the inlet, he journeyed overland to Bath; there he signed pledges,
took oaths, and did everything that was necessary to change himself from
a pirate captain to a respectable commander of a duly authorized British
privateer. Returning to his vessel with all the papers in his pocket
necessary to prove that he was a loyal and law-abiding subject of Great
Britain, he took out regular clearance papers for St. Thomas, which was
a British naval station, and where he declared he was going in order to
obtain a commission as a privateer.

Now the wily Bonnet had everything he wanted except a crew. Of course it
would not do for him, in his present respectable capacity, to go about
enlisting unemployed pirates, but at this point fortune again favored
him; he knew of a desert island not very far away where Blackbeard, at
the end of his last cruise, had marooned a large party of his men. This
heartless pirate had not wanted to take all of his followers into port,
because they might prove troublesome and expensive to him, and so he had
put a number of them on this island, to live or die as the case might
be. Bonnet went over to this island, and finding the greater part of
these men still surviving, he offered to take them to St. Thomas in his
vessel if they would agree to work the ship to port. This proposition
was of course joyfully accepted, and very soon the _Revenge_ was manned
with a complete crew of competent desperadoes.

All these operations took a good deal of time, and, at last, when
everything was ready for Bonnet to start out on his piratical cruise, he
received information which caused him to change his mind, and to set
forth on an errand of a very different kind. He had supposed that
Blackbeard, whom he had never forgiven for the shameful and treacherous
manner in which he had treated him, was still on shore enjoying himself,
but he was told by the captain of a small trading vessel that the old
pirate was preparing for another cruise, and that he was then in
Ocracoke Inlet. Now Bonnet folded his arms and stamped his feet upon the
quarter-deck. The time had come for him to show that the name of his
vessel meant something. Never before had he had an opportunity for
revenging himself on anybody, but now that hour had arrived. He would
revenge himself upon Blackbeard!

The implacable Bonnet sailed out to sea in a truly warlike frame of
mind. He was not going forth to prey upon unresisting merchantmen; he
was on his way to punish a black-hearted pirate, a faithless scoundrel,
who had not only acted knavishly toward the world in general, but had
behaved most disloyally and disrespectfully toward a fellow pirate
chief. If he could once run the _Revenge_ alongside the ship of the
perfidious Blackbeard, he would show him what a green hand could do.

When Bonnet reached Ocracoke Inlet, he was deeply disappointed to find
that Blackbeard had left that harbor, but he did not give up the
pursuit. He made hot chase after the vessel of his pirate enemy, keeping
a sharp lookout in hopes of discovering some signs of him. If the
enraged Bonnet could have met the ferocious Blackbeard face to face,
there might have been a combat which would have relieved the world of
two atrocious villains, and Captain Maynard would have been deprived of
the honor of having slain the most famous pirate of the day.

Bonnet was a good soldier and a brave man, and although he could not
sail a ship, he understood the use of the sword even better, perhaps,
than Blackbeard, and there is good reason to believe that if the two
ships had come together, their respective crews would have allowed their
captains to fight out their private quarrel without interference, for
pirates delight in a bloody spectacle, and this would have been to them
a rare diversion of the kind.

But Bonnet never overtook Blackbeard, and the great combat between the
rival pirates did not take place. After vainly searching for a
considerable time for a trace or sight of Blackbeard, the baffled Bonnet
gave up the pursuit and turned his mind to other objects. The first
thing he did was to change the name of his vessel; if he could not be
revenged, he would not sail in the _Revenge_. Casting about in his mind
for a good name, he decided to call her the _Royal James_. Having no
intention of respecting his oaths or of keeping his promises, he thought
that, as he was going to be disloyal, he might as well be as disloyal as
he could, and so he gave his ship the name assumed by the son of James
the Second, who was a pretender to the throne, and was then in France
plotting against the English government.

The next thing he did was to change his own name, for he thought this
would make matters better for him if he should be captured after
entering upon his new criminal career. So he called himself Captain
Thomas, by which name he was afterwards known.

When these preliminaries had been arranged, he gathered his crew
together and announced that instead of going to St. Thomas to get a
commission as a privateer, he had determined to keep on in his old
manner of life, and that he wished them to understand that not only was
he a pirate captain, but that they were a pirate crew. Many of the men
were very much surprised at this announcement, for they had thought it a
very natural thing for the green-hand Bonnet to give up pirating after
he had been so thoroughly snubbed by Blackbeard, and they had not
supposed that he would ever think again of sailing under a black flag.

However, the crew's opinion of the green-hand captain had been a good
deal changed. In his various cruises he had learned a good deal about
navigation, and could now give very fair orders, and his furious pursuit
of Blackbeard had also given him a reputation for reckless bravery which
he had not enjoyed before. A man who was chafing and fuming for a chance
of a hand-to-hand conflict with the greatest pirate of the day must be a
pretty good sort of a fellow from their point of view. Moreover, their
strutting and stalking captain, so recently balked of his dark revenge,
was a very savage-looking man, and it would not be pleasant either to
try to persuade him to give up his piratical intention, or to decline to
join him in carrying it out; so the whole of the crew, minor officers
and men, changed their minds about going to St. Thomas, and agreed to
hoist the skull and cross-bones, and to follow Captain Bonnet wherever
he might lead.

Bonnet now cruised about in grand style and took some prizes on the
Virginia coast, and then went up into Delaware Bay, where he captured
such ships as he wanted, and acted generally in the most domineering and
insolent fashion. Once, when he stopped near the town of Lewes, in order
to send some prisoners ashore, he sent a message to the officers of the
town to the effect that if they interfered with his men when they came
ashore, he would open fire upon the town with his cannon, and blow every
house into splinters. Of course the citizens, having no way of defending
themselves, were obliged to allow the pirates to come on shore and
depart unmolested.

Then after this the blustering captain captured two valuable sloops, and
wishing to take them along with him without the trouble of transferring
their cargoes to his own vessel, he left their crews on board, and
ordered them to follow him wherever he went. Some days after that, when
one of the vessels seemed to be sailing at too great a distance, Bonnet
quickly let her captain know that he was not a man to be trifled with,
and sent him the message that if he did not keep close to the _Royal
James_, he would fire into him and sink him to the bottom.

After a time Bonnet put into a North Carolina port in order to repair
the _Royal James_, which was becoming very leaky, and seeing no
immediate legitimate way of getting planks and beams enough with which
to make the necessary repairs, he captured a small sloop belonging in
the neighborhood, and broke it up in order to get the material he needed
to make his own vessel seaworthy.

Now the people of the North Carolina coast very seldom interfered with
pirates, as we have seen, and it is likely that Bonnet might have
stayed in port as long as he pleased, and repaired and refitted his
vessel without molestation if he had bought and paid for the planks and
timber he required. But when it came to boldly seizing their property,
that was too much even for the people of the region, and complaints of
Bonnet's behavior spread from settlement to settlement, and it very soon
became known all down the coast that there was a pirate in North
Carolina who was committing depredations there and was preparing to set
out on a fresh cruise.

When these tidings came to Charles Town, the citizens were thrown into
great agitation. It had not been long since Blackbeard had visited their
harbor, and had treated them with such brutal insolence, and there were
bold spirits in the town who declared that if any effort by them could
prevent another visitation of the pirates, that effort should be made.
There was no naval force in the harbor which could be sent out to meet
the pirates, who were coming down the coast; but Mr. William Rhett, a
private gentleman of position in the place, went to the Governor and
offered to fit out, at his own expense, an expedition for the purpose of
turning away from their city the danger which threatened it.




Chapter XXVI

The Battle of the Sand Bars


When that estimable private gentleman, Mr. William Rhett, of Charles
Town, had received a commission from the Governor to go forth on his own
responsibility and meet the dreaded pirate, the news of whose
depredations had thrown the good citizens into such a fever of
apprehension, he took possession, in the name of the law, of two large
sloops, the _Henry_ and the _Sea-Nymph_, which were in the harbor, and
at his own expense he manned them with well-armed crews, and put on
board of each of them eight small cannon. When everything was ready, Mr.
Rhett was in command of a very formidable force for those waters, and if
he had been ready to sail a few days sooner, he would have had an
opportunity of giving his men some practice in fighting pirates before
they met the particular and more important sea-robber whom they had set
out to encounter. Just as his vessel was ready to sail, Mr. Rhett
received news that a pirate ship had captured two or three merchantmen
just outside the harbor, and he put out to sea with all possible haste
and cruised up and down the coast for some time, but he did not find
this most recent depredator, who had departed very promptly when he
heard that armed ships were coming out of the harbor.

Now Mr. Rhett, who was no more of a sailor than Stede Bonnet had been
when he first began his seafaring life, boldly made his way up the coast
to the mouth of Cape Fear River, where he had been told the pirate
vessel was lying. When he reached his destination, Mr. Rhett found that
it would not be an easy thing to ascend the river, for the reason that
the pilots he had brought with him knew nothing about the waters of that
part of the coast, and although the two ships made their way very
cautiously, it was not long after they had entered the river before they
got out of the channel, and it being low tide, both of them ran aground
upon sand bars.

This was a very annoying accident, but it was not disastrous, for the
sailing masters who commanded the sloops knew very well that when the
tide rose, their vessels would float again. But it prevented Mr. Rhett
from going on and making an immediate attack upon the pirate vessel, the
topmasts of which could be plainly seen behind a high headland some
distance up the river.

Of course Bonnet, or Captain Thomas, as he now chose to be called, soon
became aware of the fact that two good-sized vessels were lying aground
near the mouth of the river, and having a very natural curiosity to see
what sort of craft they were, he waited until nightfall and then sent
three armed boats to make observations. When these boats returned to the
_Royal James_ and reported that the grounded vessels were not
well-loaded trading craft, but large sloops full of men and armed with
cannon, Bonnet (for we prefer to call him by his old name) had good
reason to fold his arms, knit his brows, and strut up and down the deck.
He was sure that the armed vessels came from Charles Town, and there was
no reason to doubt that if the Governor of South Carolina had sent two
ships against him the matter was a very serious one. He was penned up in
the river, he had only one fighting vessel to contend against two, and
if he could not succeed in getting out to sea before he should be
attacked by the Charles Town ships, there would be but little chance of
his continuing in his present line of business. If the _Royal James_ had
been ready to sail, there is no doubt that Bonnet would have taken his
chance of finding the channel in the dark, and would have sailed away
that night without regard to the cannonading which might have been
directed against him from the two stranded vessels.

But as it was impossible to get ready to sail, Bonnet went to work with
the greatest energy to get ready to fight. He knew that when the tide
rose there would be two armed sloops afloat, and that there would be a
regular naval battle on the quiet waters of Cape Fear River. All night
his men worked to clear the decks and get everything in order for the
coming combat, and all night Mr. Rhett and his crews kept a sharp watch
for any unexpected move of the enemy, while they loaded their guns,
their pistols, and their cannon, and put everything in order for action.

Very early in the morning the wide-awake crews of the South Carolina
vessels, which were now afloat and at anchor, saw that the topmasts of
the pirate craft were beginning to move above the distant headland, and
very soon Bonnet's ship came out into view, under full sail, and as she
veered around they saw that she was coming toward them. Up went the
anchors and up went the sails of the _Henry_ and the _Sea-Nymph_, and
the naval battle between the retired army officer who had almost learned
to be a sailor, and the private gentleman from South Carolina, who knew
nothing whatever about managing ships, was about to begin.

It was plain to the South Carolinians that the great object of the
pirate captain was to get out to sea just as soon as he could, and that
he was coming down the river, not because he wished to make an
immediate attack upon them, but because he hoped to slip by them and
get away. Of course they could follow him upon the ocean and fight him
if their vessels were fast enough, but once out of the river with plenty
of sea-room, he would have twenty chances of escape where now he had
one.

But Mr. Rhett did not intend that the pirates should play him this
little trick; he wanted to fight the dastardly wretches in the river,
where they could not get away, and he had no idea of letting them sneak
out to sea. Consequently as the _Royal James_, under full sail, was
making her way down the river, keeping as far as possible from her two
enemies, Mr. Rhett ordered his ships to bear down upon her so as to cut
off her retreat and force her toward the opposite shore of the river.
This manoeuvre was performed with great success. The two Charles Town
sloops sailed so boldly and swiftly toward the _Royal James_ that the
latter was obliged to hug the shore, and the first thing the pirates
knew they were stuck fast and tight upon a sand bar. Three minutes
afterward the _Henry_ ran upon a sand bar, and there being enough of
these obstructions in that river to satisfy any ordinary demand, the
_Sea-Nymph_ very soon grounded herself upon another of them. But
unfortunately she took up her permanent position at a considerable
distance from her consort.

Here now were the vessels which were to conduct this memorable
sea-fight, all three fast in the sand and unable to move, and their
predicament was made the worse by the fact that it would be five hours
before the tide would rise high enough for any one of them to float. The
positions of the three vessels were very peculiar and awkward; the
_Henry_ and the _Royal James_ were lying so near to each other that Mr.
Rhett could have shot Major Bonnet with a pistol if the latter gentleman
had given him the chance, and the _Sea-Nymph_ was so far away that she
was entirely out of the fight, and her crew could do nothing but stand
and watch what was going on between the other two vessels.

But although they could not get any nearer each other, nor get away from
each other, the pirates and Mr. Rhett's crew had no idea of postponing
the battle until they should be afloat and able to fight in the ordinary
fashion of ships; they immediately began to fire at each other with
pistols, muskets, and cannon, and the din and roar was something that
must have astonished the birds and beasts and fishes of that quiet
region.

As the tide continued to run out of the river, and its waters became
more and more shallow, the two contending vessels began to careen over
to one side, and, unfortunately for the _Henry_, they both careened in
the same direction, and in such a manner that the deck of the _Royal
James_ was inclined away from the _Henry_, while the deck of the latter
leaned toward her pirate foe. This gave a great advantage to Bonnet and
his crew, for they were in a great measure protected by the hull of
their vessel, whereas the whole deck of the _Henry_ was exposed to the
fire of the pirates. But Mr. Rhett and his South Carolinians were all
brave men, and they blazed away with their muskets and pistols at the
pirates whenever they could see a head above the rail of the _Royal
James_, while with their cannon they kept firing at the pirate's hull.

For five long hours the fight continued, but the cannon carried by the
two vessels must have been of very small calibre, for if they had been
firing at such short range and for such a length of time with modern
guns, they must have shattered each other into kindling wood. But
neither vessel seems to have been seriously injured, and although there
were a good many men killed on both sides, the combat was kept up with
great determination and fury. At one time it seemed almost certain that
Bonnet would get the better of Mr. Rhett, and he ordered his black flag
waved contemptuously in the air while his men shouted to the South
Carolinians to come over and call upon them, but the South Carolina boys
answered these taunts with cheers and fired away more furiously than
ever.

The tide was now coming in, and everybody on board the two fighting
vessels knew very well that the first one of them which should float
would have a great advantage over the other, and would probably be the
conqueror. In came the tide, and still the cannons roared and the
muskets cracked, while the hearts of the pirates and the South
Carolinians almost stood still as they each watched the other vessel to
see if she showed any signs of floating.

At last such signs were seen; the _Henry_ was further from the shore
than the _Royal James_, and she first felt the influence of the rising
waters. Her masts began to straighten, and at last her deck was level,
and she floated clear of the bottom while her antagonist still lay
careened over on her side. Now the pirates saw there was no chance for
them; in a very short time the other Carolina sloop would be afloat, and
then the two vessels would bear down upon them and utterly destroy both
them and their vessel. Consequently upon the _Royal James_ there was a
general disposition to surrender and to make the best terms they could,
for it would be a great deal better to submit and run the chance of a
trial than to keep up the fight against enemies so much superior both in
numbers and ships, who would soon be upon them.

But Bonnet would not listen to one word of surrender. Rather than give
up the fight he declared he would set fire to the powder magazine of
the _Royal James_ and blow himself, his ship, and his men high up into
the air. Although he had not a sailor's skill, he possessed a soldier's
soul, and in spite of his being a dastardly and cruel pirate he was a
brave man. But Bonnet was only one, and his crew numbered dozens, and
notwithstanding his furiously dissenting voice it was determined to
surrender, and when Mr. Rhett sailed up to the _Royal James_, intending
to board her if the pirates still showed resistance, he found them ready
to submit to terms and to yield themselves his prisoners.

Thus ended the great sea-fight between the private gentlemen, and thus
ended Stede Bonnet's career. He and his men were taken to Charles Town,
where most of the pirate crew were tried and executed. The green-hand
pirate, who had wrought more devastation along the American coast than
many a skilled sea-robber, was held in custody to await his trial, and
it seems very strange that there should have been a public sentiment in
Charles Town which induced the officials to treat this pirate with a
certain degree of respect simply from the fact that his station in life
had been that of a gentleman. He was a much more black-hearted scoundrel
than any of his men, but they were executed as soon as possible while
his trial was postponed and he was allowed privileges which would never
have been accorded a common pirate. In consequence of this leniency he
escaped and had to be retaken by Mr. Rhett. It was so long before he was
tried that sympathy for his misfortunes arose among some of the
tender-hearted citizens of Charles Town whose houses he would have
pillaged and whose families he would have murdered if the exigencies of
piracy had rendered such action desirable.

Finding that other people were trying to save his life, Bonnet came down
from his high horse and tried to save it himself by writing piteous
letters to the Governor, begging for mercy. But the Governor of South
Carolina had no notion of sparing a pirate who had deliberately put
himself under the protection of the law in order that he might better
pursue his lawless and wicked career, and the green hand, with the black
heart, was finally hung on the same spot where his companions had been
executed.




Chapter XXVII

A Six Weeks' Pirate


About the time of Stede Bonnet's terminal adventures a very
unpretentious pirate made his appearance in the waters of New York. This
was a man named Richard Worley, who set himself up in piracy in a very
small way, but who, by a strict attention to business, soon achieved a
remarkable success. He started out as a scourge upon the commerce of the
Atlantic Ocean with only an open boat and eight men. In this small craft
he went down the coast of New Jersey taking everything he could from
fishing boats and small trading vessels until he reached Delaware Bay,
and here he made a bold stroke and captured a good-sized sloop.

When this piratical outrage was reported at Philadelphia, it created a
great sensation, and people talked about it until the open boat with
nine men grew into a great pirate ship filled with roaring desperadoes
and cutthroats. From Philadelphia the news was sent to New York, and
that government was warned of the great danger which threatened the
coast. As soon as this alarming intelligence was received, the New
Yorkers set to work to get up an expedition which should go out to sea
and endeavor to destroy the pirate vessel before it could enter their
port, and work havoc among their merchantmen.

It may seem strange that a small open boat with nine men could stir up
such a commotion in these two great provinces of North America, but if
we can try to imagine the effect which would be produced among the
inhabitants of Staten Island, or in the hearts of the dwellers in the
beautiful houses on the shores of the Delaware River, by the
announcement that a boat carrying nine desperate burglars was to be
expected in their neighborhood, we can better understand what the people
of New York and Philadelphia thought when they heard that Worley had
captured a sloop in Delaware Bay.

The expedition which left New York made a very unsuccessful cruise. It
sailed for days and days, but never saw a sign of a boat containing nine
men, and it returned disappointed and obliged to report no progress.
With Worley, however, progress had been very decided. He captured
another sloop, and this being a large one and suitable to his purposes,
he took possession of it, gave up his open boat, and fitted out his
prize as a regular piratical craft. With a good ship under his command,
Captain Worley now enlarged his sphere of action; on both shores of
Delaware Bay, and along the coast of New Jersey, he captured everything
which came in his way, and for about three weeks he made the waters in
those regions very hot for every kind of peaceable commercial craft. If
Worley had been in trade, his motto would have been "Quick sales and
small profits," for by day and by night, the _New York's Revenge_, which
was the name he gave to his new vessel, cruised east and west and north
and south, losing no opportunity of levying contributions of money,
merchandise, food, and drink upon any vessel, no matter how
insignificant it might be.

The Philadelphians now began to tremble in their shoes; for if a boat
had so quickly grown into a sloop, the sloop might grow into a fleet,
and they had all heard of Porto Bello, and the deeds of the bloody
buccaneers. The Governor of Pennsylvania, recognizing the impending
danger and the necessity of prompt action, sent to Sandy Hook, where
there was a British man-of-war, the _Phoenix_, and urged that this
vessel should come down into Delaware Bay and put an end to the pirate
ship which was ravaging those waters. Considering that Worley had not
been engaged in piracy for much more than four weeks, he had created a
reputation for enterprise and industry, which gave him a very important
position as a commerce destroyer, and a large man-of-war did not think
that he was too small game for her to hunt down, and so she set forth to
capture or destroy the audacious Worley. But never a Worley of any kind
did she see. While the _Phoenix_ was sailing along the coast,
examining all the coves and harbors of New Jersey and Pennsylvania, the
_New York's Revenge_ put out to sea, and then proceeded southward to
discover a more undisturbed field of operation.

We will now leave Worley's vessel sailing southward, and go for a time
to Charles Town, where some very important events were taking place. The
Governor of South Carolina had been very much afraid that the pirates in
general would take some sort of revenge for the capture of Stede Bonnet,
who was then in prison awaiting trial, and that if he should be
executed, Charles Town might be visited by an overpowering piratical
force, and he applied to England to have a war-vessel sent to the
harbor. But before any relief of this kind could be expected, news came
to Charles Town that already a celebrated pirate, named Moody, was
outside of the harbor, capturing merchant vessels, and it might be that
he was only waiting for the arrival of other pirate ships to sail into
the harbor and rescue Bonnet.

Now the Charles Town citizens saw that they must again act for
themselves, and not depend upon the home government. If there were
pirates outside the harbor, they must be met and fought before they
could come up to the city; and the Governor and the Council decided
immediately to fit out a little fleet. Four merchant vessels were
quickly provided with cannon, ammunition, and men, and the command of
this expedition would undoubtedly have been given to Mr. Rhett had it
not been that he and the Governor had quarrelled. There being no naval
officers in Charles Town, their fighting vessels had to be commanded by
civilians, and Governor Johnson now determined that he would try his
hand at carrying on a sea-fight. Mr. Rhett had done very well; why
should not he?

Before the Governor's little fleet of vessels, one of which was the
_Royal James_, captured from Bonnet, was quite ready to sail, the
Governor received news that his preparations had not been made a moment
too soon, for already two vessels, one a large ship, and the other an
armed sloop, had come into the outer harbor, and were lying at anchor
off Sullivan's Island. It was very likely that Moody, having returned
from some outside operation, was waiting there for the arrival of other
pirate ships, and that it was an important thing to attack him at once.

As it was very desirable that the pirates should not be frightened away
before the Charles Town fleet could reach them, the vessels of the
latter were made to look as much like mere merchantmen as possible.
Their cannon were covered, and the greater part of the crews was kept
below, out of sight. Thus the four ships came sailing down the bay, and
early in the morning made their appearance in the sight of the pirates.
When the ship and the big sloop saw the four merchant vessels sailing
quietly out of the harbor, they made immediate preparations to capture
them. Anchors were weighed, sails were set, and with a black flag flying
from the topmast of each vessel, the pirates steered toward the Charles
Town fleet, and soon approached near enough to the _King William_, which
was the foremost of the fleet, to call upon her captain to surrender.
But at that moment Governor Johnson, who was on board the
_Mediterranean_, and could hear the insolent pirate shouting through his
speaking-trumpet, gave a preconcerted signal. Instantly everything was
changed. The covers were jerked off from the cannon of the pretended
merchantmen, armed men poured up out of the holds, the flag of England
was quickly raised on each one of them, and the sixty-eight guns of the
combined fleet opened fire upon the astonished pirates.

The ship which seemed to be the more formidable of the enemy's vessels
had run up so close to her intended prey that two of Governor Johnson's
vessels, the _Sea-Nymph_ and the _Royal James_, once so bitterly opposed
to each other, but now fighting together in honest comradeship, were
able to go between her and the open sea and so cut off her retreat.

But if the captain of the pirate ship could not get away, he showed that
he was very well able to fight, and although the two vessels which had
made him the object of their attack were pouring cannon balls and musket
shot upon him, he blazed away with his cannon and his muskets. The three
vessels were so near each other that sometimes their yard-arms almost
touched, so that this terrible fight seemed almost like a hand-to-hand
conflict. For four hours the roaring of the cannon, the crushing of
timbers, the almost continuous discharge of musketry were kept up, while
the smoke of the battle frequently almost prevented the crews of the
contending ships from seeing each other. Not so very far away the people
of Charles Town, who were standing on the shores of their beautiful
harbor, could see the fierce fight which was going on, and great was the
excitement and anxiety throughout the city.

But the time came when two ships grew too much for one, and as the
_Royal James_ and the _Sea-Nymph_ were able to take positions by which
they could rake the deck of the pirate vessel, many of her men gave up
the fight and rushed down into the hold to save their lives. Then both
the Charles Town vessels bore down upon the pirate and boarded her, and
now there was another savage battle with pistols and cutlasses. The
pirate captain and several of his crew were still on deck, and they
fought like wounded lions, and it was not until they had all been cut
down or shot that victory came to the men of Charles Town.

Very soon after this terrible battle was over the waiting crowds in the
city saw a glorious sight; the pirate ship came sailing slowly up the
harbor, a captured vessel, with the _Sea-Nymph_ on one side and the
_Royal James_ on the other, the colors of the Crown flying from the
masts of each one of the three.

The other pirate ship, which was quite large, seemed to be more
fortunate than her companion, for she was able to get out to sea, and
spreading all her sails she made every effort to escape. Governor
Johnson, however, had no idea of letting her get away if he could help
it. When a civilian goes out to fight a sea-battle he naturally wants to
show what he can do, and Governor Johnson did not mean to let people
think that Mr. Rhett was a better naval commander than he was. He
ordered the _Mediterranean_ and the _King William_ to put on all sail,
and away they went after the big ship. The retreating pirates did
everything they could to effect escape, throwing over their cannon, and
even their boats, in order to lighten their ship, but it was of no use.
The Governor's vessels were the faster sailers, and when the _King
William_ got near enough to fire a few cannon balls into the flying
ship, the latter hauled down the black flag and without hesitation lay
to and surrendered.

It was plain enough that this ship was not manned by desperate pirates,
and when Governor Johnson went on board of her he found her to be not
really a pirate ship, but an English vessel which not long before had
been captured by the pirates in whose company she had visited Charles
Town harbor. She had been bringing over from England a company of
convicts and what were called "covenant servants," who were going to the
colonies to be disposed of to the planters for a term of years. Among
these were thirty-six women, and when the South Carolinians went below
they were greatly surprised to find the hold crowded with these
unfortunate creatures, some of whom were nearly frightened to death. At
the time of this vessel's capture the pirate captain had enlisted some
of the convicts into his crew, as he needed men, and putting on board of
his prize a few pirates to command her, the ship had been worked by such
of her own crew and passengers as were willing to serve under pirates,
while the others were shut up below.

Here was a fine prize taken with very little trouble, and the _King
William_ and the _Mediterranean_ returned to Charles Town with their
captured ship, to be met with the shouts and cheers of the delighted
citizens, already excited to a high pitch by the previous arrival of the
captured pirate sloop.

But Governor Johnson met with something else which made a stronger
impression on him than the cheers of his townspeople, and this was the
great surprise of finding that he had not fought and conquered the
pirate Moody; without suspecting such a thing, he had crushed and
utterly annihilated the dreaded Worley, whose deeds had created such a
consternation in northern waters, and whose threatened approach had sent
a thrill of excitement all down the coast. When this astonishing news
became known, the flags of the city were waved more wildly, and the
shouts and cheers rose higher.

Thus came to an end, in the short time of six weeks, the career of
Richard Worley, who, without doubt, did more piratical work in less time
than any sea-robber on record.




Chapter XXVIII

The Story of Two Women Pirates


The history of the world gives us many instances of women who have taken
the parts of men, almost always acquitting themselves with as much
credit as if they had really belonged to the male sex, and, in our
modern days, these instances are becoming more frequent than ever
before. Joan of Arc put on a suit of armor and bravely led an army, and
there have been many other fighting women who made a reputation for
themselves; but it is very seldom that we hear of a woman who became a
pirate. There were, however, two women pirates who made themselves very
well known on our coast.

The most famous of these women pirates was named Mary Reed. Her father
was an English captain of a trading vessel, and her mother sailed with
him. This mother had had an elder child, a son, and she also had a
mother-in-law in England from whom she expected great things for her
little boy. But the boy died, and Mrs. Reed, being afraid that her
mother-in-law would not be willing to leave any property to a girl,
determined to play a little trick, and make believe that her second
child was also a boy.

Consequently, as soon as the little girl, who, from her birth had been
called Mary by her father and mother, was old enough to leave off baby
clothes, she put on boy's clothes, and when the family returned to
England a nice little boy appeared before his grandmother; but all this
deception amounted to nothing, for the old lady died without leaving
anything to the pretended boy. Mary's mother believed that her child
would get along better in the world as a boy than she would as a girl,
and therefore she still dressed her in masculine clothes, and put her
out to service as a foot-boy, or one of those youngsters who now go by
the name of "Buttons."

But Mary did not fancy blacking boots and running errands. She was very
well satisfied to be a boy, but she wanted to live the kind of a boy's
life which would please her fancy, and as she thought life on the ocean
wave would suit her very well, she ran away from her employer's house
and enlisted on board a man-of-war as a powder monkey.

After a short time, Mary found that the ocean was not all that she
expected it to be, and when she had grown up so that she looked like a
good strapping fellow, she ran away from the man-of-war when it was in
an English port, and went to Flanders, and there she thought she would
try something new, and see whether or not she would like a soldier's
life better than that of a sailor. She enlisted in a regiment of foot,
and in the course of time she became a very good soldier and took part
in several battles, firing her musket and charging with her bayonet as
well as any of the men beside her.

But there is a great deal of hard work connected with infantry service,
and although she was eager for the excitement of battle with the
exhilarating smell of powder and the cheering shouts of her
fellow-soldiers, Mary did not fancy tramping on long marches, carrying
her heavy musket and knapsack. She got herself changed into a regiment
of cavalry, and here, mounted upon a horse, with the encumbrances she
disliked to carry comfortably strapped behind her, Mary felt much more
at ease, and much better satisfied. But she was not destined to achieve
fame as a dashing cavalry man with foaming steed and flashing sabre. One
of her comrades was a very prepossessing young fellow, and Mary fell in
love with him, and when she told him she was not really a cavalry man
but a cavalry woman, he returned her affection, and the two agreed that
they would quit the army, and set up domestic life as quiet civilians.
They were married, and went into the tavern-keeping business. They were
both fond of horses, and did not wish to sever all connection with the
method of life they had just given up, and so they called their little
inn the Three Horse Shoes, and were always glad when any one of their
customers came riding up to their stables, instead of simply walking in
their door.

But this domestic life did not last very long. Mary's husband died, and,
not wishing to keep a tavern by herself, she again put on the dress of a
man and enlisted as a soldier. But her military experience did not
satisfy her, and after all she believed that she liked the sea better
than the land, and again she shipped as a sailor on a vessel bound for
the West Indies.

Now Mary's desire for change and variety seemed likely to be fully
satisfied. The ship was taken by English pirates, and as she was English
and looked as if she would make a good freebooter, they compelled her to
join them, and thus it was that she got her first idea of a pirate's
life. When this company disbanded, she went to New Providence and
enlisted on a privateer, but, as was very common on such vessels
commissioned to perform acts of legal piracy, the crew soon determined
that illegal piracy was much preferable, so they hoisted the black flag,
and began to scourge the seas.

Mary Reed was now a regular pirate, with a cutlass, pistol, and every
outward appearance of a daring sea-robber, except that she wore no
bristling beard, but as her face was sunburned and seamed by the
weather, she looked mannish enough to frighten the senses out of any
unfortunate trader on whose deck she bounded in company with her
shouting, hairy-faced companions. It is told of her that she did not
fancy the life of a pirate, but she seemed to believe in the principle
of whatever is worth doing is worth doing well; she was as ready with
her cutlass and her pistol as any other ocean bandit.

But although Mary was a daring pirate, she was also a woman, and again
she fell in love. A very pleasant and agreeable sailor was taken
prisoner by the crew of her ship, and Mary concluded that she would take
him as her portion of the spoils. Consequently, at the first port they
touched she became again a woman and married him, and as they had no
other present method of livelihood he remained with her on her ship.
Mary and her husband had no real love for a pirate's life, and they
determined to give it up as soon as possible, but the chance to do so
did not arrive. Mary had a very high regard for her new husband, who was
a quiet, amiable man, and not at all suited to his present life, and as
he had become a pirate for the love of her, she did everything she could
to make life easy for him.

She even went so far as to fight a duel in his place, one of the crew
having insulted him, probably thinking him a milksop who would not
resent an affront. But the latent courage of Mary's husband instantly
blazed up, and he challenged the insulter to a duel. Although Mary
thought her husband was brave enough to fight anybody, she thought that
perhaps, in some ways, he was a milksop and did not understand the use
of arms nearly as well as she did. Therefore, she made him stay on board
the ship while she went to a little island near where they were anchored
and fought the duel with sword and pistol. The man pirate and the woman
pirate now went savagely to work, and it was not long before the man
pirate lay dead upon the sand, while Mary returned to an admiring crew
and a grateful husband.

During her piratical career Mary fell in with another woman pirate, Anne
Bonny, by name, and these women, being perhaps the only two of their
kind, became close friends. Anne came of a good family. She was the
daughter of an Irish lawyer, who went to Carolina and became a planter,
and there the little girl grew up. When her mother died she kept the
house, but her disposition was very much more masculine than feminine.
She was very quick-tempered and easily enraged, and it is told of her
that when an Englishwoman, who was working as a servant in her father's
house, had irritated Anne by some carelessness or impertinence, that
hot-tempered young woman sprang upon her and stabbed her with a
carving-knife.

It is not surprising that Anne soon showed a dislike for the humdrum
life on a plantation, and meeting with a young sailor, who owned nothing
in the world but the becoming clothes he wore, she married him.
Thereupon her father, who seems to have been as hot-headed as his
daughter, promptly turned her out of doors. The fiery Anne was glad
enough to adopt her husband's life, and she went to sea with him,
sailing to New Providence. There she was thrown into an entirely new
circle of society. Pirates were in the habit of congregating at this
place, and Anne was greatly delighted with the company of these daring,
dashing sea-robbers, of whose exploits she had so often heard. The more
she associated with the pirates, the less she cared for the plain,
stupid sailors, who were content with the merchant service, and she
finally deserted her husband and married a Captain Rackham, one of the
most attractive and dashing pirates of the day.

Anne went on board the ship of her pirate husband, and as she was sure
his profession would exactly suit her wild and impetuous nature, she
determined also to become a pirate. She put on man's clothes, girded to
her side a cutlass, and hung pistols in her belt. During many voyages
Anne sailed with Captain Rackham, and wherever there was pirate's work
to do, she was on deck to do it. At last the gallant captain came to
grief. He was captured and condemned to death. Now there was an
opportunity for Anne's nature to assert itself, and it did, but it was a
very different sort of nature from that of Mary Reed. Just before his
execution Anne was admitted to see her husband, but instead of offering
to do anything that might comfort him or palliate his dreadful
misfortune, she simply stood and contemptuously glared at him. She was
sorry, she said, to see him in such a predicament, but she told him
plainly that if he had had the courage to fight like a man, he would not
then be waiting to be hung like a dog, and with that she walked away and
left him.

On the occasion when Captain Rackham had been captured, Mary Reed and
her husband were on board his ship, and there was, perhaps, some reason
for Anne's denunciation of the cowardice of Captain Rackham. As has been
said, the two women were good friends and great fighters, and when they
found the vessel engaged in a fight with a man-of-war, they stood
together upon the deck and boldly fought, although the rest of the crew,
and even the captain himself, were so discouraged by the heavy fire
which was brought to bear on them, that they had retreated to the hold.

Mary and Anne were so disgusted at this exhibition of cowardice, that
they rushed to the hatchways and shouted to their dastardly companions
to come up and help defend the ship, and when their entreaties were
disregarded they were so enraged that they fired down into the hold,
killing one of the frightened pirates and wounding several others. But
their ship was taken, and Mary and Anne, in company with all the pirates
who had been left alive, were put in irons and carried to England.

When she was in prison, Mary declared that she and her husband had
firmly intended to give up piracy and become private citizens. But when
she was put on trial, the accounts of her deeds had a great deal more
effect than her words upon her judges, and she was condemned to be
executed. She was saved, however, from this fate by a fever of which she
died soon after her conviction.

The impetuous Anne was also condemned, but the course of justice is
often very curious and difficult to understand, and this hard-hearted
and sanguinary woman was reprieved and finally pardoned. Whether or not
she continued to disport herself as a man we do not know, but it is
certain that she was the last of the female pirates.

There are a great many things which women can do as well as men, and
there are many professions and lines of work from which they have been
long debarred, and for which they are most admirably adapted, but it
seems to me that piracy is not one of them. It is said that a woman's
nature is apt to carry her too far, and I have never heard of any man
pirate who would allow himself to become so enraged against the
cowardice of his companions that he would deliberately fire down into
the hold of a vessel containing his wife and a crowd of his former
associates.




Chapter XXIX

A Pirate from Boyhood


About the beginning of the eighteenth century there lived in
Westminster, England, a boy who very early in life made a choice of a
future career. Nearly all boys have ideas upon this subject, and while
some think they would like to be presidents or generals of armies,
others fancy that they would prefer to be explorers of unknown countries
or to keep candy shops. But it generally happens that these youthful
ideas are never carried out, and that the boy who would wish to sell
candy because he likes to eat it, becomes a farmer on the western
prairie, where confectionery is never seen, and the would-be general
determines to study for the ministry.

But Edward Low, the boy under consideration, was a different sort of a
fellow. The life of a robber suited his youthful fancy, and he not only
adopted it at a very early age, but he stuck to it until the end of his
life. He was much stronger and bolder than the youngsters with whom he
associated, and he soon became known among them as a regular land
pirate. If a boy possessed anything which Ned Low desired, whether it
happened to be an apple, a nut, or a farthing, the young robber gave
chase to him, and treated him as a pirate treats a merchant vessel which
he has boarded.

Not only did young Low resemble a pirate in his dishonest methods, but
he also resembled one in his meanness and cruelty; if one of his victims
was supposed by him to have hidden any of the treasures which his captor
believed him to possess, Low would inflict upon him every form of
punishment which the ingenuity of a bad boy could devise, in order to
compel him to confess where he had concealed the half-penny which had
been given to him for holding a horse, or the ball with which he had
been seen playing. In the course of time this young street pirate became
a terror to all boys in that part of London in which he lived, and by
beginning so early he acquired a great proficiency in dishonest and
cruel practices.

It is likely that young Low inherited his knavish disposition, for one
of his brothers became a very bold and ingenious thief, and invented a
new kind of robbery which afterwards was popular in London. This brother
grew to be a tall fellow, and it was his practice to dress himself like
a porter,--one of those men who in those days carried packages and
parcels about the city. On his head he poised a basket, and supporting
this burden with his hands, he hurriedly made his way through the most
crowded streets of London.

The basket was a heavy one, but it did not contain any ordinary goods,
such as merchandise or marketing; but instead of these it held a very
sharp and active boy seven years old, one of the younger members of the
Low family. As the tall brother pushed rapidly here and there among the
hurrying people on the sidewalks, the boy in the basket would suddenly
stretch out with his wiry young arm, and snatch the hat or the wig of
some man who might pass near enough for him to reach him. This done, the
porter and his basket would quickly be lost in the crowd; and even if
the astonished citizen, suddenly finding himself hatless and wigless,
beheld the long-legged Low, he would have no reason to suppose that that
industrious man with the basket on his head had anything to do with the
loss of his head covering.

This new style of street robbery must have been quite profitable, for of
course the boy in the basket was well instructed, and never snatched at
a shabby hat or a poor looking wig. The elder Low came to have a good
many imitators, and it happened in the course of time that many a worthy
citizen of London wished there were some harmless way of gluing his wig
to the top of his head, or that it were the custom to secure the hat by
means of strings tied under the chin.

As Ned Low grew up to be a strong young fellow, he also grew
discontented with the pilferings and petty plunders which were possible
to him in the London streets, and so he went to sea and sailed to
America. He landed in Boston, and, as it was necessary to work in order
to eat,--for opportunities of a dishonest livelihood had not yet opened
themselves before him,--he undertook to learn the trade of a rigger, but
as he was very badly suited to any sort of steady occupation, he soon
quarrelled with his master, ran away, and got on board a vessel bound
for Honduras.

For a time he earned a livelihood by cutting logwood, but it was not
long before he quarrelled with the captain of the vessel for whom he was
working, and finally became so enraged that he tried to kill him. He did
not succeed in this dastardly attempt, but as he could not commit murder
he decided to do the next worst thing, and so gathering together twelve
of the greatest rascals among his companions, they seized a boat, went
out to the captain's schooner, which was lying near shore, and took
possession of it. Then they hoisted anchor, ran up the sail, and put out
to sea, leaving the captain and the men who were with him to take care
of themselves the best that they could and live on logwood leaves if
they could find nothing else to eat.

Now young Low was out upon the ocean in possession of a vessel and in
command of twelve sturdy scoundrels, and he did not have the least
trouble in the world in making up his mind what he should do next. As
soon as he could manufacture a black flag from materials he found on
board, he flung this ominous ensign to the breeze, and declared himself
a pirate. This was the summit of his ambition, and in this new
profession he had very little to learn. From a boy thief to a man pirate
the way is easy enough.

The logwood schooner, of course, was not provided with the cannon,
cutlasses, and pistols necessary for piratical undertakings, and
therefore Low found himself in the position of a young man beginning
business with a very small capital. So, in the hopes of providing
himself with the necessary appliances for his work, Low sailed for one
of the islands of the West Indies which was a resort for pirates, and
there he had very good fortune, for he fell in with a man named Lowther
who was already well established in the profession of piracy.

When Low sailed into the little port with his home-made black flag
floating above him, Lowther received him with the greatest courtesy and
hospitality, and shortly afterwards proposed to the newly fledged pirate
to go into partnership with him. This offer was accepted, and Low was
made second in command of the little fleet of two vessels, each of
which was well provided with arms, ammunition, and all things necessary
for robbery on the high seas.

The partnership between these two rascals did not continue very long.
They took several valuable prizes, and the more booty he obtained, the
higher became Low's opinion of himself, and the greater his desire for
independent action. Therefore it was that when they had captured a large
brigantine, Low determined that he would no longer serve under any man.
He made a bargain with Lowther by which they dissolved partnership, and
Low became the owner of the brigantine. In this vessel, with forty-four
men as a crew, he again started out in the black flag business on his
own account, and parting from his former chief officer, he sailed
northward.

As Low had landed in Boston, and had lived some time in that city, he
seems to have conceived a fancy for New England, which, however, was not
at all reciprocated by the inhabitants of that part of the country.

Among the first feats which Low performed in New England waters was the
capture of a sloop about to enter one of the ports of Rhode Island. When
he had taken everything out of this vessel which he wanted, Low cut away
the yards from the masts and stripped the vessel of all its sails and
rigging. As his object was to get away from these waters before his
presence was discovered by the people on shore, he not only made it
almost impossible to sail the vessel he had despoiled, but he wounded
the captain and others of the peaceful crew so that they should not be
able to give information to any passing craft. Then he sailed away as
rapidly as possible in the direction of the open sea. In spite, however,
of all the disadvantages under which they labored, the crew of the
merchant vessel managed to get into Block Island, and from there a small
boat was hurriedly rowed over to Rhode Island, carrying intelligence of
the bold piracy which had been committed so close to one of its ports.

When the Governor heard what had happened, he quickly sent out drummers
to sound the alarm in the seaport towns and to call upon volunteers to
go out and capture the pirates. So great was the resentment caused by
the audacious deed of Low that a large number of volunteers hastened to
offer their services to the Governor, and two vessels were fitted out
with such rapidity that, although their commanders had only heard of the
affair in the morning, they were ready to sail before sunset. They put
on all sail and made the best speed they could, and although they really
caught sight of Low's ship, the pirate vessel was a swifter craft than
those in pursuit of her, and the angry sailors of Rhode Island were at
last compelled to give up the chase.

The next of Low's transactions was on a wholesale scale. Rounding Cape
Cod and sailing up the coast, he at last reached the vicinity of
Marblehead, and there, in a harbor called in those days Port Rosemary,
he found at anchor a fleet of thirteen merchant vessels. This was a
grand sight, as welcome to the eye of a pirate as a great nugget of gold
would be to a miner who for weary days had been washing yellow grains
from the "pay dirt" which he had laboriously dug from the hard soil.

It would have been easy for Low to take his pick from these vessels
quietly resting in the little harbor, for he soon perceived that none of
them were armed nor were they able to protect themselves from assault,
but his audacity was of an expansive kind, and he determined to capture
them all. Sailing boldly into the harbor, he hoisted the dreadful black
flag, and then, standing on his quarter-deck with his speaking-trumpet,
he shouted to each vessel as he passed it that if it did not surrender
he would board it and give no quarter to captain or crew. Of course
there was nothing else for the peaceful sailors to do but to submit, and
so this greedy pirate took possession of each vessel in turn and
stripped it of everything of value he cared to take away.

But he did not confine himself to stealing the goods on board these
merchantmen. As he preferred to command several vessels instead of one,
he took possession of some of the best of the ships and compelled as
many of their men as he thought he would need to enter his service.
Then, as one of the captured vessels was larger and better than his
brigantine, he took it for his own ship, and at the head of the little
pirate fleet he bid farewell to Marblehead and started out on a grand
cruise against the commerce of our coast.

It is wonderful how rapidly this man Low succeeded in his business
enterprises. Beginning with a little vessel with a dozen unarmed men, he
found himself in a very short time at the head of what was perhaps the
largest piratical force in American waters. What might have happened if
Nature had not taken a hand in this game it is not difficult to imagine,
for our seaboard towns, especially those of the South, would have been
an easy prey to Low and his fleet.

But sailing down to the West Indies, probably in order to fit out his
ships with guns, arms, and ammunition before beginning a naval campaign,
his fleet was overtaken by a terrible storm, and in order to save the
vessels they were obliged to throw overboard a great many of the heavier
goods they had captured at Marblehead, and when at last they found
shelter in the harbor of a small island, they were glad that they had
escaped with their lives.

The grasping and rapacious Low was not now in a condition to proceed to
any rendezvous of pirates where he might purchase the arms and supplies
he needed. A great part of his valuable plunder had gone to the bottom
of the sea, and he was therefore obliged to content himself with
operations upon a comparatively small scale.

How small and contemptible this scale was it is scarcely possible for an
ordinary civilized being to comprehend, but the soul of this ignoble
pirate was capable of extraordinary baseness.

When he had repaired the damage to his ships, Low sailed out from the
island, and before long he fell in with a wrecked vessel which had lost
all its masts in a great storm, and was totally disabled, floating about
wherever the winds chose to blow it. The poor fellows on board greatly
needed succor, and there is no doubt that when they saw the approach of
sails their hopes rose high, and even if they had known what sort of
ships they were which were making their way toward them, they would
scarcely have suspected that the commander of these goodly vessels was
such an utterly despicable scoundrel as he proved to be.

Instead of giving any sort of aid to the poor shipwrecked crew, Low and
his men set to work to plunder their vessel, and they took from it a
thousand pounds in money, and everything of value which they could find
on board. Having thus stripped the unfortunate wreck, they departed,
leaving the captain and crew of the disabled vessel to perish by storm
or starvation, unless some other vessel, manned by human beings and not
pitiless beasts, should pass their way and save them.

Low now commenced a long series of piratical depredations. He captured
many merchantmen, he committed the vilest cruelties upon his victims,
and in every way proved himself to be one of the meanest and most
black-hearted pirates of whom we have any account. It is not necessary
to relate his various dastardly performances. They were all very much of
the same order, and none of them possessed any peculiar interest; his
existence is referred to in these pages because he was one of the most
noted and successful pirates of his time, and also because his career
indicated how entirely different was the character of the buccaneers of
previous days from that of the pirates who in the eighteenth century
infested our coast. The first might have been compared to bold and
dashing highwaymen, who at least showed courage and daring; but the
others resembled sneak thieves, always seeking to commit a crime if they
could do it in safety, but never willing to risk their cowardly necks in
any danger.

The buccaneers of the olden days were certainly men of the greatest
bravery. They did not hesitate to attack well-armed vessels manned by
crews much larger than their own, and in later periods they faced cannon
and conquered cities. Their crimes were many and vile; but when they
committed cruelties they did so in order to compel their prisoners to
disclose their hidden treasures, and when they attacked a Spanish
vessel, and murdered all on board, they had in their hearts the
remembrance that the Spanish naval forces gave no quarter to buccaneers.

But pirates such as Edward Low showed not one palliating feature in
their infamous characters. To rob and desert a shipwrecked crew was only
one of Low's contemptible actions. It appears that he seldom attacked a
vessel from which there seemed to be any probability of resistance, and
we read of no notable combats or sea-fights in which he was engaged. He
preyed upon the weak and defenceless, and his inhuman cruelties were
practised, not for the sake of extorting gain from his victims, but
simply to gratify his spite and love of wickedness.

There were men among Low's followers who looked upon him as a bold and
brave leader, for he was always a blusterer and a braggart, and there
were honest seamen and merchants who were very much afraid of him, but
time proved that there was no reason for any one to suppose that Edward
Low had a spark of courage in his composition. He was brave enough when
he was attacking an unarmed crew, but when he had to deal with any
vessel capable of inflicting any injury upon him he was a coward indeed.

Sailing in company with one companion vessel,--for he had discarded the
greater part of his pirate fleet,--Low sighted a good-sized ship at a
considerable distance, and he and his consort immediately gave chase,
supposing the distant vessel might prove to be a good prize. It so
happened, however, that the ship discovered by Low was an English
man-of-war, the _Greyhound_, which was cruising along the coast looking
for these very pirates, who had recently committed some outrageous
crimes upon the crews of merchant vessels in those waters.

When the two ships, with the black flags floating above them and their
decks crowded with desperate fellows armed with pistols and cutlasses,
drew near to the vessel, of which they expected to make a prize, they
were greatly amazed when she suddenly turned in her course and delivered
a broadside from her heavy cannon. The pirates returned the fire, for
they were well armed with cannon, and there was nothing else for them to
do but fight, but the combat was an extremely short one. Low's consort
was soon disabled by the fire from the man-of-war, and, as soon as he
perceived this, the dastardly Low, without any regard for his
companions in arms, and with no thought for anything but his own safety,
immediately stopped fighting, and setting all sail, sped away from the
scene of combat as swiftly as it was possible for the wind to force his
vessel through the water.

The disabled pirate ship was quickly captured, and not long afterwards
twenty-five of her crew were tried, convicted, and hung near Newport,
Rhode Island. But the arrant Low escaped without injury, and continued
his career of contemptible crime for some time longer. What finally
became of him is not set down in the histories of piracy. It is not
improbable that if the men under his command were not too brutally
stupid to comprehend his cowardly unfaithfulness to them, they suddenly
removed from this world one of the least interesting of all base
beings.




Chapter XXX

The Pirate of the Gulf


At the beginning of this century there was a very able and, indeed,
talented man living on the shores of the Gulf of Mexico, who has been
set down in the historical records of the times as a very important
pirate, and who is described in story and in tradition as a gallant and
romantic freebooter of the sea. This man was Jean Lafitte, widely known
as "The Pirate of the Gulf," and yet who was, in fact, so little of a
pirate, that it may be doubted whether or not he deserves a place in
these stories of American pirates.

Lafitte was a French blacksmith, and, while still a young man, he came
with his two brothers to New Orleans, and set up a shop in Bourbon
Street, where he did a good business in horseshoeing and in other
branches of his trade. But he had a soul which soared high above his
anvil and his bellows, and perceiving an opportunity to take up a very
profitable occupation, he gave up blacksmithing, and with his two
brothers as partners became a superintendent of privateering and a
general manager of semi-legalized piracy. The business opportunity which
came to the watchful and clear-sighted Lafitte may be briefly described.

In the early years of this century the Gulf of Mexico was the scene of
operations of small vessels calling themselves privateers, but in fact
pirates. War had broken out between England and Spain, on the one side,
and France on the other, and consequently the first-named nations were
very glad to commission privateers to prey upon the commerce of France.
There were also privateers who had been sent out by some of the Central
American republics who had thrown off the Spanish yoke, and these,
considering Spanish vessels as their proper booty, were very much
inclined to look upon English vessels in the same light, as the English
and Spanish were allies. And when a few French privateers came also upon
the scene, they helped to make the business of legitimate capture of
merchantmen, during the time of war, a very complicated affair.

But upon one point these privateers, who so often acted as pirates,
because they had not the spare time in which to work out difficult
problems of nationality, were all agreed: when they had loaded their
ships with booty, they must sail to some place where it would be safe to
dispose of it. So, in course of time, the bay of Barrataria, about
forty miles south of New Orleans and very well situated for an illegal
settlement, was chosen as a privateers' port, and a large and
flourishing colony soon grew up at the head of the bay, to which came
privateers of every nationality to dispose of their cargoes.

Of course there was no one in the comparatively desolate country about
Barrataria who could buy the valuable goods which were brought into that
port, but the great object of the owners of this merchandise was to
smuggle it up to New Orleans and dispose of it. But there could be no
legitimate traffic of this sort, for the United States at the very
beginning of the century was at peace with England, France, and Spain,
and therefore could not receive into any of her ports, goods which had
been captured from the ships of these nations. Consequently the plunder
of the privateering pirates of Barrataria was brought up to New Orleans
in all sorts of secret and underhand fashions, and sold to merchants in
that city, without the custom house having anything to do with the
importations.

Now this was great business; Jean Lafitte had a great business mind, and
therefore it was not long after his arrival at Barrataria before he was
the head man in the colony, and director-in-chief of all its operations.
Thus, by becoming a prominent figure in a piratical circle, he came to
be considered a pirate, and as such came down to us in the pages of
history.

But, in fact, Lafitte never committed an act of piracy in his life; he
was a blacksmith, and knew no more about sailing a ship or even the
smallest kind of a boat than he knew about the proper construction of a
sonnet. He did not even try, like the celebrated Bonnet, to find other
people who would navigate a vessel for him, for he had no taste for the
ocean wave, and all that he had to do he did upon firm, dry land. It is
said of him that he was never at sea but twice in his life: once when he
came from France, and once when he left this country, and on neither
occasion did he sail under the "Jolly Roger," as the pirate flag was
sometimes called. For these reasons it seems scarcely right to call
Lafitte a pirate, but as he has been so generally considered in that
light, we will admit him into the bad company, the stories of whose
lives we are now telling.

The energy and business abilities of Jean Lafitte soon made themselves
felt not only in Barrataria, but in New Orleans. The privateers found
that he managed their affairs with much discretion and considerable
fairness, and, while they were willing to depend upon him, they were
obliged to obey him.

On the other hand, the trade of New Orleans was very much influenced by
the great quantities of goods which under Lafitte's directions were
smuggled into the city. Many merchants and shopkeepers who possessed no
consciences to speak of were glad to buy these smuggled goods for very
little money and to sell them at low prices and large profits, but the
respectable business men, who were obliged to pay market prices for
their goods, were greatly disturbed by the large quantities of
merchandise which were continually smuggled into New Orleans and sold at
rates with which they could not compete.

It was toward the end of our war with England, which began in 1812, that
the government of the United States, urged to speedy action by the
increasing complaints of the law-abiding merchants of New Orleans,
determined to send out a small naval force and entirely break up the
illegitimate rendezvous at Barrataria.

Lafitte's two brothers were in New Orleans acting as his agents, and one
of them, Dominique, was arrested and thrown into prison, and Commodore
Patterson, who was commanding at that station, was ordered to fit out an
expedition as quickly as possible to sail down to Barrataria to destroy
the ships found in the bay, to capture the town, and to confiscate and
seize upon all goods which might be found in the place.

When Jean Lafitte heard of the vigorous methods which were about to be
taken against him, his prospects must have been very gloomy ones, for
of course he could not defend his little colony against a regular naval
force, which, although its large vessels could not sail into the shallow
bay, could send out boats with armed crews against which it would be
foolish for him to contend. But just about this time a very strange
thing happened.

A strong English naval force had taken possession of Pensacola, Florida,
and as an attack upon New Orleans was contemplated, the British
commander, knowing of Lafitte's colony at Barrataria, and believing that
these hardy and reckless adventurers would be very valuable allies in
the proposed movement upon the city, determined to send an ambassador to
Lafitte to see what could be done in the way of forming an alliance with
this powerful leader of semi-pirates and smugglers.

Accordingly, the sloop of war _Sophia_, commanded by Captain Lockyer,
was sent to Barrataria to treat with Lafitte, and when this vessel
arrived off the mouth of the harbor, which she could not enter, she
began firing signal guns in order to attract the attention of the people
of the colony. Naturally enough, the report of the _Sophia's_ guns
created a great excitement in Barrataria, and all the people who
happened to be at the settlement at that time crowded out upon the beach
to see what they could see. But the war-vessel was too far away for them
to distinguish her nationality, and Lafitte quickly made up his mind
that the only thing for him to do was to row out to the mouth of the
harbor and see what was the matter. Without doubt he feared that this
was the United States vessel which had come to break up his settlement.
But whether this was the case or not, he must go out and try the effect
of fair words, for he had no desire whatever to defend his interests by
hard blows.

Before Lafitte reached the vessel he was surprised to find it was a
British man-of-war, not an American, and very soon he saw that a boat
was coming from it and rowing toward him. This boat contained Captain
Lockyer and two other officers, besides the men who rowed it; when the
two boats met, the captain told who he was, and asked if Mr. Lafitte
could be found in Barrataria, stating that he had an important document
to deliver to him. The cautious Frenchman did not immediately admit that
he was the man for whom the document was intended, but he said that
Lafitte was at Barrataria, and as the two boats rowed together toward
shore, he thought it would be as well to announce his position, and did
so.

When the crowd of privateersmen saw the officers in British uniform
landing upon their beach, they were not inclined to receive them kindly,
for an attack had been made upon the place by a small British force
some time before, and a good deal of damage had been done. But Lafitte
quieted the angry feelings of his followers, conducted the officers to
his own house, and treated them with great hospitality, which he was
able to do in fine style, for his men brought into Barrataria luxuries
from all parts of the world.

When Lafitte opened the package of papers which Captain Lockyer handed
to him, he was very much surprised. Some of them were general
proclamations announcing the intention of Great Britain if the people of
Louisiana did not submit to her demands; but the most important document
was one in which Colonel Nichols, commander-in-chief of the British
forces in the Gulf, made an offer to Lafitte and his followers to become
a part of the British navy, promising to give amnesty to all the
inhabitants of Barrataria, to make their leader a captain in the navy,
and to do a great many other good things, provided they would join his
forces, and help him to attack the American seaports. In case, however,
this offer should be refused, the Barratarians were assured that their
place would speedily be attacked, their vessels destroyed, and all their
possessions confiscated.

Lafitte was now in a state of great perplexity. He did not wish to
become a British captain, for his knowledge of horseshoeing would be of
no service to him in such a capacity; moreover, he had no love for the
British, and his sympathies were all on the side of the United States in
this war. But here he was with the British commander asking him to
become an ally, and to take up arms against the United States,
threatening at the same time to destroy him and his colony in case of
refusal. On the other hand, there was the United States at that moment
preparing an expedition for the purpose of breaking up the settlement at
Barrataria, and to do everything which the British threatened to do, in
case Lafitte did not agree to their proposals.

The chief of Barrataria might have made a poor show with a cutlass and a
brace of pistols, but he was a long-headed and sagacious man, with a
strong tendency to practical diplomacy. He was in a bad scrape, and he
must act with decision and promptness, if he wanted to get out of it.

The first thing he did was to gain time by delaying his answer to the
proposition brought by Captain Lockyer. He assured that officer that he
must consult with his people and see what they would do, and that he
must also get rid of some truculent members of the colony, who would
never agree to act in concert with England, and that therefore he should
not be able to give an answer to Colonel Nichols for two weeks. Captain
Lockyer saw for himself that it would not be an easy matter to induce
these independent and unruly fellows, many of whom already hated
England, to enter into the British service. Therefore he thought it
would be wise to allow Lafitte the time he asked for, and he sailed
away, promising to return in fifteen days.

The diplomatic Lafitte, having finished for a time his negotiations with
the British, lost no time in communicating with the American
authorities. He sent to Governor Claiborne, of Louisiana, all the
documents he had received from Captain Lockyer, and wrote him a letter
in which he told him everything that had happened, and thus gave to the
United States the first authentic information of the proposed attack
upon Mobile and New Orleans. He then told the Governor that he had no
intention of fighting against the country he had adopted; that he was
perfectly willing and anxious to aid her in every manner possible, and
that he and his followers would gladly join the United States against
the British, asking nothing in return except that all proceedings
against Barrataria should be abandoned, that amnesty should be given to
him and his men, that his brother should be released from prison, and
that an act of oblivion should be passed by which the deeds of the
smugglers of Barrataria should be condoned and forgotten.

Furthermore, he said that if the United States government did not
accede to his proposition, he would immediately depart from Barrataria
with all his men; for no matter what loss such a proceeding might prove
to him he would not remain in a place where he might be forced to act
against the United States. Lafitte also wrote to a member of the
Louisiana Legislature, and his letters were well calculated to produce a
very good effect in his favor.

The Governor immediately called a council, and submitted the papers and
letters received from Lafitte. When these had been read, two points were
considered by the council, the first being that the letters and
proclamations from the British might be forgeries concocted by Lafitte
for the purpose of averting the punishment which was threatened by the
United States; and the second, whether or not it would be consistent
with the dignity of the government to treat with this leader of pirates
and smugglers.

The consultation resulted in a decision not to have anything to do with
Lafitte in the way of negotiations, and to hurry forward the
preparations which had been made for the destruction of the dangerous
and injurious settlement at Barrataria. In consequence of this action of
the council, Commodore Patterson sailed in a very few days down the
Mississippi and attacked the pirate settlement at Barrataria with such
effect that most of her ships were taken, many prisoners and much
valuable merchandise captured, and the whole place utterly destroyed.
Lafitte, with the greater part of his men, had fled to the woods, and so
escaped capture.

Captain Lockyer at the appointed time arrived off the harbor of
Barrataria and blazed away with his signal guns for forty-eight hours,
but receiving no answer, and fearing to send a boat into the harbor,
suspecting treachery on the part of Lafitte, he was obliged to depart in
ignorance of what had happened.

When the papers and letters which had been sent to Governor Claiborne by
Lafitte were made public, the people of Louisiana and the rest of the
country did not at all agree with the Governor and his council in regard
to their decision and their subsequent action, and Edward Livingston, a
distinguished lawyer of New York, took the part of Lafitte and argued
very strongly in favor of his loyalty and honesty in the affair.

Even when it was discovered that all the information which Lafitte had
sent was perfectly correct, and that a formidable attack was about to be
made upon New Orleans, General Jackson, who was in command in that part
of the country, issued a very savage proclamation against the British
method of making war, and among their wicked deeds he mentioned nothing
which seemed to him to be worse than their endeavor to employ against
the citizens of the United States the band of "hellish banditti"
commanded by Jean Lafitte!

But public opinion was strongly in favor of the ex-pirate of the Gulf,
and as things began to look more and more serious in regard to New
Orleans, General Jackson was at last very glad, in spite of all that he
had said, to accept the renewed offers of Lafitte and his men to assist
in the defence of the city, and in consequence of his change of mind
many of the former inhabitants of Barrataria fought in the battle of New
Orleans and did good work. Their services were so valuable, in fact,
that when the war closed President Madison issued a proclamation in
which it was stated that the former inhabitants of Barrataria, in
consequence of having abandoned their wicked ways of life, and having
assisted in the defence of their country, were now granted full pardon
for all the evil deeds they had previously committed.

Now Lafitte and his men were free and independent citizens of the United
States; they could live where they pleased without fear of molestation,
and could enter into any sort of legal business which suited their
fancy, but this did not satisfy Lafitte. He had endeavored to take a
prompt and honest stand on the side of his country; his offers had been
treated with contempt and disbelief; he had been branded as a deceitful
knave, and no disposition had been shown to act justly toward him until
his services became so necessary to the government that it was obliged
to accept them.

Consequently, Lafitte, accompanied by some of his old adherents,
determined to leave a country where his loyalty had received such
unsatisfactory recognition, and to begin life again in some other part
of the American continent. Not long after the war he sailed out upon the
Gulf of Mexico,--for what destination it is not known, but probably for
some Central American port,--and as nothing was ever heard of him or his
party, it is believed by many persons that they all perished in the
great storm which arose soon after their departure. There were other
persons, however, who stated that he reached Yucatan, where he died on
dry land in 1826.

But the end of Lafitte is no more doubtful than his right to the title
given to him by people of a romantic turn of mind, and other persons of
a still more fanciful disposition might be willing to suppose that the
Gulf of Mexico, indignant at the undeserved distinction which had come
to him, had swallowed him up in order to put an end to his pretension to
the title of "The Pirate of the Gulf."




Chapter XXXI

The Pirate of the Buried Treasure


Among all the pirates who have figured in history, legend, or song,
there is one whose name stands preëminent as the typical hero of the
dreaded black flag. The name of this man will instantly rise in the mind
of almost every reader, for when we speak of pirates we always think of
Captain Kidd.

In fact, however, Captain Kidd was not a typical pirate, for in many
ways he was different from the ordinary marine freebooter, especially
when we consider him in relation to our own country. All other pirates
who made themselves notorious on our coast were known as robbers,
pillagers, and ruthless destroyers of life and property, but Captain
Kidd's fame was of another kind. We do not think of him as a pirate who
came to carry away the property of American citizens, for nearly all the
stories about him relate to his arrival at different points on our
shores for the sole purpose of burying and thus concealing the rich
treasures which he had collected in other parts of the world.

This novel reputation given a pirate who enriched our shore by his
deposits and took away none of the possessions of our people could not
fail to make Captain Kidd a most interesting personage, and the result
has been that he has been lifted out of the sphere of ordinary history
and description into the region of imagination and legendary romance. In
a word, he has been made a hero of fiction and song. It may be well,
then, to assume that there are two Captain Kidds,--one the Kidd of
legend and story, and the other the Kidd of actual fact, and we will
consider, one at a time, the two characters in which we know the man.

As has been said before, nearly all the stories of the legendary Captain
Kidd relate to his visits along our northern coast, and even to inland
points, for the purpose of concealing the treasures which had been
amassed in other parts of the world.

Thus if we were to find ourselves in almost any village or rural
settlement along the coast of New Jersey or Long Island, and were to
fall in with any old resident who was fond of talking to strangers, he
would probably point out to us the blackened and weather-beaten ribs of
a great ship which had been wrecked on the sand bar off the coast during
a terrible storm long ago; he would show us where the bathing was
pleasant and safe; he would tell us of the best place for fishing, and
probably show us the high bluff a little back from the beach from which
the Indian maiden leaped to escape the tomahawk of her enraged lover,
and then he would be almost sure to tell us of the secluded spot where
it was said Captain Kidd and his pirates once buried a lot of treasure.

If we should ask our garrulous guide why this treasure had not been dug
up by the people of the place, he would probably shake his head and
declare that personally he knew nothing about it, but that it was
generally believed that it was there, and he had heard that there had
been people who had tried to find it, but if they did find any they
never said anything about it, and it was his opinion that if Captain
Kidd ever put any gold or silver or precious stones under the ground on
that part of the coast these treasures were all there yet.

Further questioning would probably develop the fact that there was a
certain superstition which prevented a great many people from
interfering with the possible deposits which Captain Kidd had made in
their neighborhood, and although few persons would be able to define
exactly the foundation of the superstition, it was generally supposed
that most of the pirates' treasures were guarded by pirate ghosts. In
that case, of course, timid individuals would be deterred from going
out by themselves at night,--for that was the proper time to dig for
buried treasure,--and as it would not have been easy to get together a
number of men each brave enough to give the others courage, many of the
spots reputed to be the repositories of buried treasure have never been
disturbed.

In spite of the fear of ghosts, in spite of the want of accurate
knowledge in regard to favored localities, in spite of hardships,
previous disappointments, or expected ridicule, a great many extensive
excavations have been made in the sands or the soil along the coasts of
our northern states, and even in quiet woods lying miles from the sea,
to which it would have been necessary for the pirates to carry their
goods in wagons, people have dug and hoped and have gone away sadly to
attend to more sensible business, and far up some of our rivers--where a
pirate vessel never floated--people have dug with the same hopeful
anxiety, and have stopped digging in the same condition of dejected
disappointment.

Sometimes these enterprises were conducted on a scale which reminds us
of the operations on the gold coast of California. Companies were
organized, stock was issued and subscribed for, and the excavations were
conducted under the direction of skilful treasure-seeking engineers.

It is said that not long ago a company was organized in Nova Scotia for
the purpose of seeking for Captain Kidd's treasures in a place which it
is highly probable Captain Kidd never saw. A great excavation having
been made, the water from the sea came in and filled it up, but the work
was stopped only long enough to procure steam pumps with which the big
hole could be drained. At last accounts the treasures had not been
reached, and this incident is mentioned only to show how this belief in
buried treasures continues even to the present day.

There is a legend which differs somewhat from the ordinary run of these
stories, and it is told about a little island on the coast of Cape Cod,
which is called Hannah Screecher's Island, and this is the way its name
came to it.

Captain Kidd while sailing along the coast, looking for a suitable place
to bury some treasure, found this island adapted to his purpose, and
landed there with his savage crew, and his bags and boxes, and his gold
and precious stones. It was said to be the habit of these pirates,
whenever they made a deposit on the coast, to make the hole big enough
not only to hold the treasure they wished to deposit there, but the body
of one of the crew,--who was buried with the valuables in order that his
spirit might act as a day and night watchman to frighten away people who
might happen to be digging in that particular spot.

The story relates that somewhere on the coast Captain Kidd had captured
a young lady named Hannah, and not knowing what to do with her, and
desiring not to commit an unnecessary extravagance by disposing of a
useful sailor, he determined to kill Hannah, and bury her with the
treasure, in order that she might keep away intruders until he came for
it.

It was very natural that when Hannah was brought on shore and found out
what was going to be done with her, she should screech in a most
dreadful manner, and although the pirates soon silenced her and covered
her up, they did not succeed in silencing her spirit, and ever since
that time,--according to the stories told by some of the older
inhabitants of Cape Cod,--there may be heard in the early dusk of the
evening the screeches of Hannah coming across the water from her little
island to the mainland.

Mr. James Herbert Morse has written a ballad founded upon this peculiar
incident, and with the permission of the author we give it here:--

          THE LADY HANNAH.

    "Now take my hand," quoth Captain Kidd,
      "The air is blithe, I scent the meads."
    He led her up the starlit sands,
      Out of the rustling reeds.

    The great white owl then beat his breast,
      Athwart the cedars whirred and flew;
    "There's death in our handsome captain's eye"
      Murmured the pirate's crew.

    And long they lay upon their oars
      And cursed the silence and the chill;
    They cursed the wail of the rising wind,
      For no man dared be still.

    Of ribald songs they sang a score
      To stifle the midnight sobs and sighs,
    They told wild tales of the Indian Main,
      To drown the far-off cries.

    But when they ceased, and Captain Kidd
      Came down the sands of Dead Neck Isle,
    "My lady wearies," he grimly said,
      "And she would rest awhile.

    "I've made her a bed--'tis here, 'tis there,
      And she shall wake, be it soon or long,
    Where grass is green and wild birds sing
      And the wind makes undersong.

    "Be quick, my men, and give a hand,
      She loved soft furs and silken stuff,
    Jewels of gold and silver bars,
      And she shall have enough.

    "With silver bars and golden ore,
      So fine a lady she shall be,
    A many suitor shall seek her long,
      As they sought Penelope.

    "And if a lover would win her hand,
      No lips e'er kissed a hand so white,
    And if a lover would hear her sing,
      She sings at owlet light.

    "But if a lover would win her gold,
      And his hands be strong to lift the lid,
    'Tis here, 'tis there, 'tis everywhere--
      In the chest," quoth Captain Kidd.

    They lifted long, they lifted well,
      Ingots of gold, and silver bars,
      And silken plunder from wild, wild wars,
    But where they laid them, no man can tell,
      Though known to a thousand stars.

But the ordinary Kidd stories are very much the same, and depend a good
deal upon the character of the coast and upon the imagination of the
people who live in that region. We will give one of them as a sample,
and from this a number of very good pirate stories could be manufactured
by ingenious persons.

It was a fine summer night late in the seventeenth century. A young man
named Abner Stout, in company with his wife Mary, went out for a walk
upon the beach. They lived in a little village near the coast of New
Jersey. Abner was a good carpenter, but a poor man; but he and his wife
were very happy with each other, and as they walked toward the sea in
the light of the full moon, no young lovers could have been more gay.

When they reached a little bluff covered with low shrubbery, which was
the first spot from which they could have a full view of the ocean,
Abner suddenly stopped, and pointed out to Mary an unusual sight. There,
as plainly in view as if it had been broad daylight, was a vessel lying
at the entrance of the little bay. The sails were furled, and it was
apparently anchored.

For a minute Abner gazed in utter amazement at the sight of this vessel,
for no ships, large or small, came to this little lonely bay. There was
a harbor two or three miles farther up the coast to which all trading
craft repaired. What could the strange ship want here?

This unusual visitor to the little bay was a very low and very long,
black schooner, with tall masts which raked forward, and with something
which looked very much like a black flag fluttering in its rigging. Now
the truth struck into the soul of Abner. "Hide yourself, Mary," he
whispered. "It is a pirate ship!" And almost at the same instant the
young man and his wife laid themselves flat on the ground among the
bushes, but they were very careful, each of them, to take a position
which would allow them to peep out through the twigs and leaves upon the
scene before them.

There seemed to be a good deal of commotion on board the black schooner,
and very soon a large boat pushed off from her side, and the men in it
began rowing rapidly toward the shore, apparently making for a spot on
the beach, not far from the bluff on which Abner and Mary were
concealed. "Let us get up and run," whispered Mary, trembling from head
to toe. "They are pirates, and they are coming here!"

"Lie still! Lie still!" said Abner. "If we get up and leave these
bushes, we shall be seen, and then they will be after us! Lie still, and
do not move a finger!"

The trembling Mary obeyed her husband, and they both lay quite still,
scarcely breathing, with eyes wide open. The boat rapidly approached the
shore. Abner counted ten men rowing and one man sitting in the stern.
The boat seemed to be heavily loaded, and the oarsmen rowed hard.

Now the boat was run through the surf to the beach, and its eleven
occupants jumped out. There was no mistaking their character. They were
true pirates. They had great cutlasses and pistols, and one of them was
very tall and broad shouldered, and wore an old-fashioned cocked hat.

"That's Captain Kidd," whispered Abner to his wife, and she pressed his
hand to let him know that she thought he must be right.

Now the men came up high upon the beach, and began looking about here
and there as if they were searching for something. Mary was filled with
horror for fear they should come to that bluff to search, but Abner knew
there was no danger of that. They had probably come to those shores to
bury treasure, as if they were great sea-turtles coming up upon the
beach to lay their eggs, and they were now looking for some good spot
where they might dig.

Presently the tall man gave some orders in a low voice, and then his men
left him to himself, and went back to the boat. There was a great pine
tree standing back a considerable distance from the water, battered and
racked by storms, but still a tough old tree. Toward this the pirate
captain stalked, and standing close to it, with his back against it, he
looked up into the sky. It was plain that he was looking for a star.
There were very few of these luminaries to be seen in the heavens, for
the moon was so bright. But as Abner looked in the direction in which
the pirate captain gazed, he saw a star still bright in spite of the
moonlight.

With his eyes fixed upon this star, the pirate captain now stepped
forward, making long strides. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
Then he stopped, plunged his right heel in the soft ground, and turned
squarely about to the left, so that his broad back was now parallel
with a line drawn from the pine tree to the star.

At right angles to this line the pirate now stepped forward, making as
before seven long paces. Then he stopped, dug his heel into the ground,
and beckoned to his men. Up they came running, carrying picks and
spades, and with great alacrity they began to dig at the place where the
captain had marked with his heel.

It was plain that these pirates were used to making excavations, for it
was not long before the hole was so deep that those within it could not
be seen. Then the captain gave an order to cease digging, and he and all
the pirates went back to the boat.

For about half an hour,--though Mary thought it was a longer time than
that,--those pirates worked very hard carrying great boxes and bags from
the boat to the excavation. When everything had been brought up, two of
the pirates went down into the hole, and the others handed to them the
various packages. Skilfully and quickly they worked, doubtless storing
their goods with great care, until nearly everything which had been
brought from the boat had been placed in the deep hole. Some rolls of
goods were left upon the ground which Mary thought were carpets, but
which Abner believed to be rich Persian rugs, or something of that
kind.

Now the captain stepped aside, and picking up from the sand some little
sticks and reeds, he selected ten of them, and with these in one hand,
and with their ends protruding a short distance above his closed
fingers, he rejoined his men. They gathered before him, and he held out
toward them the hand which contained the little sticks.

"They're drawing lots!" gasped Abner, and Mary trembled more than she
had done yet.

Now the lots were all drawn, and one man, apparently a young pirate,
stepped out from among his fellows. His head was bowed, and his arms
were folded across his manly chest. The captain spoke a few words, and
the young pirate advanced alone to the side of the deep hole.

Mary now shut her eyes tight, tight; but Abner's were wide open. There
was a sudden gleam of cutlasses in the air; there was one short,
plaintive groan, and the body of the young pirate fell into the hole.
Instantly all the other goods, furs, rugs, or whatever they were, were
tumbled in upon him. Then the men began to shovel in the earth and sand,
and in an incredibly short time the hole was filled up even with the
ground about it.

Of course all the earth and sand which had been taken out of the hole
could not now be put back into it. But these experienced treasure-hiders
knew exactly what to do with it. A spadeful at a time, the soil which
could not be replaced was carried to the sea, and thrown out into the
water, and when the whole place had been carefully smoothed over, the
pirates gathered sticks and stones, and little bushes, and great masses
of wild cranberry vines, and scattered them about over the place so that
it soon looked exactly like the rest of the beach about it.

Then the tall captain gave another low command, the pirates returned to
their boat, it was pushed off, and rapidly rowed back to the schooner.
Up came the anchor, up went the dark sails. The low, black schooner was
put about, and very soon she was disappearing over the darkening waters,
her black flag fluttering fiercely high above her.

"Now, let us run," whispered poor Mary, who, although she had not seen
everything, imagined a great deal; for as the pirates were getting into
their boat she had opened her eyes and had counted them, and there were
only nine beside the tall captain.

Abner thought that her advice was very good, and starting up out of the
brushwood they hastened home as fast as their legs would carry them.

[Illustration: "Two of the pirates went down into the hole."--p. 302.]

The next day Abner seemed to be a changed man. He had work to do, but he
neglected it. Never had such a thing happened before! For hours he sat
in front of the house, looking up into the sky, counting one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven. Then he would twist himself around on
the little bench, and count seven more.

This worthy couple lived in a small house which had a large cellar, and
during the afternoon of that day Abner busied himself in clearing out
this cellar, and taking out of it everything which it had contained. His
wife asked no questions. In her soul she knew what Abner was thinking
about.

Supper was over, and most of the people in the village were thinking of
going to bed, when Abner said to Mary, "Let us each take a spade, and I
will carry a pail, and we will go out upon the beach for a walk. If any
one should see us, they would think that we were going to dig for
clams."

"Oh, no, dear Abner!" cried Mary. "We must not dig there! Think of that
young pirate. Almost the first thing we would come to would be him!"

"I have thought of that," said Abner; "but do you not believe that the
most Christian act that you and I could do would be to take him out and
place him in a proper grave near by?"

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Mary, "do not say such a thing as that! Think of his
ghost! They killed him and put him there, that his ghost might guard
their treasure. You know, Abner, as well as I do, that this is their
dreadful fashion!"

"I know all about that," said Abner, "and that is the reason I wish to
go to-night. I do not believe there has yet been time enough for his
ghost to form. But let us take him out now, dear Mary, and lay him
reverently away,--and then!" He looked at her with flashing eyes.

"But, Abner," said she, "do you think we have the right?"

"Of course we have," said he. "Those treasures do not belong to the
pirates. If we take them they are treasure-trove, and legally ours. And
think, dear Mary, how poor we are to-night, and how rich we may be
to-morrow! Come, get the pail. We must be off."

Running nearly all the way,--for they were in such a hurry they could
not walk,--Abner and Mary soon reached the bluff, and hastily scrambling
down to the beach below, they stood upon the dreadful spot where Captain
Kidd and his pirates had stood the night before. There was the old
battered pine tree, reaching out two of its bare arms encouragingly
toward them.

Without loss of time Abner walked up to the tree, put his back to it,
and then looked up into the sky. Now he called Mary to him. "Which star
do you think he looked at, good wife?" said he. "There is a bright one
low down, and then there is another one a little higher up, and farther
to the right, but it is fainter."

"It would be the bright one, I think," said Mary. And then Abner, his
eyes fixed upon the bright star, commenced to stride. One, two, three,
four, five, six, seven. Turning squarely around to the left he again
made seven paces. And now he beckoned vigorously to Mary to come and
dig.

For about ten minutes they dug, and then they laid bare a great mass of
rock. "This isn't the place," cried Abner. "I must begin again. I did
not look at the right star. I will take the other one."

For the greater part of that night Abner and Mary remained upon the
beach. Abner would put his back against the tree, fix his eyes upon
another star, stride forward seven paces, and then seven to the left,
and he would come upon a little scrubby pine tree. Of course that was
not the place.

The moon soon began to set, and more stars came out, so that Abner had a
greater choice. Again and again he made his measurements, and every time
that he came to the end of his second seven paces, he found that it
would have been impossible for the pirates to make their excavation
there.

There was clearly something wrong. Abner thought that he had not
selected the right star, and Mary thought that his legs were not long
enough. "That pirate captain," quoth she, "had a long and manly stride.
Seven of his paces would go a far greater distance than seven of yours,
Abner."

Abner made his paces a little longer; but although he and his wife kept
up their work until they could see the early dawn, they found no spot
where it would be worth while to dig, and so mournfully they returned to
their home and their empty cellar.

As long as the moonlight lasted, Abner and Mary went to the little beach
at the head of the bay, and made their measurements and their searches
but although they sometimes dug a little here and there, they always
found that they had not struck the place where the pirate's treasure had
been buried.

When at last they gave up their search, and concluded to put their
household goods back into their cellar, they told the tale to some of
the neighbors, and other people went out and dug, not only at the place
which had been designated, but miles up and down the coast, and then the
story was told and retold, and so it has lasted until the present day.

What has been said about the legendary Captain Kidd will give a very
good idea of the estimation in which this romantic being has been, and
still is, held in various parts of the country, and, of all the
legitimate legends about him, there is not one which recounts his
piratical deeds upon our coast. The reason for this will be seen when we
consider, in the next chapter, the life and character of the real
Captain Kidd.




Chapter XXXII

The Real Captain Kidd


William Kidd, or Robert Kidd, as he is sometimes called, was a sailor in
the merchant service who had a wife and family in New York. He was a
very respectable man and had a good reputation as a seaman, and about
1690, when there was war between England and France, Kidd was given the
command of a privateer, and having had two or three engagements with
French vessels he showed himself to be a brave fighter and a prudent
commander.

Some years later he sailed to England, and, while there, he received an
appointment of a peculiar character. It was at the time when the King of
England was doing his best to put down the pirates of the American
coast, and Sir George Bellomont, the recently appointed Governor of New
York, recommended Captain Kidd as a very suitable man to command a ship
to be sent out to suppress piracy. When Kidd agreed to take the position
of chief of marine police, he was not employed by the Crown, but by a
small company of gentlemen of capital, who formed themselves into a sort
of trust company, or society for the prevention of cruelty to
merchantmen, and the object of their association was not only to put
down pirates, but to put some money in their own pockets as well.

Kidd was furnished with two commissions, one appointing him a privateer
with authority to capture French vessels, and the other empowering him
to seize and destroy all pirate ships. Kidd was ordered in his mission
to keep a strict account of all booty captured, in order that it might
be fairly divided among those who were stockholders in the enterprise,
one-tenth of the total proceeds being reserved for the King.

Kidd sailed from England in the _Adventure_, a large ship with thirty
guns and eighty men, and on his way to America he captured a French ship
which he carried to New York. Here he arranged to make his crew a great
deal larger than had been thought necessary in England, and, by offering
a fair share of the property he might confiscate on piratical or French
ships, he induced a great many able seamen to enter his service, and
when the _Adventure_ left New York she carried a crew of one hundred and
fifty-five men.

With a fine ship and a strong crew, Kidd now sailed out of the harbor
with the ostensible purpose of putting down piracy in American waters,
but the methods of this legally appointed marine policeman were very
peculiar, and, instead of cruising up and down our coast, he gayly
sailed away to the island of Madeira, and then around the Cape of Good
Hope to Madagascar and the Red Sea, thus getting himself as far out of
his regular beat as any New York constable would have been had he
undertaken to patrol the dominions of the Khan of Tartary.

By the time Captain Kidd reached that part of the world he had been at
sea for nearly a year without putting down any pirates or capturing any
French ships. In fact, he had made no money whatever for himself or the
stockholders of the company which had sent him out. His men, of course,
must have been very much surprised at this unusual neglect of his own
and his employers' interests, but when he reached the Red Sea, he boldly
informed them that he had made a change in his business, and had decided
that he would be no longer a suppressor of piracy, but would become a
pirate himself; and, instead of taking prizes of French ships
only,--which he was legally empowered to do,--he would try to capture
any valuable ship he could find on the seas, no matter to what nation it
belonged. He then went on to state that his present purpose in coming
into those oriental waters was to capture the rich fleet from Mocha
which was due in the lower part of the Red Sea about that time.

The crew of the _Adventure_, who must have been tired of having very
little to do and making no money, expressed their entire approbation of
their captain's change of purpose, and readily agreed to become pirates.

Kidd waited a good while for the Mocha fleet, but it did not arrive, and
then he made his first venture in actual piracy. He overhauled a Moorish
vessel which was commanded by an English captain, and as England was not
at war with Morocco, and as the nationality of the ship's commander
should have protected him, Kidd thus boldly broke the marine laws which
governed the civilized world and stamped himself an out-and-out pirate.
After the exercise of considerable cruelty he extorted from his first
prize a small amount of money; and although he and his men did not gain
very much booty, they had whetted their appetites for more, and Kidd
cruised savagely over the eastern seas in search of other spoils.

After a time the _Adventure_ fell in with a fine English ship, called
the _Royal Captain_, and although she was probably laden with a rich
cargo, Kidd did not attack her. His piratical character was not yet
sufficiently formed to give him the disloyal audacity which would enable
him with his English ship and his English crew, to fall upon another
English ship manned by another English crew. In time his heart might be
hardened, but he felt that he could not begin with this sort of thing
just yet. So the _Adventure_ saluted the _Royal Captain_ with
ceremonious politeness, and each vessel passed quietly on its way. But
this conscientious consideration did not suit Kidd's crew. They had
already had a taste of booty, and they were hungry for more, and when
the fine English vessel, of which they might so easily have made a
prize, was allowed to escape them, they were loud in their complaints
and grumblings.

One of the men, a gunner, named William Moore, became actually
impertinent upon the subject, and he and Captain Kidd had a violent
quarrel, in the course of which the captain picked up a heavy iron-bound
bucket and struck the dissatisfied gunner on the head with it. The blow
was such a powerful one that the man's skull was broken, and he died the
next day.

Captain Kidd's conscience seems to have been a good deal in his way; for
although he had been sailing about in various eastern waters, taking
prizes wherever he could, he was anxious that reports of his misdeeds
should not get home before him. Having captured a fine vessel bound
westward, he took from her all the booty he could, and then proceeded
to arrange matters so that the capture of this ship should appear to be
a legal transaction. The ship was manned by Moors and commanded by a
Dutchman, and of course Kidd had no right to touch it, but the
sharp-witted and business-like pirate selected one of the passengers and
made him sign a paper declaring that he was a Frenchman, and that he
commanded the ship. When this statement had been sworn to before
witnesses, Kidd put the document in his pocket so that if he were called
upon to explain the transaction he might be able to show that he had
good reason to suppose that he had captured a French ship, which, of
course, was all right and proper.

Kidd now ravaged the East India waters with great success and profit,
and at last he fell in with a very fine ship from Armenia, called the
_Quedagh Merchant_, commanded by an Englishman. Kidd's conscience had
been growing harder and harder every day, and he did not now hesitate to
attack any vessel. The great merchantman was captured, and proved to be
one of the most valuable prizes ever taken by a pirate, for Kidd's own
share of the spoils amounted to more than sixty thousand dollars. This
was such a grand haul that Kidd lost no time in taking his prize to some
place where he might safely dispose of her cargo, and get rid of her
passengers. Accordingly he sailed for Madagascar. While he was there he
fell in with the first pirate vessel he had met since he had started out
to put down piracy. This was a ship commanded by an English pirate named
Culliford, and here would have been a chance for Captain Kidd to show
that, although he might transgress the law himself, he would be true to
his engagement not to allow other people to do so; but he had given up
putting down piracy, and instead of apprehending Culliford he went into
partnership with him, and the two agreed to go pirating together.

This partnership, however, did not continue long, for Captain Kidd began
to believe that it was time for him to return to his native country and
make a report of his proceedings to his employers. Having confined his
piratical proceedings to distant parts of the world, he hoped that he
would be able to make Sir George Bellomont and the other stockholders
suppose that his booty was all legitimately taken from French vessels
cruising in the east, and when the proper division should be made he
would be able to quietly enjoy his portion of the treasure he had
gained.

He did not go back in the _Adventure_, which was probably not large
enough to carry all the booty he had amassed, but putting everything on
board his latest prize, the _Quedagh Merchant_, he burned his old ship
and sailed homeward.

When he reached the West Indies, however, our wary sea-robber was very
much surprised to find that accounts of his evil deeds had reached
America, and that the colonial authorities had been so much incensed by
the news that the man who had been sent out to suppress piracy had
become himself a pirate, that they had circulated notices throughout the
different colonies, urging the arrest of Kidd if he should come into any
American port. This was disheartening intelligence for the
treasure-laden Captain Kidd, but he did not despair; he knew that the
love of money was often as strong in the minds of human beings as the
love of justice. Sir George Bellomont, who was now in New York, was one
of the principal stockholders in the enterprise, and Kidd hoped that the
rich share of the results of his industry which would come to the
Governor might cause unpleasant reports to be disregarded. In this case
he might yet return to his wife and family with a neat little fortune,
and without danger of being called upon to explain his exceptional
performances in the eastern seas.

Of course Kidd was not so foolish and rash as to sail into New York
harbor on board the _Quedagh Merchant_, so he bought a small sloop and
put the most valuable portion of his goods on board her, leaving his
larger vessel, which also contained a great quantity of merchandise, in
the charge of one of his confederates, and in the little sloop he
cautiously approached the coast of New Jersey. His great desire was to
find out what sort of a reception he might expect, so he entered
Delaware Bay, and when he stopped at a little seaport in order to take
in some supplies, he discovered that there was but small chance of his
visiting his home and his family, and of making a report to his superior
in the character of a deserving mariner who had returned after a
successful voyage. Some people in the village recognized him, and the
report soon spread to New York that the pirate Kidd was lurking about
the coast. A sloop of war was sent out to capture his vessel, and
finding that it was impossible to remain in the vicinity where he had
been discovered, Kidd sailed northward and entered Long Island Sound.

Here the shrewd and anxious pirate began to act the part of the watch
dog who has been killing sheep. In every way he endeavored to assume the
appearance of innocence and to conceal every sign of misbehavior. He
wrote to Sir George Bellomont that he should have called upon him in
order to report his proceedings and hand over his profits, were it not
for the wicked and malicious reports which had been circulated about
him.

It was during this period of suspense, when the returned pirate did not
know what was likely to happen, that it is supposed, by the believers in
the hidden treasures of Kidd, that he buried his coin and bullion and
his jewels, some in one place and some in another, so that if he were
captured his riches would not be taken with him. Among the wild stories
which were believed at that time, and for long years after, was one to
the effect that Captain Kidd's ship was chased up the Hudson River by a
man-of-war, and that the pirates, finding they could not get away, sank
their ship and fled to the shore with all the gold and silver they could
carry, which they afterwards buried at the foot of Dunderbergh Mountain.
A great deal of rocky soil has been turned over at different times in
search of these treasures, but no discoveries of hidden coin have yet
been reported. The fact is, however, that during this time of anxious
waiting Kidd never sailed west of Oyster Bay in Long Island. He was
afraid to approach New York, although he had frequent communication with
that city, and was joined by his wife and family.

About this time occurred an incident which has given rise to all the
stories regarding the buried treasure of Captain Kidd. The disturbed and
anxious pirate concluded that it was a dangerous thing to keep so much
valuable treasure on board his vessel which might at any time be
overhauled by the authorities, and he therefore landed at Gardiner's
Island on the Long Island coast, and obtained permission from the
proprietor to bury some of his superfluous stores upon his estate. This
was a straightforward transaction. Mr. Gardiner knew all about the
burial of the treasure, and when it was afterwards proved that Kidd was
really a pirate the hidden booty was all given up to the government.

This appears to be the only case in which it was positively known that
Kidd buried treasure on our coast, and it has given rise to all the
stories of the kind which have ever been told.

For some weeks Kidd's sloop remained in Long Island Sound, and then he
took courage and went to Boston to see some influential people there. He
was allowed to go freely about the city for a week, and then he was
arrested.

The rest of Kidd's story is soon told; he was sent to England for trial,
and there he was condemned to death, not only for the piracies he had
committed, but also for the murder of William Moore. He was executed,
and his body was hung in chains on the banks of the Thames, where for
years it dangled in the wind, a warning to all evil-minded sailors.

About the time of Kidd's trial and execution a ballad was written which
had a wide circulation in England and America. It was set to music, and
for many years helped to spread the fame of this pirate. The ballad was
a very long one, containing nearly twenty-six verses, and some of them
run as follows:--

        My name was Robert Kidd, when I sailed, when I sailed,
            My name was Robert Kidd, when I sailed,
                My name was Robert Kidd,
                    God's laws I did forbid,
        And so wickedly I did, when I sailed.

        My parents taught me well, when I sailed, when I sailed,
            My parents taught me well when I sailed,
                My parents taught me well
                    To shun the gates of hell,
        But 'gainst them I rebelled, when I sailed.

        I'd a Bible in my hand, when I sailed, when I sailed,
            I'd a Bible in my hand when I sailed,
                I'd a Bible in my hand,
                    By my father's great command,
        And sunk it in the sand, when I sailed.

        I murdered William Moore, as I sailed, as I sailed,
            I murdered William Moore as I sailed,
                I murdered William Moore,
                    And laid him in his gore,
        Not many leagues from shore, as I sailed.

        I was sick and nigh to death, when I sailed, when I sailed,
            I was sick and nigh to death when I sailed,
                I was sick and nigh to death,
                    And I vowed at every breath,
        To walk in wisdom's ways, as I sailed.

        I thought I was undone, as I sailed, as I sailed,
            I thought I was undone, as I sailed,
                I thought I was undone,
                    And my wicked glass had run,
        But health did soon return, as I sailed.

        My repentance lasted not, as I sailed, as I sailed,
            My repentance lasted not, as I sailed,
                My repentance lasted not,
                    My vows I soon forgot,
        Damnation was my lot, as I sailed.

        I spyed the ships from France, as I sailed, as I sailed,
            I spyed the ships from France, as I sailed,
                I spyed the ships from France,
                    To them I did advance,
        And took them all by chance, as I sailed.

        I spyed the ships of Spain, as I sailed, as I sailed,
            I spyed the ships of Spain, as I sailed,
                I spyed the ships of Spain,
                    I fired on them amain,
        'Till most of them was slain, as I sailed.

        I'd ninety bars of gold, as I sailed, as I sailed,
            I'd ninety bars of gold, as I sailed,
                I'd ninety bars of gold,
                    And dollars manifold,
        With riches uncontrolled, as I sailed.

        Thus being o'er-taken at last, I must die, I must die,
            Thus being o'er-taken at last, I must die,
                Thus being o'er-taken at last,
                    And into prison cast,
        And sentence being passed, I must die.

        Farewell, the raging main, I must die, I must die,
            Farewell, the raging main, I must die,
                Farewell, the raging main,
                    To Turkey, France, and Spain,
        I shall ne'er see you again, I must die.

        To Execution Dock I must go, I must go,
            To Execution Dock I must go,
                To Execution Dock,
                    Will many thousands flock,
        But I must bear the shock, and must die.

        Come all ye young and old, see me die, see me die,
            Come all ye young and old, see me die,
                Come all ye young and old,
                    You're welcome to my gold,
        For by it I've lost my soul, and must die.

        Take warning now by me, for I must die, for I must die,
            Take warning now by me, for I must die,
                Take warning now by me,
                    And shun bad company,
        Lest you come to hell with me, for I die.

It is said that Kidd showed no repentance when he was tried, but
insisted that he was the victim of malicious persons who swore falsely
against him. And yet a more thoroughly dishonest rascal never sailed
under the black flag. In the guise of an accredited officer of the
government, he committed the crimes he was sent out to suppress; he
deceived his men; he robbed and misused his fellow-countrymen and his
friends, and he even descended to the meanness of cheating and
despoiling the natives of the West India Islands, with whom he traded.
These people were in the habit of supplying pirates with food and other
necessaries, and they always found their rough customers entirely
honest, and willing to pay for what they received; for as the pirates
made a practice of stopping at certain points for supplies, they wished,
of course, to be on good terms with those who furnished them. But Kidd
had no ideas of honor toward people of high or low degree. He would
trade with the natives as if he intended to treat them fairly and pay
for all he got; but when the time came for him to depart, and he was
ready to weigh anchor, he would seize upon all the commodities he could
lay his hands upon, and without paying a copper to the distressed and
indignant Indians, he would gayly sail away, his black flag flaunting
derisively in the wind.

But although in reality Captain Kidd was no hero, he has been known for
a century and more as the great American pirate, and his name has been
representative of piracy ever since. Years after he had been hung, when
people heard that a vessel with a black flag, or one which looked black
in the distance, flying from its rigging had been seen, they forgot that
the famous pirate was dead, and imagined that Captain Kidd was visiting
their part of the coast in order that he might find a good place to bury
some treasure which it was no longer safe for him to carry about.

There were two great reasons for the fame of Captain Kidd. One of these
was the fact that he had been sent out by important officers of the
crown who expected to share the profits of his legitimate operations,
but who were supposed by their enemies to be perfectly willing to take
any sort of profits provided it could not be proved that they were the
results of piracy, and who afterwards allowed Kidd to suffer for their
sins as well as his own. These opinions introduced certain political
features into his career and made him a very much talked-of man. The
greater reason for his fame, however, was the widespread belief in his
buried treasures, and this made him the object of the most intense
interest to hundreds of misguided people who hoped to be lucky enough to
share his spoils.

There were other pirates on the American coast during the eighteenth
century, and some of them became very well known, but their stories are
not uncommon, and we need not tell them here. As our country became
better settled, and as well-armed revenue cutters began to cruise up and
down our Atlantic coast for the protection of our commerce, pirates
became fewer and fewer, and even those who were still bold enough to ply
their trade grew milder in their manners, less daring in their exploits,
and--more important than anything else--so unsuccessful in their illegal
enterprises that they were forced to admit that it was now more
profitable to command or work a merchantman than endeavor to capture
one, and so the sea-robbers of our coasts gradually passed away.





Produced by Suzanne Shell, Christine D. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's note.

Many of the names in this book (even outside quoted passages) are
inconsistently spelt. I have chosen to retain the original spelling
treating these as author error rather than typographical carelessness.




THE PIRATES'

WHO'S WHO

_Giving Particulars of the Lives & Deaths of the Pirates & Buccaneers_

BY PHILIP GOSSE

ILLUSTRATED


BURT FRANKLIN: RESEARCH & SOURCE WORKS SERIES 119

Essays in History, Economics & Social Science 51


BURT FRANKLIN

NEW YORK




  Published by BURT FRANKLIN
  235 East 44th St., New York 10017
  Originally Published: 1924
  Printed in the U.S.A.

  Library of Congress Catalog Card No.: 68-56594
  Burt Franklin: Research & Source Works Series 119
  Essays in History, Economics & Social Science 51




  I DEDICATE THIS BOOK

  TO

  MY FELLOW-MEMBERS OF

  THE FOUNTAIN CLUB

  WITH THE EARNEST HOPE THAT NOTHING
  IT CONTAINS MAY INCITE THEM TO
  EMULATE ITS HEROES




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                               TO FACE PAGE

  A PAGE FROM THE LOG-BOOK OF CAPTAIN DAMPIER            98

  PRESSING A PIRATE TO PLEAD                            140

  A PIRATE BEING HANGED AT EXECUTION DOCK, WAPPING      182

  ANNE BONNY AND MARY READ, CONVICTED OF
  PIRACY NOVEMBER 28TH, 1720, IN JAMAICA                256

  CAPTAIN BARTHOLOMEW ROBERTS                           262




PREFACE


Let it be made clear at the very outset of this Preface that the pages
which follow do not pretend to be a history of piracy, but are simply an
attempt to gather together, from various sources, particulars of those
redoubtable pirates and buccaneers whose names have been handed down to us
in a desultory way.

I do not deal here with the children of fancy; I believe that every man,
or woman too--since certain of the gentler sex cut no small figure at the
game--mentioned in this volume actually existed.

A time has come when every form of learning, however preposterous it may
seem, is made as unlaborious as possible for the would-be student.
Knowledge, which is after all but a string of facts, is being arranged,
sorted, distilled, and set down in compact form, ready for rapid
assimilation. There is little fear that the student who may wish in the
future to become master of any subject will have to delve into the
original sources in his search after facts and dates.

Surely pirates, taking them in their broadest sense, are as much entitled
to a biographical dictionary of their own as are clergymen, race-horses,
or artists in ferro-concrete, who all, I am assured, have their own "Who's
Who"? Have not the medical men their Directory, the lawyers their List,
the peers their Peerage? There are books which record the names and the
particulars of musicians, schoolmasters, stockbrokers, saints and
bookmakers, and I dare say there is an average adjuster's almanac. A peer,
a horse, dog, cat, and even a white mouse, if of blood sufficiently blue,
has his pedigree recorded somewhere. Above all, there is that astounding
and entertaining volume, "Who's Who," found in every club smoking-room,
and which grows more bulky year by year, stuffed with information about
the careers, the hobbies, and the marriages of all the most distinguished
persons in every profession, including very full details about the lives
and doings of all our journalists. But on the club table where these books
of ready reference stand with "Whitaker," "ABC," and "Ruff's Guide to the
Turf," there is just one gap that the compiler of this work has for a long
while felt sorely needed filling. There has been until now no work that
gives immediate and trustworthy information about the lives, and--so sadly
important in their cases--the deaths of our pirates and buccaneers.

In delving in the volumes of the "Dictionary of National Biography," it
has been a sad disappointment to the writer to find so little space
devoted to the careers of these picturesque if, I must admit, often
unseemly persons. There are, of course, to be found a few pirates with
household names such as Kidd, Teach, and Avery. A few, too, of the
buccaneers, headed by the great Sir Henry Morgan, come in for their share.
But I compare with indignation the meagre show of pirates in that
monumental work with the rich profusion of divines! Even during the years
when piracy was at its height--say from 1680 until 1730--the pirates are
utterly swamped by the theologians. Can it be that these two professions
flourished most vigorously side by side, and that when one began to
languish, the other also began to fade?

Even so there can be no excuse for the past and present neglect of these
sea-adventurers. But a change is beginning to show itself. Increasing
evidence is to be found that the more intelligent portions of the
population of this country, and even more so the enlightened of the great
United States of America, are beginning to show a proper interest in the
lives of the pirates and buccaneers. That this should be so amongst the
Americans is quite natural, when it is remembered what a close intimacy
existed between their Puritan forefathers of New England and the pirates,
both by blood relation and by trade, since the pirates had no more
obliging and ready customers for their spoils of gold dust, stolen slaves,
or church ornaments, than the early settlers of New York, Massachusetts,
and Carolina.

In beginning to compile such a list as is to be found in this volume, a
difficulty is met at once. My original intention was that only pirates and
buccaneers should be included. To admit privateers, corsairs, and other
sea-rovers would have meant the addition of a vast number of names, and
would have made the work unwieldy, and the very object of this volume as a
book of ready reference would not have been achieved. But the difficulty
has been to define the exact meaning of a pirate and of a buccaneer. In
the dictionary a pirate is defined as "a sea-robber, marauder, one who
infringes another's copyright"; while a buccaneer is described as "a
sea-robber, a pirate, especially of the Spanish-American coasts." This
seems explicit, but a pirate was not a pirate from the cradle to the
gallows. He usually began his life at sea as an honest mariner in the
merchant service. He perhaps mutinied with other of the ship's crew,
killed or otherwise disposed of the captain, seized the ship, elected a
new commander, and sailed off "on the account." Many an honest seaman was
captured with the rest of his ship's crew by a pirate, and either
voluntarily joined the freebooters by signing their articles, or, being a
good navigator or "sea-artist," was compelled by the pirates to lend them
his services. Others, again, were in privateer ships, which carried on a
legitimate warfare against the shipping of hostile countries, under a
commission or letter of marque.

Often the very commission or letter of marque carried about so jealously
by some shady privateer was not worth the paper it was written on, nor the
handful of dubloons paid for it. One buccaneer sailed about the South
Seas, plundering Spanish ships and sacking churches and burning towns,
under a commission issued to him, for a consideration, by the Governor of
a Danish West India island, himself an ex-pirate. This precious document,
adorned with florid scrolls and a big, impressive seal, was written in
Danish. Someone with a knowledge of that language had an opportunity and
the curiosity to translate it, when he found that all it entitled the
bearer to do was to hunt for goats and pigs on the Island of Hispaniola,
and nothing more.

When, at the conclusion of hostilities, peace was declared, the crew of a
privateer found it exceedingly irksome to give up the roving life, and
were liable to drift into piracy. Often it happened that, after a long
naval war, crews were disbanded, ships laid up, and navies reduced, thus
flooding the countryside with idle mariners, and filling the roads with
begging and starving seamen. These were driven to go to sea if they could
find a berth, often half starved and brutally treated, and always
underpaid, and so easily yielded to the temptation of joining some vessel
bound vaguely for the "South Sea," where no questions were asked and no
wages paid, but every hand on board had a share in the adventure.

The buccaneers were a great source of piracy also. When a war was on hand
the English Government was only too glad to have the help of these daring
and skilful seamen; but when peace was declared these allies began to lead
to international complications, and means had to be taken to abolish them,
and to try and turn them into honest settlers in the islands. But when a
man has for years lived the free life, sailed out from Jamaica a pauper,
to return in six weeks or less with, perhaps, a bag of gold worth two,
three, or four thousand pounds, which he has prided himself on spending in
the taverns and gambling-hells of Port Royal in a week, how can he settle
down to humdrum uneventful toil, with its small profits? Thus he goes back
"on the account" and sails to some prearranged rendezvous of the "brethren
of the coast."

To write a whole history of piracy would be a great undertaking, but a
very interesting one. Piracy must have begun in the far, dim ages, and
perhaps when some naked savage, paddling himself across a tropical river,
met with another adventurer on a better tree-trunk, or carrying a bigger
bunch of bananas, the first act of piracy was committed. Indeed, piracy
must surely be the third oldest profession in the world, if we give the
honour of the second place to the ancient craft of healing. If such a
history were to include the whole of piracy, it would have to refer to the
Phoenicians, to the Mediterranean sea-rovers of the days of Rome, who, had
they but known it, held the future destiny of the world in their grasp
when they, a handful of pirates, took prisoner the young Julius Cæsar, to
ransom him and afterwards to be caught and crucified by him. The Arabs in
the Red Sea were for many years past-masters of the art of piracy, as were
the Barbary corsairs of Algiers and Tunis, who made the Mediterranean a
place of danger for many generations of seamen. All this while the Chinese
and Malays were active pirates, while the Pirate coast of the Persian Gulf
was feared by all mariners. Then arose the great period, beginning in the
reign of Henry VIII., advancing with rapid strides during the adventurous
years of Queen Elizabeth, when many West of England squires were wont to
sell their estates and invest all in a ship in which to go cruising on
the Spanish Main, in the hope of taking a rich Spanish galleon homeward
bound from Cartagena and Porto Bello, deep laden with the riches of Peru
and Mexico.

Out of these semi-pirate adventurers developed the buccaneers, a
ruffianly, dare-devil lot, who feared neither God, man, nor death.

By the middle of the eighteenth century piracy was on the wane, and
practically had died out by the beginning of the nineteenth, the final
thrust that destroyed it being given by the American and English Navies in
the North Atlantic and West Indian Seas. But by this time piracy had
degenerated to mere sea-robbing, the days of gallant and ruthless
sea-battles had passed, and the pirate of those decadent days was
generally a Spanish-American half-breed, with no courage, a mere robber
and murderer.

The advent of the telegraph and of steam-driven ships settled for ever the
account of the pirates, except in China, when even to this day accounts
reach us, through the Press, of piratical enterprises; but never again
will the black, rakish-looking craft of the pirate, with the Jolly Roger
flying, be liable to pounce down upon the unsuspecting and harmless
merchantman.

The books devoted to the lives and exploits of buccaneers and pirates are
few. Indeed, but two stand out prominently, both masterpieces of their
kind. One, "The Bucaniers of America, or a True Account of the Most
Remarkable Assaults Committed of Late Years upon the Coasts of the West
Indies," etc., was written by a sea-surgeon to the buccaneers, A.O.
Exquemelin, a Dutchman, and was published at Amsterdam in 1679.

Many translations were made, the first one in English being published in
1684 by William Crooke, at the Green Dragon, without Temple Bar, in
London. The publication of this book was the cause of a libel action
brought by Sir Henry Morgan against the publisher; the buccaneer commander
won his case and was granted £200 damages and a public apology. In this
book Morgan was held up as a perfect monster for his cruel treatment to
his prisoners, but although Morgan resented this very much, the statement
that annoyed him much more was that which told the reader that Morgan came
of very humble stock and was sold by his parents when a boy, to serve as a
labourer in Barbadoes.

The greatest work on pirates was written in 1726 by Captain Charles
Johnson. The original edition, now exceedingly rare, is called "A General
History of the Pyrates, from Their First Rise and Settlement in the Island
of Providence, to the Present Time," and is illustrated by interesting
engravings.

Another edition, in 1734, is a handsome folio called "A General History of
the Lives and Adventures of the Most Famous Highwaymen," etc., "To which
is added a Genuine Account of the Voyages and Plunders of the Most
Notorious Pyrates," and contains many full-page copperplates by J. Basire
and others. The pirates are given only a share in the pages of this book,
but it has some very fine engravings of such famous pirates as Avery,
Roberts, Low, Lowther, and "Blackbeard."

The third edition of the "History of Pirates," of 1725, has a quaint
frontispiece, showing the two women pirates, Anne Bonny and Mary Read, in
action with their swords drawn, upon the deck of a ship. While the fourth
edition, published in 1726, in two volumes, contains the stories of the
less well-known South-Sea Rovers.

After studying the subject of piracy at all closely, one cannot but be
struck by the number of pirates who came from Wales. Welshmen figure not
only amongst the rank and file, but amongst the leaders. Morgan, of
course, stands head and shoulders above the rest. It is curious how
certain races show particular adaptability for certain callings. Up to two
hundred years ago the chief pirates were Welshmen; to-day most of our
haberdashers hail from the same land of the leek. It would be interesting
to try and fathom the reason why these two callings, at first sight so
dissimilar, should call forth the qualities in a particular race. Perhaps
some of our leading haberdashers and linen drapers will be willing to
supply the answer.

I sometimes wonder what happens to the modern pirates; I mean the men who,
had they lived 200 years ago, would have been pirates. What do they find
to exercise their undoubted, if unsocial, talents and energies to-day?
Many, I think, find openings of an adventurous financial kind in the City.

Politics, again, surely has its buccaneers. One can imagine, for example,
some leading modern politician--let us say a Welshman--who, like Morgan,
being a brilliant public speaker, is able by his eloquence to sway vast
crowds of listeners, whether buccaneers or electors, a man of quick and
subtle mind, able to recognize and seize upon the main chance, perfectly
ruthless in his methods when necessity requires, and one who, having
achieved the goal on which he had set his ambition, discards his party or
followers, as Morgan did his buccaneers after the sacking of Panama. Nor
is Europe to-day without a counterpart to the ruffian crews who arrogantly
"defied the world and declared war on all nations."

One great difficulty which the author of this work is met with is to
decide who was, and who was not, a pirate.

Certain friends who have taken a kindly, if somewhat frivolous, interest
in the compilation of this work have inquired if Sir Francis Drake was to
be included; and it must be admitted that the question is not an easy one
to answer. The most fervent patriot must admit that the early voyages of
Drake were, to put it mildly, of a buccaneering kind, although his late
voyages were more nearly akin to privateering cruises than piracy. But if,
during the reign of King Philip, a Spaniard had been asked if Drake was a
pirate, he would certainly have answered, "Yes," and that without any
hesitation whatever. So much depends upon the point of view.

In the 1814 edition of Johnson's "History of Highwaymen and Pirates," the
famous Paul Jones holds a prominent place as a pirate, and is described in
no half measures as a traitor; yet I doubt if in the schools of America
to-day the rising young citizens of "God's Own Country" are told any such
thing, but are probably, and quite naturally, taught to look upon Paul
Jones as a true patriot and a brave sailor. Again, there is Christopher
Columbus, the greatest of all explorers, about whom no breath of scandal
in the piratical way was ever breathed, who only escaped being a pirate by
the fact that his was the first ship to sail in the Caribbean Sea; for
there is little doubt that had the great navigator found an English ship
lying at anchor when he first arrived at the Island of San Salvador, an
act of piracy would have immediately taken place.

For the student who is interested there are other writers who have dealt
with the subject of piracy, such as the buccaneers Ringrose, Cooke,
Funnell, Dampier, and Cowley; Woodes Rogers, with his "Voyage to the South
Seas"; Wafer, who wrote an amusing little book in 1699 describing his
hardships and adventures on the Isthmus of Darien. Of modern writers may
be recommended Mr. John Masefield's "Spanish Main," "The Buccaneers in the
West Indies," by C.H. Haring, and the latest publication of the Marine
Research Society of Massachusetts, entitled "The Pirates of the New
England Coast," and last, but far from least, the works of Mr. A. Hyatt
Verrill.

The conditions of life on a pirate ship appear to have been much the same
in all vessels. On procuring a craft by stealing or by mutiny of the crew,
the first thing to do was to elect a commander. This was done by vote
amongst the crew, who elected whoever they considered the most daring
amongst them, and the best navigator. The next officer chosen was the
quartermaster. The captain and quartermaster once elected, the former
could appoint any junior officers he chose, and the shares in any plunder
they took was divided according to the rank of each pirate. The crew were
then searched for a pirate who could write, and, when found, this scholar
would be taken down to the great cabin, given pen, ink, and paper, and
after the articles had been discussed and decided upon, they were written
down, to be signed by each member of the crew. As an example, the articles
drawn up by the crew of Captain John Phillips on board the _Revenge_ are
given below in full:

                                1.

    Every man shall obey civil Command; the Captain shall have one
    full Share and a half in all Prizes; the Master, Carpenter,
    Boatswain and Gunner shall have one Share and quarter.

                                2.

    If any Man shall offer to run away, or keep any Secret from
    the Company, he shall be marroon'd with one Bottle of Powder,
    one Bottle of Water, one small Arm, and Shot.

                                3.

    If any Man shall steal any Thing in the Company, or game, to
    the value of a Piece of Eight, he shall be Marroon'd or shot.

                                4.

    If at any Time we should meet another Marrooner (that is,
    Pyrate,) that Man that shall sign his Articles without the
    Consent of our Company, shall suffer such Punishment as the
    Captain and Company shall think fit.

                                5.

    That Man that shall strike another whilst these Articles are
    in force, shall receive Moses's Law (that is 40 Stripes
    lacking one) on the bare Back.

                                6.

    That Man that shall snap his Arms, or smoak Tobacco in the
    Hold, without a cap to his Pipe, or carry a Candle lighted
    without a Lanthorn, shall suffer the same Punishment as in the
    former Article.

                                7.

    That Man that shall not keep his Arms clean, fit for an
    Engagement, or neglect his Business, shall be cut off from his
    Share, and suffer such other Punishment as the Captain and the
    Company shall think fit.

                                8.

    If any Man shall lose a Joint in time of an Engagement, shall
    have 400 Pieces of Eight; if a limb, 800.

                                9.

    If at any time you meet with a prudent Woman, that Man that
    offers to meddle with her, without her Consent, shall suffer
    present Death.

These formalities took time and much argument and the drinking of many
bowls of punch, and, when once settled, the next business was to make a
flag. The Jolly Roger, consisting of a human skull and two crossed
thigh-bones, was generally portrayed in black and white. Some crews
preferred a study in red and white. More enterprising captains with
imagination and taste, such as Captain Bartholomew Roberts, who was a
truly remarkable man and the greatest pirate who ever "declared war upon
all the world," aimed at something more elaborate. Roberts flew several
flags, all made to his own design.

On one was depicted a "human anatomy," holding a rummer, or glass, of
punch in one bony hand, and a flaming sword in the other. Another
favourite flag of Roberts had a huge portrait of himself, sword in hand,
and two skulls.

Another had a "skellington" standing with either foot firmly placed on a
skull, and under one skull were embroidered the letters A.B.H., under the
other A.M.H., which letters stood for a Barbadian's head and a
Martinican's head, to warn any inhabitant of either of these islands what
to expect if he was so unfortunate as to be taken prisoner by Bartholomew,
who never forgot nor forgave two occasions on which he was very roughly
handled by ships from Barbadoes and Martinique.

The weak point in all pirate ships was the lack of discipline. Time and
again some successful enterprise, almost completed, was thrown away by
lack of discipline. No captain could be certain of his command or crew. If
he did anything they disapproved of, the crew would throw him in chains
into the hold, or as likely overboard, and elect another. It is on record
that one ship had elected thirteen different commanders in a few months.
Some of the big men retained their commands, Roberts holding the record,
for a pirate, of four years, until his death; while Bartholomew Sharp
holds the record for a buccaneer.

Having procured a vessel, perhaps little more than a fishing-boat,
sometimes only an open row-boat, the embryo pirates would paddle along
some coast until they came across an unsuspecting craft, one not too big
for the desperadoes to attack. Hiding their arms, they would row
alongside, and then suddenly, with shouts and curses, board the vessel,
kill any who resisted, and start a cruise in their new ship, their number
being increased by volunteers or forced men from amongst the prize's crew.
Cruising thus, the pirates would gradually get together a small fleet of
the fastest and best sailing vessels among their prizes and increase their
crew as they went along.

Both the buccaneers and the pirates had their favourite haunts and places
of rendezvous. These had to be within easy sailing distance of one or more
regular trade routes, and at the same time had to be in some quiet spot
unlikely to be visited by strange craft, and, besides being sheltered
from storms, must have a suitable beach on which their vessels could be
careened and the hulls scraped of barnacles and weeds. The greatest
stronghold of the buccaneers was at Tortuga, or Turtle Island, a small
island lying off the west coast of Hispaniola. Here in their most piping
days flourished a buccaneer republic, where the seamen made their own laws
and cultivated the land for sugar-cane and yams. Occasionally the
Spaniards or the French, without any warning, would swoop down on the
settlement and break up the small republic, but sooner or later the
buccaneers would be back once again in possession.

The favourite and most flourishing headquarters of the West India pirates
was at New Providence Island in the Bahama Islands, occupied to-day by the
flourishing town of Nassau, now the headquarters of those worthy
descendants of the pirates, the bootleggers, who from the old port carry
on their exciting and profitable smuggling of whisky into the United
States.

The numerous bays and islands lying off the coast of South Carolina were
very popular with the free booters in the late seventeenth and early
eighteenth centuries; while Port Royal, in Jamaica, was noted from early
days as the port from which the most famous buccaneers sailed for the
Spanish Main, and to which they returned with their plunder.

The French filibusters and pirates mostly used the Virgin Islands, while
the Dutch patronized their own islands of Curaçao, Saba, and St.
Eustatius. But the buccaneers did not allow the chance of nationality to
divide them, for Frenchmen, Englishmen, and Dutchmen, all "brethren of the
coast," sailed together and plundered the Spaniard in open and equal
friendship.

An entirely different group of pirates arose in the South Seas, with their
headquarters in Madagascar. Here the pirates went farther towards forming
a permanent society than at any other time during their history, with the
exception of the Barbary corsairs, who had their strongly fortified
settlements for many years at Algiers, Tunis, and Sallee.

The origin of the buccaneers is interesting, and I cannot do better than
quote the opening chapter of Clark Russell's "Life of William Dampier," in
the English Men of Action Series, published by Messrs. Macmillan in 1889.
He writes:

"In or about the middle of the seventeenth century, the Island of San
Domingo, or Hispaniola as it was then called, was haunted and overrun by a
singular community of savage, surly, fierce, and filthy men. They were
chiefly composed of French colonists, whose ranks had from time to time
been enlarged by liberal contributions from the slums and alleys of more
than one European city and town. These people went dressed in shirts and
pantaloons of coarse linen cloth, which they steeped in the blood of the
animals they slaughtered. They wore round caps, boots of hogskin drawn
over their naked feet, and belts of raw hide, in which they stuck their
sabres and knives. They also armed themselves with firelocks, which threw
a couple of balls, each weighing two ounces. The places where they dried
and salted their meat were called _boucans_, and from this term they came
to be styled bucaniers, or buccaneers, as we spell it. They were hunters
by trade, and savages in their habits. They chased and slaughtered horned
cattle and trafficked with the flesh, and their favourite food was raw
marrow from the bones of the beasts which they shot. They ate and slept on
the ground, their table was a stone, their bolster the trunk of a tree,
and their roof the hot and sparkling heavens of the Antilles."

The Spaniards, who were jealous of any other nation than their own having
a foothold in America, determined to get rid of these wild but hitherto
harmless buccaneers. This they accomplished, and in time drove the
cattle-hunters out of Hispaniola; and to make sure that the unwelcome
visitors should not return, they exterminated all the wild cattle. This
was the worst mistake the Spaniards could have made, for these wild men
had to look for other means of supporting themselves, and they joined the
freebooters and thus began the great period of piracy which was the cause
of the ultimate breaking-up of the Spanish power in the West Indies.

Of the life on board buccaneer and pirate ships a somewhat hazy and
incomplete picture reaches us. The crews were usually large compared with
the number of men carried in other ships, and a state of crowded
discomfort must have been the result, especially in some crazy old vessel
cruising in the tropics or rounding the Horn in winter. Of the
relationship between the sea-rovers and the fair sex it would be best,
perhaps, to draw a discreet veil. The pirates and the buccaneers looked
upon women simply as the spoils of war, and were as profligate with these
as with the rest of their plunder. I do not know if I am disclosing a
secret when I mention that my friend Mr. Hyatt Verrill, who is an
authority on the subject of the lives of the pirates, is about to publish
a book devoted to the love affairs of these gentry. I confess to looking
forward with pleasure and a certain degree of trepidation to reading his
book and to seeing how he will deal with so delicate a subject.

We know that Sir Henry Morgan was married and provided for his widow in
his will.

Captain Kidd, wife, and child, resided in New York, in the utmost conjugal
happiness and respectability, but then Kidd was a martyr and no pirate.

Captain Rackam, the dashing "Calico Jack," ran away to sea with the woman
pirate, Mrs. Anne Bonny, and they lived together happily on board ship
and on land, as did Captain and Mrs. Cobham. The only other pirate I know
of who took a "wife" to sea with him was Captain Pease, who flourished in
a half-hearted way--half-hearted in the piratical, but not the matrimonial
sense--in the middle of the nineteenth century.

A certain settler in New Zealand in the "early days" describes a visit he
paid to Captain Pease and his family on board that pirate's handy little
schooner, lying at anchor in a quiet cove at that island.

On stepping aboard, the guest was warmly welcomed by a short, red-faced
man, bald of head and rotund in figure, of about fifty-five years of age.
His appearance suggested a successful grocer rather than a pirate. On the
deck were seated two ladies, one nearing middle age, the other young and
undoubtedly pretty. At the feet of these ladies sprawled several small
children. Captain Pease proceeded to introduce his guest to these as Mrs.
Pease No. 1 and Mrs. Pease No. 2. The ladies continued their sewing while
a conversation took place on various subjects. Presently, taking out his
watch, the pirate turned to the younger lady, observing that it was
nearing teatime. Mrs. Pease No. 2, laying down her sewing, went to the
cabin, from which the rattle of teacups and the hiss of a boiling kettle
were soon heard. Tea being announced as ready, the party entered the
cabin, Mrs. Pease senior taking the place at the head of the table and
pouring out the tea while the younger Mrs. Pease very prettily handed
round the cups and bread and butter, the guest particularly noticing with
what respect and thoughtfulness she looked after the wants of the elder
Mrs. Pease.

As a pirate Captain Pease was second or even third rate, confining his
daring to seizing small unarmed native craft, or robbing the stores of
lonely white traders on out-of-the-way atolls. But as a married man he
showed himself to be a master; matrimony was his strong suit, domesticity
his trump card. He gave one valuable hint to his guest, which was this:
"Never take more than two wives with you on a voyage, _and choose 'em with
care_."

One is apt to disassociate serious matrimony, and still less responsible
paternity, with the calling of piracy, but with Captain Pease this was far
from being the case. Every one of his wives--for he had others on
shore--contributed her mite, or two, to the growing family, and the
Captain really could not say which of his offspring he was most proud of.
It seems at first strange that a man of Captain Pease's appearance,
figure, and settled habits, almost humdrum, should have been such an
undoubted success with the ladies; but that he was a success there can be
no doubt. Perhaps his calling had a good deal to do with this attraction
he had for them.

Before bringing this Preface to a conclusion, there is one other aspect of
piracy upon which I will touch.

Death, portrayed by a skeleton, was the device on the flag beneath which
they fought; and a skeleton was for ever threatening to emerge from its
cupboard aboard every pirate vessel.

The end of most of the pirates and a large proportion of the buccaneers
was a sudden and violent one, and few of them died in their beds. Many
were killed in battle, numbers of them were drowned. Not a few drank
themselves to death with strong Jamaica rum, while many of the buccaneers
died of malaria and yellow fever contracted in the jungles of Central
America, and most of the pirates who survived these perils lived only to
be hanged.

It is recorded of a certain ex-prizefighter and pirate, Dennis McCarthy,
who was about to be hanged at New Providence Island in 1718, that, as he
stood on the gallows, all bedecked with coloured ribbons, as became a
boxer, he told his admiring audience that his friends had often, in joke,
told him he would die in his shoes; and so, to prove them liars, he kicked
off his shoes amongst the crowd, and so died without them.

The trial of a pirate was usually a rough and ready business, and the
culprit seldom received the benefit of any doubt that might exist.

If he made any defence at all, it was usually to plead that he had been
forced to join the pirates against his wish, and that he had long been
waiting for an opportunity to escape.

Once condemned to death, and the date of execution decided, the prisoner,
if at Newgate, was handed over to the good offices of the prison Ordinary;
or, if in New England, to such vigorous apostles of Christianity as the
Rev. Cotton or the Rev. Increase Mather. The former of these two famous
theologians was pastor of the North Church in Boston, and the author of a
very rare work published in 1695, called "An History of Some Criminals
Executed in This Land." Cotton Mather preached many a "hanging" sermon to
condemned pirates, a few of which can still be read. One of these,
preached in 1704, is called "A Brief Discourse occasioned by a Tragical
Spectacle of a Number of Miserables under Sentence of Death for Piracy."

The Reverend Doctor made a speciality of these "hanging" sermons, and was
a thorough master of his subject, as is shown by the following passage
taken from the above "Brief Discourse":

"The Privateering Stroke so easily degenerates into the Piratical; and the
Privateering Trade is usually carried on with an Unchristian Temper, and
proves an Inlet unto so much Debauchery and Iniquity."

On the Sunday previous to an execution the condemned pirates were taken to
church to listen to a sermon while they were "exhibited" to the crowded
and gaping congregation. On the day of the execution a procession was
formed, which marched from the gaol to the gallows.

At the head was carried a silver oar, the emblem from very early days of a
pirate execution. Arrived at the gibbet, the prisoner, who always dressed
himself in his, or someone else's, best clothes, would doff his hat and
make a speech.

Sometimes the bolder spirits would speak in a defiant and unrepentant way;
but most of them professed a deep repentance for their sins and warned
their listeners to guard against the temptation of drink and avarice.
After the prisoner's death the bodies of the more notorious pirates were
taken down and hanged in chains at some prominent spot where ships passed,
in order to be a warning to any mariners who had piratical leanings.

The number of pirates or buccaneers who died in their beds must have been
very small, particularly amongst the former; and I have been able to trace
but a single example of a tombstone marking the burial-place of a pirate.
This is, or was until recently, to be found in the graveyard at Dartmouth,
and records the resting-place of the late Captain Thomas Goldsmith, who
commanded the _Snap Dragon_, of Dartmouth, in which vessel he amassed much
riches during the reign of Queen Anne, and died, apparently not regretted,
in 1714. Engraved upon his headstone are the following lines:

    Men that are virtuous serve the Lord;
    And the Devil's by his friends ador'd;
    And as they merit get a place
    Amidst the bless'd or hellish race;
    Pray then ye learned clergy show
    Where can this brute, Tom Goldsmith, go?
    Whose life was one continual evil
    Striving to cheat God, Man and Devil.




THE PIRATES' WHO'S WHO


AISA. Barbary corsair.

A famous Mediterranean pirate, and one of Dragut's admirals in the
sixteenth century.


ALCANTRA, CAPTAIN MANSEL.

A Spaniard. Commanded a pirate brig, the _Macrinarian_. Committed many
outrages. Took the Liverpool packet _Topaz_, from Calcutta to Boston, in
1829, near St. Helena, murdering the whole crew. In the same year he took
the _Candace_, from Marblehead, and plundered her. The supercargo of the
_Candace_ was an amateur actor, and had on board a priest's black gown and
broad brimmed hat. These he put on and sat in his cabin pretending to tell
his beads. On the pirates coming to rob him, they all crossed themselves
and left him, so that he alone of the whole company was not robbed.


ALEXANDER, JOHN.

A Scotch buccaneer; one of Captain Sharp's crew. Drowned on May 9th, 1681.
Captain Sharp, with a party of twenty-four men, had landed on the Island
of Chiva, off the coast of Peru, and taken several prisoners, amongst whom
was a shipwright and his man, who were actually at work building two great
ships for the Spaniards. Sharp, thinking these men would be very useful to
him, took them away, with all their tools and a quantity of ironwork, in a
dory, to convey them off to his ship. But the dory, being overladen,
sank, and Alexander was drowned. On the evening of May 12th his body was
found; which they took up, and next day "threw him overboard, giving him
three French vollies for his customary ceremony."


ALI BASHA.

Of Algiers. Barbary corsair.

Conquered the Kingdom of Tunis in the sixteenth century, and captured many
Maltese galleys. He brought the development of organized piracy to its
greatest perfection.

In 1571 Ali Basha commanded a fleet of no fewer than 250 Moslem galleys in
the battle of Lepanto, when he was severely defeated, but escaped with his
life.


ALLESTON, CAPTAIN.

Commanded a vessel of eighteen tons, no guns, and a crew of twenty-four.
In March, 1679, sailed in company with eight other vessels, under command
of Captain Harris, to the Coast of Darien, and marched on foot across the
isthmus, on his way attacking and sacking Santa Maria.


AMAND or ANNAND, ALEXANDER.

Of Jamaica.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew in the _Royal James_. Hanged on November
8th, 1718, at White Point, Charleston, South Carolina, and buried in the
marsh below low-water mark.


AMEER, IBRAHIM.

An admiral of an Arabian fleet of Red Sea pirates. In 1816 he captured
four British merchant vessels on their way to Surat.


ANDRESON, CAPTAIN CORNELIUS.

A Dutch pirate. Sailed from Boston in 1674 with Captain Roderigo to
plunder English ships along the coast of Maine, in a vessel called the
_Penobscot Shallop_.

Tried at Cambridge, Massachusetts, sentenced to death, but later on
pardoned. Afterwards fought very bravely for the English colonists against
the Indians.


ANDROEAS, CAPTAIN.

A Chief or Captain of the Darien Indians, who in 1679 conducted the
buccaneers under Coxon and Harris across the isthmus to attack Santa Maria
and afterwards to make an attempt on Panama.

Captain Androeas had a great esteem for the English, partly because the
buccaneers were kind to the Indians, and partly because of the Indians'
fear and hatred of the Spaniards. He afterwards led back a party of
malcontents under Captain Coxon from the Pacific side of the isthmus.


ANGORA, Sultan of Timor.

Refusing to allow the East India Company to station garrisons on Timor, he
was driven out of the whole of his island except the chief town, also
called Angora.

Deciding to take revenge, he turned pirate and went to sea in command of a
small fleet of five well-armed prows and several galleys. His first prize
was a packet brig carrying despatches from Calcutta to the English General
before Angora. Captain Hastings, the commander, a near relation of Warren
Hastings, and a gallant officer, had thrown the despatches overboard, for
which he was hanged, while the crew were sent to prison at Angora and
afterwards poisoned. His next prize was an East Indian ship, the _Edward_,
Captain Harford, the crew of which were also poisoned. Cruising off Bombay
he defeated a vessel sent out by the Government to attack him. After
taking other English vessels, Angora met with a richly laden ship from
Burmah, a country whose sovereign he was on friendly terms with, but the
Sultan-pirate took this ship and drowned every soul on board except one
woman, who, owing to her great beauty, he kept for himself. His next
victim was a well-armed Malay praam, which he captured after a severe
fight. The crew he shackled and threw overboard, while he burnt the
vessel. Paying another visit to Bombay, he caught the garrison unprepared,
blew up the fort, and sailed off with some sheep, cows, and pigs. A few
days later the pirate seized an English packet, _St. George_, and after he
had tortured to death the captain, the terrified crew joined his service.
Returning to Timor with his plunder, he was surprised by the arrival off
the port of H.M.S. _Victorious_, seventy-four guns, which had been sent to
take him. Slipping out of harbour unobserved in the night in his fastest
sailing praam, he escaped to Trincomalee in Ceylon, where the East India
Company decided to allow him to remain undisturbed.


ANGRIA.

Brother of a famous pirate, Angora, Sultan of Timor. When the Sultan
retired from practice to the Island of Ceylon he gave his brother his
praam, a fast vessel armed with thirty-eight guns.

Angria's brother Angora had been dethroned from the Island of Timor by the
English Government, and this had prevented the former from all hope of
succeeding as Sultan. Owing to this, Angria, a very vindictive man,
nursed against the English Government a very real grievance. Declaring
himself Sultan of another smaller island, Little Timor, he sailed out to
look for spoil. His first victim was the _Elphinston_, which he took some
eighty miles off Bombay. Putting the crew of forty-seven men into an open
boat, without water, and with scarcely room to move, he left them. It was
in the hottest month of the year, and only twenty-eight of them reached
Bombay alive.

Angria, being broad-minded on the subject of his new profession, did not
limit himself to taking only English vessels, for meeting with two Chinese
junks, laden with spices and riches, he plundered them both, and tying the
crew back to back threw them into the sea to drown. One of the Chinamen,
while watching his companions being drowned, managed to get a hand free
from his ropes, and, taking his dagger, stabbed Angria, but, missing his
heart, only wounded him in the shoulder. To punish him the pirate had the
skin cut off his back and then had him beaten with canes. Then lashing him
firmly down to a raft he was thrown overboard. After drifting about for
three days and nights he was picked up, still alive, by a fishing-boat and
carried to Bombay, where, fully recovered, he lived the rest of his days.

Angria continued his activities for three years, during which space he was
said to have murdered in cold blood over 500 Englishmen. He was eventually
chased by Commander Jones in H.M.S. _Asia_, sixty-four guns, into Timor,
and after a close siege of the town for twelve months, Angria was shot by
one of the mob while haranguing them from a balcony.

After Commander Jones's death his widow built a tower at Shooter's Hill,
by Woolwich Common, to perpetuate the memory of her husband who had rid
the Indian Ocean of the tyrant Angria.

The following lines are from the pen of Robert Bloomfield, and allude to
this monument:

    Yon far-famed monumental tower
    Records the achievements of the brave,
    And Angria's subjugated power,
    Who plunder'd on the Eastern Wave.


ANSTIS, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

The first mention of the name of this notorious pirate occurs in the year
1718, when we hear of him shipping himself at Providence in a sloop called
the _Buck_ in company with five other rascals who were conspiring together
to seize the vessel and with her go "a-pyrating."

Of these five, one was Howel Davis, who was afterwards killed in an affair
at the Island of Princes; another, Denman Topping, who was killed in the
taking of a rich Portuguese ship on the coast of Brazil; a third, Walter
Kennedy, was eventually hanged at Execution Dock, while the two others,
who escaped the usual end of pirates--that is, by hanging, shooting, or
drowning in saltwater or rum--disappeared into respectable obscurity in
employment of some sort in the City of London.

This party of six conspirators was the nucleus of a very powerful
combination of pirates, which eventually came under the command of the
famous Captain Roberts.

Anstis's pirate career began as did most others. They cruised about
amongst the West India Islands, seizing and plundering all merchant ships
they chanced upon, and, if we are to believe some of the stories that were
circulated at the time of their treatment of their prisoners, they appear
to have been an even rougher lot of scoundrels than was usual.

Before long they seized a very stout ship, the _Morning Star_, bound from
Guinea to Carolina, and fitted her up with thirty-two cannons taken from
another prize; manned her with a crew of one hundred men, and put Captain
John Fenn in command. Anstis, as the elder officer, could have had command
of this newer and larger ship, but he was so in love with his own vessel,
the _Good Fortune_, which was an excellent sailer, that he preferred to
remain in her.

The party now had two stout ships, but, as so often happened, trouble
began to ferment amongst the crew. A large number of these had been more
or less forced to "go a-pyrating," and were anxious to avoid the
consequences, so they decided to send a round-robin--that is, a
petition--signed by all with their names in a circle so that no rogue
could be held to be more prominent than any other, to ask for the King's
pardon.

This round-robin was addressed to "his most sacred Majesty George, by the
Grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the
Faith," etc.

This petition was sent to England by a merchant vessel then sailing from
Jamaica, while the crews hid their ships amongst the mangrove swamps of a
small uninhabited island off the coast of Cuba. Here they waited for nine
months for an answer to their petition to the King, living on turtle,
fish, rice, and, of course, rum _ad lib._ as long as it lasted.

To pass the time various diversions were instigated, particularly
dancing--a pastime in great favour amongst pirates. We have a most amusing
account left us of a mock court of justice held by them to try one another
of piracy, and he who was on one day tried as the prisoner would next day
take his turn at being Judge.

This shows a grim sense of humour, as most of those who took part in these
mock trials were certain to end their careers before a real trial unless
they came to a sudden and violent end beforehand.

Here is an account of one such mock-trial as given to Captain Johnson, the
historian of the pirates, by an eyewitness:

"The Court and Criminals being both appointed, as also Council to plead,
the Judge got up in a Tree, and had a dirty Taurpaulin hung over his
shoulder; this was done by Way of Robe, with a Thrum Cap on his Head, and
a large Pair of Spectacles upon his Nose. Thus equipp'd, he settled
himself in his Place; and abundance of Officers attending him below, with
Crows, Handspikes, etc., instead of Wands, Tipstaves, and such like....
The Criminals were brought out, making a thousand sour Faces; and one who
acted as Attorney-General opened the Charge against them; their Speeches
were very laconick, and their whole Proceedings concise. We shall give it
by Way of Dialogue.

"Attor. Gen.: 'An't please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
here is a Fellow before you that is a sad Dog, a sad sad Dog; and I humbly
hope your Lordship will order him to be hang'd out of the Way
immediately.... He has committed Pyracy upon the High Seas, and we shall
prove, an't please your Lordship, that this Fellow, this sad Dog before
you, has escaped a thousand Storms, nay, has got safe ashore when the Ship
has been cast away, which was a certain Sign he was not born to be
drown'd; yet not having the Fear of hanging before his Eyes, he went on
robbing and ravishing Man, Woman and Child, plundering Ships Cargoes fore
and aft, burning and sinking Ship, Bark and Boat, as if the Devil had been
in him. But this is not all, my Lord, he has committed worse Villanies
than all these, for we shall prove, that he has been guilty of drinking
Small-Beer; and your Lordship knows, there never was a sober Fellow but
what was a Rogue. My Lord, I should have spoke much finer than I do now,
but that as your Lordship knows our Rum is all out, and how should a Man
speak good Law that has not drank a Dram.... However, I hope, your
Lordship will order the Fellow to be hang'd.'

"Judge: '... Hearkee me, Sirrah ... you lousy, pittiful, ill-look'd Dog;
what have you to say why you should not be tuck'd up immediately, and set
a Sun-drying like a Scare-crow?... Are you guilty, or not guilty?'

"Pris.: 'Not guilty, an't please your Worship.'

"Judge: 'Not guilty! say so again, Sirrah, and I'll have you hang'd
without any Tryal.'

"Pris.: 'An't please your Worship's Honour, my Lord, I am as honest a poor
Fellow as ever went between Stem and Stern of a Ship, and can hand, reef,
steer, and clap two Ends of a Rope together, as well as e'er a He that
ever cross'd salt Water; but I was taken by one George Bradley' (the Name
of him that sat as Judge,) 'a notorious Pyrate, a sad Rogue as ever was
unhang'd, and he forc'd me, an't please your Honour.'

"Judge: 'Answer me, Sirrah.... How will you be try'd?'

"Pris.: 'By G---- and my Country.'

"Judge: 'The Devil you will.... Why then, Gentlemen of the Jury, I think
we have nothing to do but to proceed to Judgement.'

"Attor. Gen.: 'Right, my Lord; for if the Fellow should be suffered to
speak, he may clear himself, and that's an Affront to the Court.'

"Pris.: 'Pray, my Lord, I hope your Lordship will consider ...'

"Judge: 'Consider!... How dare you talk of considering?... Sirrah, Sirrah,
I never consider'd in all my Life.... I'll make it Treason to consider.'

"Pris.: 'But, I hope, your Lordship will hear some reason.'

"Judge: 'D'ye hear how the Scoundrel prates?... What have we to do with
the Reason?... I'd have you to know, Raskal, we don't sit here to hear
Reason ... we go according to Law.... Is our Dinner ready?'

"Attor. Gen.: 'Yes, my Lord.'

"Judge: 'Then heark'ee you Raskal at the Bar; hear me, Sirrah, hear me....
You must suffer, for three reasons; first, because it is not fit I should
sit here as Judge, and no Body be hanged.... Secondly, you must be hanged,
because you have a damn'd hanging Look.... And thirdly, you must be
hanged, because I am hungry; for, know, Sirrah, that 'tis a Custom, that
whenever the Judge's Dinner is ready before the Tryal is over, the
Prisoner is to be hanged of Course.... There's Law for you, ye Dog.... So
take him away Gaoler.'"

In August, 1722, the pirates sailed out from their hiding-place and
waylaid the ship which was returning to Jamaica with the answer to the
petition, but to their disappointment heard that no notice had been taken
of their round-robin by the Government at home.

No time was lost in returning to their old ways, for the very next day
both pirate ships left their hiding-place and sailed out on the "grand
account."

But now their luck deserted them, for the _Morning Star_ was run aground
on a reef by gross neglect on the part of the officers and wrecked. Most
of the crew escaped on to an island, where Captain Anstis found them next
day, and no sooner had he taken aboard Captain Fenn, Phillips, the
carpenter, and a few others, than all of a sudden down upon them came two
men-of-war, the _Hector_ and the _Adventure_, so that Anstis had barely
time to cut his cables and get away to sea, hotly pursued by the
_Adventure_. The latter, in a stiff breeze, was slowly gaining on the
brigantine when all of a sudden the wind dropped, the pirates got out the
sweeps, and thus managed, for the time being, to escape. In the meantime
the _Hector_ took prisoner the forty pirates remaining on the island.

Anstis soon got to work again, and captured several prizes. He then sailed
to the Island of Tobago to clean and refit his ship. Just when all the
guns and stores had been landed and the ship heeled, as ill-luck would
have it, the _Winchester_, man-of-war, put into the bay; and the pirates
had barely time to set their ship on fire and to escape into the woods.
Anstis had by now lost all authority over his discontented crew, and one
night was shot while asleep in his hammock.


ANTONIO.

Captain of the Darien Indians and friend to the English buccaneers.


ARCHER, JOHN ROSE.

He learnt his art as a pirate in the excellent school of the notorious
Blackbeard.

In 1723 he was, for the time being, in honest employment in a Newfoundland
fishing-boat, which was captured by Phillips and his crew. As Phillips was
only a beginner at piracy, he was very glad to get the aid of such an old
hand at the game as John Archer, whom he promptly appointed to the office
of quartermaster in the pirate ship. This quick promotion caused some
murmuring amongst Phillips's original crew, the carpenter, Fern, being
particularly outspoken against it.

Archer ended his days on the gallows at Boston on June 2nd, 1724, and we
read that he "dy'd very penitent, with the assistance of two grave Divines
to attend him."


ARGALL.

Licensed and titled buccaneer.

Believed to have buried a rich treasure in the Isles of Shoals, off
Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in the seventeenth century.


ARMSTRONG.

Born in London. A deserter from the Royal Navy. One of Captain Roberts's
crew taken by H.M.S. _Swallow_, from which ship he had previously
deserted.

In an account of his execution on board H.M.S. _Weymouth_ we read: "Being
on board a Man of War there was no Body to press him to an Acknowledgement
of the Crime he died for, nor of sorrowing in particular for it, which
would have been exemplary, and made suitable Impressions on seamen; so
that his last Hour was spent in lamenting and bewailing his Sins in
general, exhorting the Spectators to an honest and good life, in which
alone they could find Satisfaction."

This painful scene ended by the condemned singing with the spectators a
few verses of the 140th Psalm: at the conclusion of which, at the firing
of a gun, "he was tric'd up at the Fore Yard."

Died at the age of 34.


ARNOLD, SION.

A Madagascar pirate, who was brought to New England by Captain Shelley in
1699.


ASHPLANT, VALENTINE.

Born in the Minories, London. He served with Captain Howell Davis, and
later with Bartholomew Roberts. He was one of the leading lights of
Roberts's crew, a member of the "House of Lords."

He took part in the capture and plundering of the _King Solomon_ at Cape
Apollonia, North-West Coast of Africa, in January, 1719, when the pirates,
in an open boat, attacked the ship while at anchor. Ashplant was taken
prisoner two years later by H.M.S. _Swallow_. Tried for piracy at Cape
Coast Castle and found guilty in March, 1722, and hanged in chains there
at the age of 32.


ATWELL.

A hand aboard the brig _Vineyard_ in 1830, he took part with Charles Gibbs
and others in a mutiny in which both the captain and mate was murdered.


AUGUR, CAPTAIN JOHN.

A pirate of New Providence, Bahama Islands. He accepted the royal pardon
in 1718, and impressed the Governor, Woodes Rogers, so favourably that he
was placed in command of a sloop to go and trade amongst the islands. A
few days out Augur met with two sloops, "the sight of which dispelled all
memory of their late good intention," and turning pirates once more, they
seized the two sloops and took out of them money and goods to the value of
£500.

The pirates now sailed for Hispaniola, but with bad luck, or owing to
retribution, a sudden hurricane arose which drove them back to the one
spot in the West Indies they must have been most anxious to avoid--that
is, the Bahama Islands. Here the sloop became a total wreck, but the crew
got ashore and for a while lay hidden in a wood. Rogers, hearing where
they were, sent an armed sloop to the island, and the captain by fair
promises induced the eleven marooned pirates to come aboard. Taking these
back to Providence, Rogers had them all tried before a court of lately
converted pirates, and they were condemned to be hanged. While standing
on the gallows platform the wretched culprits reproached the crowd of
spectators, so lately their fellow-brethren in piracy, for allowing their
old comrades to be hanged, and urging them to come to the rescue. But
virtue was still strong in these recent converts, and all the comfort the
criminals got was to be told "it was their Business to turn their Minds to
another World, and sincerely to repent of what Wickedness they had done in
this." "Yes," answered the now irritated and in no-wise abashed Augur, "I
_do_ heartily repent: I repent I have not done more Mischief, and that we
did not cut the Throats of them that took us, and I am extremely sorry
that you an't all hang'd as well as we."


AUSTIN, JAMES.

Captured with the rest of Captain John Quelch's crew in the brigantine
_Charles_. Escaped for a time, but was caught and secured in the gaol at
Piscataqua, and later on tried for piracy at the Star Tavern at Boston in
June, 1704.


AVERY, CAPTAIN JOHN, _alias_ HENRY EVERY, _alias_ CAPTAIN BRIDGEMAN.
Nicknamed "Long Ben," or the "Arch-Pirate."

In the year 1695, when at the height of his career, Avery caught the
public's fancy as no other pirate ever did, with the possible exception of
Captain Kidd. So much so that his achievements, or supposed achievements,
formed the plot of several popular novels and plays.

Charles Johnson wrote a play called "The Successful Pyrate," which work
ran into several editions, and was acted at the Theatre Royal in Drury
Lane.

The scene in this play was laid in the Island of Madagascar, and the hero
was modelled on Captain Avery.

This pirate was a Devonshire man, being born near Plymouth about the year
1665, and was bred to the sea. He sailed on several voyages as mate aboard
a merchantman. He was later appointed first officer in an armed privateer
_The Duke_, Commander Captain Gibson, which sailed from Bristol for Spain,
being hired by the Spaniards for service in the West Indies against the
French pirates.

Avery soon plotted a mutiny, which was carried out while _The Duke_ lay at
anchor in Cadiz Harbour; the ship was seized, and the captain put ashore.
Avery was elected captain, and he renamed the ship the _Charles the
Second_. For more than a year Avery sailed in this vessel, preying without
distinction upon persons of all nations and religions.

After leaving Spain he first sailed to the Isle of May, holding the
Portuguese governor for ransom till provisions were sent on board. He took
near here three English ships, then sailed to the coast of Guinea to
procure slaves. To catch these Avery would anchor off a village and hoist
English colours. The trusting negroes would then paddle off to the ship in
canoes, bringing gold to traffic with. At a given signal these natives
would be seized, clapped in irons, and thrown into the hold.

Avery next sailed to the Island of Princes, where he attacked two Danish
ships, and took them both. The next place the pirates touched at was
Madagascar, from there they sailed to the Red Sea to await the fleet
expected from Mocha. To pass the time and to earn an honest penny the
pirates called in at a town called Meat, there to sell to the natives some
of their stolen merchandise. But the cautious inhabitants refused to do
any business with these suspicious looking merchants, so in order to
punish them the pirates burnt down their town. They next visited Aden,
where they met two other English pirate ships, and were soon joined by
three others from America, all on the same enterprise.

Expecting the Mocha fleet to come along, they waited here, but the fleet
slipped past the pirates in the night. Avery was after them the next
morning, and catching them up, singled out the largest ship, fought her
for two hours, and took her. She proved to be the _Gunsway_, belonging to
the Great Mogul himself, and a very valuable prize, as out of her they
took 100,000 pieces of eight and a like number of chequins, as well as
several of the highest persons of the court who were passengers on a
pilgrimage to Mecca. It was rumoured that a daughter of the Great Mogul
was also on board. Accounts of this exploit eventually reached England,
and created great excitement, so that it soon became the talk of the town
that Captain Avery had taken the beautiful young princess to Madagascar,
where he had married her and was living in royal state, the proud father
of several small princes and princesses.

The Mogul was naturally infuriated at this outrage on his ship, and
threatened in retaliation to lay waste all the East India Company's
settlements.

Having got a vast booty, Avery and his friends sailed towards Madagascar,
and on the way there Avery, as admiral of the little fleet, signalled to
the captain of the other sloops to come aboard his vessel. When they
arrived Avery put before them the following ingenious scheme. He proposed
that the treasures in the two sloops should, for safety, be put into his
keeping till they all three arrived in Madagascar. This, being agreed to,
was done, but during the night, after Avery had explained matters to his
own men, he altered his course and left the sloops, and never saw them
again. He now sailed away with all the plunder to the West Indies,
arriving safely at New Providence Island in the Bahamas, where he offered
the Governor a bribe of twenty pieces of eight and two pieces of gold to
get him a pardon. Avery arrived in 1696 at Boston, where he appears to
have successfully bribed the Quaker Governor to let him and some of his
crew land with their spoils unmolested. But the pirate did not feel quite
safe, and also thought it would be wellnigh impossible to sell his
diamonds in the colony without being closely questioned as to how he came
by them. So, leaving America, he sailed to the North of Ireland, where he
sold the sloop. Here the crew finally dispersed, and Avery stopped some
time in Dublin, but was still unable to dispose of his stolen diamonds.
Thinking England would be a better place for this transaction, he went
there, and settled at Bideford in Devon. Here he lived very quietly under
a false name, and through a friend communicated with certain merchants in
Bristol. These came to see him, accepted his diamonds and some gold cups,
giving him a few pounds for his immediate wants, and took the valuables to
Bristol to sell, promising to send him the money procured for them. Time
dragged on, but nothing came from the Bristol merchants, and at last it
began to dawn on Avery that there were pirates on land as well as at sea.
His frequent letters to the merchants brought at the most but a few
occasional shillings, which were immediately swallowed up by the payment
of his debts for the bare necessities of life at Bideford. At length, when
matters were becoming desperate, Avery was taken ill and died "not being
worth as much as would buy him a coffin." Thus ended Avery, "the Grand
Pirate," whose name was known all over Europe, and who was supposed to be
reigning as a king in Madagascar when all the while he was hiding and
starving in a cottage at Bideford.


AYLETT, CAPTAIN.

This buccaneer was killed by an explosion of gunpowder on board the
_Oxford_ during a banquet of Morgan's captains off Hispaniola in 1669.


BAILY, JOB, or BAYLEY.

Of London.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged at Charleston in 1718.


BAKER, CAPTAIN.

One of Gasparilla's gang up to 1822, when they were broken up by the
United States Navy. His favourite hunting-ground was the Gulf of Mexico.


BALL, ROGER.

One of Captain Bartholomew's crew in the _Royal Fortune_. Captured by
H.M.S. _Swallow_ off the West Coast of Africa. He had been terribly burnt
by an explosion of a barrel of gunpowder, and while seated "in a private
corner, with a look as sullen as winter," a surgeon of the king's ship
came up and asked him how he came to be blown up in that frightful manner.
"Why," says he, "John Morris fired a pistol into the powder, and if he had
not done it, I would." The surgeon, with great kindness, offered to dress
the prisoner's wounds, but Ball, although in terrible pain, refused to
allow them to be touched. He died the same night.


BALLET, JOHN. Buccaneer.

Third mate on board Woodes Rogers's ship, the _Duke_, but was by
profession a surgeon, in which latter capacity he had sailed on a previous
voyage with Dampier.


BALTIZAR, CAPTAIN.

A terror to all shipping in the Gulf of Mexico in the early part of the
nineteenth century. Brought to Boston as a prisoner in 1823, taken thence
to Kingston, Jamaica, and there hanged. For some extraordinary reason the
American juries seldom would condemn a pirate to death, so that whenever
possible the pirate prisoners were handed over to the English, who made
short shift with them.


BANNISTER, CAPTAIN.

Ran away from Port Royal, Jamaica, in June, 1684, on a "privateering"
venture in a ship of thirty guns. Caught and brought back by the frigate
_Ruby_, and put on trial by the Lieutenant-Governor Molesworth, who was at
that time very active in his efforts to stamp out piracy in the West
Indies.

Bannister entirely escaped punishment, capital or otherwise, as he was
released by the grand jury on a technical point, surely most rare good
fortune for the captain in days when the law was elastic enough to fit
most crimes, and was far from lenient on piracy. Six months later the
indefatigable captain again eluded the forts, and for two years succeeded
in dodging the frigates sent out by Governor Molesworth to capture him.
Finally, in January, 1687, Captain Spragge sailed victoriously into Port
Royal with Bannister and three other buccaneers hanging at the yard-arm,
"a spectacle of great satisfaction to all good people, and of terror to
the favourers of pirates."


BARBAROSSA, or "REDBEARD" (his real name was URUJ). Barbary Corsair.

Son of a Turkish renegade and a Christian mother. Born in the Island of
Lesbon in the Ægean Sea, a stronghold of the Mediterranean pirates.

In 1504 Barbarossa made his headquarters at Tunis, in return for which he
paid the Sultan one-fifth of all the booty he took. One of his first and
boldest exploits was the capture of two richly laden galleys belonging to
Pope Julius II., on their way from Genoa to Civita Vecchia. Next year he
captured a Spanish ship with 500 soldiers on board. In 1512 he was invited
by the Moors to assist them in an attempt to retake the town and port of
Bujeya from the Spaniards. After eight days of fighting, Barbarossa lost
an arm, and the siege was given up, but he took away with him a large
Genoese ship. In 1516 Barbarossa changed his headquarters to Jijil, and
took command of an army of 6,000 men and sixteen galliots, with which he
attacked and captured the Spanish fortress of Algiers, of which he became
Sultan. Barbarossa was by now vastly rich and powerful, his fleets
bringing in prizes from Genoa, Naples, Venice, and Spain.

Eventually Charles V. of Spain sent an army of 10,000 troops to North
Africa, defeated the corsairs, and Barbarossa was slain in battle.


BARBE, CAPTAIN NICHOLAS.

Master of a Breton ship, the _Mychell_, of St. Malo, owned by Hayman
Gillard. Captured by an English ship in 1532. Her crew was made up of nine
Bretons and five Scots.


BARNARD, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

In June, 1663, this buccaneer sailed from Port Royal to the Orinoco. He
took and plundered the town of Santo Tomas, and returned the following
March.


BARNES, CAPTAIN.

In 1677 several English privateers surprised and sacked the town of Santa
Marta in the Spanish Main. To save the town from being burnt, the
Governor and Bishop became hostages until a ransom had been paid. These
the pirates, under the command of Captains Barnes and Coxon, carried back
to Jamaica and delivered up to Lord Vaughan, the Governor of the island.
Vaughan treated the Bishop well, and hired a vessel specially to send him
back to Castagona, for which kindness "the good old man was exceedingly
pleased."


BARNES, HENRY.

Of Barbadoes.

Tried for piracy at Newport in 1723, but found to be not guilty.


BARROW, JAMES.

Taken by Captain Roberts out of the _Martha_ snow (Captain Lady). Turned
pirate and served in the _Ranger_ in 1721.


BELLAMY, CAPTAIN CHARLES. Pirate, Socialist, and orator. A famous West
Indian filibuster.

He began life as a wrecker in the West Indies, but this business being
uncertain in its profits, and Bellamy being an ambitious young man, he
decided with his partner, Paul Williams, to aim at higher things, and to
enter the profession of piracy. Bellamy had now chosen a calling that lent
itself to his undoubted talents, and his future career, while it lasted,
was a brilliant one.

Procuring a ship, he sailed up and down the coast of Carolina and New
England, taking and plundering numerous vessels; and when this
neighbourhood became too hot for him he would cruise for a while in the
cooler climate of Newfoundland.

Bellamy had considerable gifts for public speaking, and seldom missed an
opportunity of addressing the assembled officers and crews of the ships
he took, before liberating or otherwise disposing of them.

His views were distinctly Socialistic. On one occasion, in an address to a
Captain Beer, who had pleaded to have his sloop returned to him, Captain
Bellamy, after clearing his throat, began as follows: "I am sorry," he
said, "that you can't have your sloop again, for I scorn to do anyone any
mischief--when it is not to my advantage--though you are a sneaking puppy,
and so are all those who will submit to be governed by laws which rich men
have made for their own security, for the cowardly whelps have not the
courage otherwise to defend what they get by their knavery. But damn ye
altogether for a pack of crafty rascals, and you, who serve them, for a
parcel of hen-hearted numbskulls! They vilify us, the scoundrels do, when
there is the only difference that they rob the poor under cover of the
law, forsooth, and we plunder the rich under the protection of our own
courage. Had you not better make one of us than sneak after these villains
for employment?"

Bellamy's fall came at last at the hands of a whaler captain. At the time
he was in command of the _Whidaw_ and a small fleet of other pirate craft,
which was lying at anchor in the Bay of Placentia in Newfoundland. Sailing
from Placentia for Nantucket Shoals, he seized a whaling vessel, the _Mary
Anne_. As the skipper of the whaler knew the coast well, Bellamy made him
pilot of his small fleet. The cunning skipper one night ran his ship on to
a sand-bank near Eastman, Massachusetts, and the rest of the fleet
followed his stern light on to the rocks. Almost all the crews perished,
only seven of the pirates being saved. These were seized and brought to
trial, condemned, and hanged at Boston in 1726. The days spent between the
sentence and the hanging were not wasted, for we read in a contemporary
account that "by the indefatigable pains of a pious and learned divine,
who constantly attended them, they were at length, by the special grace of
God, made sensible of and truly penitent for the enormous crimes they had
been guilty of."


BELVIN, JAMES.

Bo'son to Captain Gow, the pirate. He had the reputation of being a good
sailor but a bloodthirsty fellow. Was hanged at Wapping in June, 1725.


BEME, FRANCIS.

In 1539 this Baltic pirate was cruising off Antwerp, waiting to waylay
English merchant vessels.


BENDALL, GEORGE, or BENDEALL.

A flourishing pirate, whose headquarters, in the early eighteenth century,
were in New Providence Island.

In the year 1717, King George offered a free pardon to all freebooters who
would come in and give themselves up. But the call of the brotherhood was
too strong for a few of the "old hands," and Bendall, amongst others, was
off once again to carry on piracy around the Bahama and Virgin Islands.
Within a few years these last "die-hards" were all killed, drowned,
caught, or hanged.


BENNETT, WILLIAM.

An English soldier, who deserted from Fort Loyal, Falmouth, Marne, in
1689, and joined the pirate Pounds. Was sent to prison at Boston, where he
died.


BILL, PHILIP.

Belonged to the Island of St. Thomas.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Hanged at the age of 27.


BISHOP.

An Irishman. Chief mate to the pirate Captain Cobham.


BISHOP, CAPTAIN.

In 1613, Bishop and a few other English seamen set up as pirates at
Marmora on the Barbary Coast.


BISHOP, WILLIAM.

One of Avery's crew. Hanged at Execution Dock in 1691.


BLADS, WILLIAM.

Born in Rhode Island.

One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Hanged at Newport on July 19th,
1723. Age 28.


BLAKE, BENJAMIN.

A Boston boy, taken prisoner with Captain Pounds's crew at Tarpaulin Cove.


BLAKE, JAMES.

One of Captain Teach's crew. Hanged in 1718 at Virginia.


BLEWFIELD, CAPTAIN, or BLAUVELT.

In 1649 this Dutch pirate brought a prize into Newport, Rhode Island. In
1663 was known to be living among the friendly Indians at Cape Gratia de
Dios on the Spanish Main. He commanded a barque carrying three guns and a
crew of fifty men. He was very active in the logwood cutting in Honduras.
Whether the town and river of Bluefield take their name from this pirate
is uncertain, but the captain must many a time have gone up the river into
the forests of Nicaragua on his logwood cutting raids.


BLOT, CAPTAIN. French filibuster.

In 1684 was in command of _La Quagone_, ninety men, eight guns.


BOLIVAR, LIEUTENANT.

This Portuguese pirate was first officer to Captain Jonnia. He was a
stout, well-built man of swarthy complexion and keen, ferocious eyes, huge
black whiskers and beard, and a tremendously loud voice. He took the
Boston schooner _Exertion_ at Twelve League Key on December 17th, 1821.


BOND, CAPTAIN.

Of Bristol.

In 1682 arrived at the Cape Verde Islands. Having procured leave to land
on Mayo Island, on the pretence of being an honest merchant in need of
provisions, particularly of beef and goats, Bond and his crew seized and
carried away some of the principal inhabitants. A year later John Cooke
and Cowley arrived at Mayo in the _Revenge_, but were prevented by the
inhabitants from landing owing to their recent treatment at the hands of
Bond.


BONNET, MAJOR STEDE, _alias_ CAPTAIN THOMAS, _alias_ EDWARDS.

The history of this pirate is both interesting and unique. He was not
brought up to the seafaring life; in fact, before he took to piracy, he
had already retired from the Army, with the rank of Major. He owned
substantial landed property in Barbadoes, lived in a fine house, was
married, and much respected by the quality and gentry of that island. His
turning pirate naturally greatly scandalized his neighbours, and they
found it difficult at first to imagine whatever had caused this sudden and
extraordinary resolution, particularly in a man of his position in
Society. But when the cause at last came to be known, he was more pitied
than blamed, for it was understood that the Major's mind had become
unbalanced owing to the unbridled nagging of Mrs. Bonnet. Referring to
this, the historian Captain Johnson writes as follows: "He was afterwards
rather pitty'd than condemned, by those that were acquainted with him,
believing that this Humour of going a-pyrating proceeded from a Disorder
in his Mind, which had been but too visible in him, some Time before this
wicked Undertaking; and which is said to have been occasioned by some
Discomforts he found in a married State; be that as it will, the Major was
but ill qualified for the Business, as not understanding maritime
Affairs." Whatever the cause of the Major's "disorder of mind," the fact
remains that at his own expense he fitted out a sloop armed with ten guns
and a crew of seventy men. The fact that he honestly paid in cash for this
ship is highly suspicious of a deranged mind, since no other pirate, to
the writer's knowledge, ever showed such a nicety of feeling, but always
stole the ship in which to embark "on the account." The Major, to satisfy
the curious, gave out that he intended to trade between the islands, but
one night, without a word of farewell to Mrs. Bonnet, he sailed out of
harbour in the _Revenge_, as he called his ship, and began to cruise off
the coast of Virginia. For a rank amateur, Bonnet met with wonderful
success, as is shown by a list of the prizes he took and plundered in this
first period of his piracy:

The _Anne_, of Glasgow (Captain Montgomery).

The _Turbet_, of Barbadoes, which, after plundering, he burnt, as he did
all prizes from Barbadoes.

The _Endeavour_ (Captain Scott).

The _Young_, of Leith.

The plunder out of these ships he sold at Gardiner Island, near New York.

Cruising next off the coast of Carolina, Bonnet took a brace of prizes,
but began to have trouble with his unruly crew, who, seeing that their
captain knew nothing whatever of sea affairs, took advantage of the fact
and commenced to get out of hand. Unluckily for Bonnet, he at this time
met with the famous Captain Teach, or Blackbeard, and the latter, quickly
appreciating how matters stood, ordered the Major to come aboard his own
ship, while he put his lieutenant, Richards, to command Bonnet's vessel.
The poor Major was most depressed by this undignified change in his
affairs, until Blackbeard lost his ship in Topsail Inlet, and finding
himself at a disadvantage, promptly surrendered to the King's proclamation
and allowed Bonnet to reassume command of his own sloop. But Major Bonnet
had been suffering from qualms of conscience latterly, so he sailed to
Bath Town in North Carolina, where he, too, surrendered to the Governor
and received his certificate of pardon. Almost at once news came of war
being declared between England and France with Spain, so Bonnet hurried
back to Topsail, and was granted permission to take back his sloop and
sail her to St. Thomas's Island, to receive a commission as a privateer
from the French Governor of that island. But in the meanwhile Teach had
robbed everything of any value out of Bonnet's ship, and had marooned
seventeen of the crew on a sandy island, but these were rescued by the
Major before they died of starvation. Just as the ship was ready to sail,
a bumboat came alongside to sell apples and cider to the sloop's crew, and
from these they got an interesting piece of news. They learnt that Teach,
with a crew of eighteen men, was at that moment lying at anchor in
Ocricock Inlet. The Major, longing to revenge the insult he had suffered
from Blackbeard, and his crew remembering how he had left them to die on a
desert island, went off in search of Teach, but failed to find him. Stede
Bonnet having received his pardon in his own name, now called himself
Captain Thomas and again took to piracy, and evidently had benefited by
his apprenticeship with Blackbeard, for he was now most successful, taking
many prizes off the coast of Virginia, and later in Delaware Bay.

Bonnet now sailed in a larger ship, the _Royal James_, so named from
feelings of loyalty to the Crown. But she proved to be very leaky, and the
pirates had to take her to the mouth of Cape Fear River for repairs. News
of this being carried to the Council of South Carolina, arrangements were
made to attempt to capture the pirate, and a Colonel William Rhet, at his
own expense, fitted out two armed sloops, the _Henry_ (eight guns and
seventy men) and the _Sea Nymph_ (eight guns and sixty men), both sailing
under the direct command of the gallant Colonel. On September 25th, 1718,
the sloops arrived at Cape Fear River, and there sure enough was the
_Royal James_, with three sloops lying at anchor behind the bar. The
pirate tried to escape by sailing out, but was followed by the Colonel's
two vessels until all three ran aground within gunshot of each other. A
brisk fight took place for five hours, when the Major struck his colours
and surrendered. There was great public rejoicing in Charleston when, on
October 3rd, Colonel Rhet sailed victoriously into the harbour with his
prisoners. But next day Bonnet managed to escape out of prison and sailed
to Swillivant's Island. The indefatigable Colonel Rhet again set out after
the Major, and again caught him and brought him back to Charleston.

The trial of Stede Bonnet and his crew began on October 28th, 1718, at
Charleston, and continued till November 12th, the Judge being Nicholas
Trot. Bonnet was found guilty and condemned to be hanged. Judge Trot made
a speech of overwhelming length to the condemned, full of Biblical
quotations, to each of which the learned magistrate gave chapter and
verse. In November, 1718, the gallant, if unfortunate, Major was hanged at
White Point, Charleston.

Apart from the unusual cause for his turning pirate, Bonnet is interesting
as being almost the only case known, otherwise than in books of romance,
of a pirate making his prisoners walk the plank.


BONNY, ANNE. Female pirate.

Anne was born in County Cork, and her father was an Attorney-at-Law, who
practised his profession in that city, her mother being lady's maid to the
attorney's lawful wife.

The story of the events which led to the existence of Anne may be read in
Johnson's "History of the Pyrates," where it is recounted in a style quite
suggestive of Fielding. In spite of its sad deficiency in moral tone, the
narrative is highly diverting. But as this work is strictly confined to
the history of the pirates and not to the amorous intrigues of their
forbears, we will skip these pre-natal episodes and come to the time when
the attorney, having lost a once flourishing legal practice, sailed from
Ireland to Carolina to seek a fortune there, taking his little daughter
Anne with him. In new surroundings fortune favoured the attorney, and he
soon owned a rich plantation, and his daughter kept house for him.

Anne was now grown up and a fine young woman, but had a "fierce and
courageous temper," which more than once led her into scrapes, as, on one
occasion, when in a sad fit of temper, she slew her English servant-maid
with a case-knife. But except for these occasional outbursts of passion
she was a good and dutiful girl. Her father now began to think of finding
a suitable young man to be a husband for Anne, which would not be hard to
do, since Anne, besides her good looks, was his heir and would be well
provided for by him. But Anne fell in love with a good-looking young
sailor who arrived one day at Charleston, and, knowing her father would
never consent to such a match, the lovers were secretly married, in the
expectation that, the deed being done, the father would soon become
reconciled to it. But on the contrary, the attorney, on being told the
news, turned his daughter out of doors and would have nothing more to do
with either of them. The bridegroom, finding his heiress worth not a
groat, did what other sailors have done before and since, and slipped away
to sea without so much as saying good-bye to his bride. But a more gallant
lover soon hove in sight, the handsome, rich, dare-devil pirate, Captain
John Rackam, known up and down the coast as "Calico Jack." Jack's methods
of courting and taking a ship were similar--no time wasted, straight up
alongside, every gun brought to play, and the prize seized. Anne was soon
swept off her feet by her picturesque and impetuous lover, and consented
to go to sea with him in his ship, but disguised herself in sailor's
clothes before going on board. The lovers sailed together on a piratical
honeymoon until certain news being conveyed to Captain Rackam by his
bride, he sailed to Cuba and put Anne ashore at a small cove, where he had
a house and also friends, who he knew would take good care of her. But
before long Anne was back in the pirate ship, as active as any of her male
shipmates with cutlass and marlinspike, always one of the leaders in
boarding a prize.

However, the day of retribution was at hand. While cruising near Jamaica
in October, 1720, the pirates were surprised by the sudden arrival of an
armed sloop, which had been sent out by the Governor of that island for
the express purpose of capturing Rackam and his crew. A fight followed, in
which the pirates behaved in a most cowardly way, and were soon driven
below decks, all but Anne Bonny and another woman pirate, Mary Read, who
fought gallantly till taken prisoners, all the while flaunting their male
companions on their cowardly conduct. The prisoners were carried to
Jamaica and tried for piracy at St. Jago de la Vega, and convicted on
November 28th, 1720. Anne pleaded to have her execution postponed for
reasons of her condition of health, and this was allowed, and she never
appears to have been hanged, though what her ultimate fate was is unknown.
On the day that her lover Rackam was hanged he obtained, by special
favour, permission to see Anne, but must have derived little comfort from
the farewell interview, for all he got in the way of sympathy from his
lady love were these words--that "she was sorry to see him there, but if
he had fought like a Man, he need not have been hang'd like a Dog."


BOON, JOHN.

Member of the Council of Carolina under Governor Colleton, and expelled
from it "for holding correspondence with pirates," 1687.


BOOTH, SAMUEL.

Of Charleston, Carolina.

One of Major Bonnet's crew. Hanged at Charleston, South Carolina, in 1718.


BOURNANO, CAPTAIN, or DE BERNANOS.

In 1679 this famous French filibuster commanded a ship of ninety tons,
armed with six guns, and manned by a crew of eighty-six French sailors.
Joined Captain Bartholomew Sharp when he was preparing his expedition to
assault the town of Santa Maria. Bournano was a useful ally, as he was
much liked by the Darien Indians, but his crew quarrelled with the English
buccaneers, and they left Sharp's company. In the year 1684, Bournano,
known by then as Le Sieur de Bernanos, commanded a ship, _La Schite_,
carrying a crew of sixty men and armed with eight guns.


LA BOUSE, CAPTAIN OLIVER, or DE LA BOUCHE.

French pirate.

When Captain Howel Davis had taken and sacked the fort at Gambia and with
his crew was spending a day in revelry, a ship was reported, bearing down
on them in full sail. The pirates prepared to fight her, when she ran up
the Black Flag and proved to be a French pirate ship of fourteen guns and
sixty-four hands, half French and half negroes, commanded by Captain La
Bouse. A great many civilities passed between the two captains, and they
agreed to sail down the coast together. Arriving at Sierra Leone, they
found a tall ship lying at anchor. This ship they attacked, firing a
broadside, when she also ran up the Black Flag, being the vessel of the
notorious Captain Cocklyn. For the next two days the three captains and
their crews "spent improving their acquaintance and friendship," which was
the pirate expression for getting gloriously drunk. On the third day they
attacked and took the African Company's Fort. Shortly afterwards the three
captains quarrelled, and each went his own way. In 1718 La Bouse was at
New Providence Island. In 1720 this pirate commanded the _Indian Queen_,
250 tons, armed with twenty-eight guns, and a crew of ninety men. Sailing
from the Guinea Coast to the East Indies, de la Bouche lost his ship on
the Island of Mayotta, near Madagascar.

The captain and forty men set about building a new vessel, while the
remainder went off in canoes to join Captain England's pirates at Johanna.


BOWEN.

A Bristol man. In 1537, when the Breton pirates were becoming very daring
along the south coast of England and Wales, Bowen contrived to capture
fourteen of these robbers, who had landed near Tenby, and had them put in
prison.


BOWEN, CAPTAIN JOHN.

The practice of this South Sea pirate extended from Madagascar to Bengal.
He commanded a good ship, the _Speaker_, a French vessel, owned by an
English company interested in the slave trade, which Bowen had captured by
a cunning ruse. He afterwards lost his ship off Mauritius, but was well
treated by the Dutch Governor, who supplied doctors, medicine, and food to
the shipwrecked pirates. After three months' hospitality on the island,
Bowen procured a sloop, and in March, 1701, sailed for Madagascar. As a
parting friendly gift to the Governor, he gave him 2,500 pieces of eight
and the wreck of the _Speaker_, with all the guns and stores. On arriving
at Madagascar, Bowen erected a fort and built a town. Shortly after this a
ship, the _Speedy Return_, and a brigantine were so very thoughtless as to
put into the port, and paid for this thoughtlessness by being promptly
seized by Bowen. With these two vessels Bowen and his merry men went
"a-pyrating" again, and with great success, for in a short time they had
gathered together over a million dollars in coin, as well as vast
quantities of valuable merchandise. The pirates then, most wisely,
considering that they had succeeded well enough, settled down amongst
their Dutch friends in the Island of Mauritius to a quiet and comfortable
life on shore.


BOWMAN, WILLIAM.

A seaman; one of the party which crossed the Isthmus of Darien on foot
with Dampier in 1681. Wafer records that Bowman, "a weakly Man, a Taylor
by trade," slipped while crossing a swollen river, and was carried off by
the swift current, and nearly drowned by the weight of a satchel he
carried containing 400 pieces of eight.


BOYD, ROBERT.

Of Bath Town, North Carolina.

Sailed with Major Stede Bonnet in the _Royal James_. Hanged on November
8th, 1718, at Charleston.


BOYZA.

A Columbian.

One of Captain Gilbert's crew in the _Panda_. Hanged at Boston in June,
1835.


BRADISH, CAPTAIN JOSEPH.

A notorious pirate. Born at Cambridge, Massachusetts, on November 28th,
1672. In March, 1689, was in London out of a berth, and shipped as mate in
the hake-boat _Adventure_, bound for Borneo on an interloping trade.

In September, 1698, when most of the officers and passengers were ashore
at the Island of Polonais, Bradish and the crew cut the cable and ran away
with the ship. The crew shared the money which was found in the
bread-room, and which filled nine chests, amounting to about 3,700 Spanish
dollars.

Bradish sailed the _Adventure_ to Long Island, arriving there on March
19th, 1699. After leaving their money and jewels on Nassau Island, they
sank their ship. Most of the crew bought horses at the neighbouring
farmhouses and disappeared. Bradish and a few others were rash enough to
go to Massachusetts, where they were promptly arrested and placed in the
Boston Gaol. But the gaolkeeper, one Caleb Ray, was a relation of Bradish,
and allowed him to escape. An offer of a reward of £200 brought the
escaped prisoner back, and he sailed in irons on H.M.S. _Advice_, with
Kidd and other pirates, to England, and was hanged in chains in London at
Hope Dock in 1700.


BRADLEY, GEORGE.

Master of Captain Fenn's ship, the _Morning Star_, wrecked on the Grand
Caymans in August, 1722. The crew got ashore on an island and hid in the
woods. Bradley and the other pirates afterwards surrendered themselves to
an English sloop, and were carried to Bermuda. Bradley escaped to England,
and was last heard of at Bristol.


BREAKES, CAPTAIN HIRAM.

This Dutch pirate was the second son of a well-to-do councillor of the
Island of Saba in the West Indies. Hiram was appointed in the year 1764 to
a ship which traded between that island and Amsterdam. In the latter port,
Hiram, who was now 19 years of age and a handsome fellow standing over six
feet in height, fell in love with a certain Mrs. Snyde.

Getting command of a small ship that traded between Schiedam, in Holland,
and Lisbon, Breakes for some time sailed between these ports. Returning to
Amsterdam, he and Mrs. Snyde murdered that lady's husband, but at the
trial managed to get acquitted.

Breakes's next exploit was to steal his employer's ship and cargo and go
out as a pirate, naming his vessel the _Adventure_. His first exploit was
a daring one. Sailing into Vigo Harbour in full view of the forts, he
seized a vessel, the _Acapulco_, lately come from Valparaiso, and took her
off. On plundering her they found 200,000 small bars of gold, each about
the size of a man's finger. The captain and crew of this Chilian vessel
were all murdered. Breakes preferred the _Acapulco_ to his own ship, so he
fitted her up and sailed in her to the Mediterranean.

Breakes was one of the religious variety of pirate, for after six days of
robbing and throat-slitting he would order his crew to clean themselves on
the Sabbath and gather on the quarter-deck, where he would read prayers to
them and would often preach a sermon "after the Lutheran style," thus
fortifying the brave fellows for another week of toil and bloodshed.

Gifted with unlimited boldness, Breakes called in at Gibraltar and
requested the Governor to grant him a British privateer's commission,
which the Governor did "for a consideration." Sailing in the neighbourhood
of the Balearic Islands, he took a few ships, when one day, spying a
nunnery by the sea-shore in Minorca, he proposed to his crew that they
should fit themselves out with a wife apiece.

This generous offer was eagerly accepted, and the crew, headed by Captain
Breakes, marched up to the nunnery unopposed, and were welcomed at the
door by the lady abbess. Having entered the peaceful cloister, each pirate
chose a nun and marched back to the ship with their spoils. Soon after
this Breakes decided to retire from piracy, and returned to Amsterdam to
claim Mrs. Snyde. But he found that she had but lately been hanged for
poisoning her little son, of which the pirate was father. This tragedy so
preyed upon the mind of Captain Breakes that he turned "melancholy mad"
and drowned himself in one of the many dykes with which that city abounds.


BRECK, JOHN.

One of the crew of the brigantine _Charles_ (Captain John Quelch). Tried
for piracy at Boston in 1704.


BREHA, CAPTAIN, _alias_ LANDRESSON.


BRENNINGHAM, CAPTAIN.

Of Jamaica and Tortuga.

In 1663 commanded a frigate of six guns and seventy men.


BRIERLY, JOHN, _alias_ TIMBERHEAD.

Of Bath Town in North Carolina.

One of the crew of the _Royal James_. Hanged at Charleston in November,
1718.


BRIGHT, JOHN.

Of St. Margaret's, Westminster.

One of the crew of Captain Charles Harris. Hanged at Newport, Rhode
Island, in July, 1723, at the age of 25.


BRINKLEY, JAMES.

Of Suffolk, England.

One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Hanged for piracy at Newport, Rhode
Island, on July 19th, 1723. Age 28.


BRODLEY, CAPTAIN JOSEPH, or BRADLEY, sometimes called
"Lieutenant-Colonel." "An ancient and expert pirate."

Appointed Vice-Admiral by Morgan in his expedition up the Chagre River. He
was a tough old pirate, and had proved himself a terror to the Spaniards,
particularly when Mansvelt took the Isle of St. Catharine. In 1676 Brodley
was sent by Morgan to capture the Castle of Chagre, a very strongly
garrisoned fort. All day the pirates kept up a furious attack, but were
driven back. At last, when it seemed impossible for the pirates ever to
succeed in entering the castle, a remarkable accident happened which
altered the whole issue. One of the pirates was wounded by an arrow in his
back, which pierced his body and came out the opposite side. This he
instantly pulled out at the side of his breast; then, taking a little
cotton, he wound it about the arrow, and, putting it into his musket, he
shot it back into the castle. The cotton, kindled by the powder, set fire
to several houses within the castle, which, being thatched with
palm-leaves, took fire very easily. This fire at last reached the powder
magazine, and a great explosion occurred. Owing to this accident of the
arrow the pirates were eventually able to take the Castle of Chagre. This
was one of the finest and bravest defences ever made by the Spaniards. Out
of 314 Spanish soldiers in the castle, only thirty survived, all the rest,
including the Governor, being killed. Brodley was himself severely wounded
in this action and died as a consequence ten days later.


BROOKS, JOSEPH (senior).

One of Blackbeard's crew in the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Killed on November
22nd, 1718, at North Carolina.


BROOKS, JOSEPH (junior).

One of Blackbeard's crew in the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Taken prisoner by
Lieutenant Maynard on November 22nd, 1718. Carried to Virginia, where he
was tried and hanged.


BROWN, CAPTAIN.

A notorious latter-day pirate, who "worked" the east coast of Central
America in the early part of the nineteenth century.


BROWN, CAPTAIN.

On July 24th, 1702, sailed from Jamaica in command of the _Blessing_--ten
guns and crew of seventy-nine men, with the famous Edward Davis on
board--to attack the town of Tolu on the Spanish Main. The town was taken
and plundered, but Brown was killed, being shot through the head.


BROWN, CAPTAIN NICHOLAS.

Surrendered to the King's pardon for pirates at New Providence, Bahamas,
in 1718. Soon afterwards he surrendered to the Spanish Governor of Cuba,
embraced the Catholic faith, and turned pirate once more; and was very
active in attacking English ships off the Island of Jamaica.


BROWN, JOHN.

Of Durham, England.

One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Hanged at the age of 29 years at
Newport, Rhode Island, in 1723.


BROWN, JOHN.

Of Liverpool.

One of Captain Harris's crew. Found guilty of piracy at Newport, Rhode
Island, in 1723, but recommended to the King's favour, perhaps in view of
his age, being but 17 years old.


BROWNE, CAPTAIN JAMES.

A Scotchman.

In 1677, when in command of a mixed crew of English, Dutch, and French
pirates, he took a Dutch ship trading in negroes off the coast of
Cartagena. The Dutch captain and several of his crew were killed, while
the cargo of 150 negroes was landed in a remote bay on the coast of
Jamaica.

Lord Vaughan sent a frigate, which captured about a hundred of the negro
slaves and also Browne and eight of his pirate crew. The captain and crew
were tried for piracy and condemned. The crew were pardoned, but Browne
was ordered to be executed. The captain appealed to the Assembly to have
the benefit of the Act of Privateers, and the House of Assembly twice sent
a committee to the Governor to beg a reprieve. Lord Vaughan refused this
and ordered the immediate execution of Browne. Half an hour after the
hanging the provost-marshal appeared with an order, signed by the Speaker,
to stop the execution.


BROWNE, EDWARD.

Of York River, Virginia.

One of Captain Pounds's crew. Wounded at Tarpaulin Cove in 1689.


BROWNE, JOHN, _alias_ MAMME.

An English sailor who joined the Barbary pirates at Algiers and turned
Mohammedan. Taken in the _Exchange_ in 1622 and carried a prisoner to
Plymouth.


BROWNE, RICHARD. Surgeon.

Surgeon-General in Morgan's fleet which carried the buccaneers to the
Spanish Main. He wrote an account of the disastrous explosion on board the
_Oxford_ during a banquet given to Morgan and the buccaneer commanders on
January 2nd, 1669, off Cow Island to the south of Hispaniola, at which the
details were being discussed for an attack on Cartagena.

Browne writes: "I was eating my dinner with the rest when the mainmasts
blew out and fell upon Captains Aylett and Bigford and others and knocked
them on the head. I saved myself by getting astride the mizzenmast." Only
Morgan and those who sat on his side of the dinner-table were saved.

Browne, who certainly was not biased towards Morgan in his accounts of his
exploits, is one of the few narrators who gives the buccaneer Admiral
credit for moderation towards his prisoners, particularly women.


BUCK, ELEAZER.

One of Captain Pounds's crew. Tried at Boston in 1689 for piracy and found
guilty, but pardoned on payment of a fine of twenty marks.


BUCKENHAM, CAPTAIN.

In 1679 sailed from England to the West Indies. He was taken by the
Spaniards off Campeachy and carried to Mexico. A seaman, Russel, also a
prisoner there, and who escaped afterwards, reported to Lionel Wafer that
he last saw Captain Buckenham with a log chained to his leg and a basket
on his back, crying bread about the streets of the city of Mexico for his
master, a baker.


BULL, CAPTAIN DIXEY.

Born in London of a respectable family, and in 1631 went to Boston, where
he received a grant of land at York on the coast of Maine. Became a
"trader for bever" in New England. In June, 1632, while in Penobscot Bay,
a French pinnace arrived and seized his shallop and stock of "coats,
ruggs, blanketts, bisketts, etc." Annoyed by this high-handed behaviour,
Bull collected together a small crew and turned pirate, thus being the
very first pirate on the New England coast. Bull took several small
vessels, and was not caught by the authorities, who sent out small armed
sloops to search for him, and nothing more was heard of this pioneer
pirate after 1633, although rumour said that he had reached England in
safety.


BULL, MR.

A member of the crew of Coxon's canoe, he was killed in the famous attack
by the buccaneers on the Spanish Fleet off Panama in 1680.


BULLOCK. Surgeon.

One of the crew at the second disastrous attack by Captain Sharp on the
town of Arica, when the buccaneers were driven out of the town. All
escaped who could, except the surgeons, who, in a most unprofessional way,
had been indulging somewhat freely in the wines of the country during the
battle, and consequently were in no condition to take their places with
the retreating force. The surgeons, after being taken prisoner, were
persuaded to disclose to the Spaniards the prearranged signals by smoke
from two fires, which was to be given in case of a successful taking of
the town, to bring up the boats that were hiding on the shore, ready to
take the buccaneers back to their ships. Fortunately the buccaneers on the
shore arrived just as the canoes were getting under way, otherwise the
whole remnant of them would have perished. The only one of these
disreputable surgeons whose name we know is Dr. Bullock. Some months
afterwards it was ascertained, through a prisoner, that the Spaniards
"civilly entertained these surgeons, more especially the women." Surgeons,
even such surgeons as these, were considered to be valuable in those days
in the out-of-the-way Spanish colonies.


BUNCE, CHARLES.

Born at Exeter; died at the age of 26.

Taken by Captain Roberts out of a Dutch galley in 1721, he joined the
pirates, to be eventually hanged in 1722. He made a moving speech from the
gallows, "disclaiming against the guilded Bates of Power, Liberty, and
Wealth that had ensnared him amongst the pirates," earnestly exhorting the
spectators to remember his youth, and ending by declaring that "he stood
there as a beacon upon a Rock" (the gallows standing on one) "to warn
erring Marriners of Danger."


BURDER, WILLIAM.

Mayor of Dover.

It may seem strange to accuse the mayor of so important a seaport as Dover
of being a pirate, but it is difficult to see how William Burder is to
escape the accusation when we learn that in the year 1563 he captured 600
French vessels and a large number of neutral craft, which he plundered,
and also no fewer than sixty-one Spanish ships, to the very natural
annoyance of the King of Spain, whose country was at this time at peace
with England.


BURGESS, CAPTAIN SAMUEL SOUTH.

Born and bred in New York, he was a man of good education, and began his
career on a privateer in the West Indies. Later on he was sent by a Mr.
Philips, owner and shipbuilder, to trade with the pirates in Madagascar.
This business Burgess augmented with a little piracy on his own account,
and after taking several prizes he returned to the West Indies, where he
disposed of his loot. He then proceeded to New York, and, purposely
wrecking his vessel at Sandy Hook, landed in the guise of an honest
shipwrecked mariner.

Burgess settled down for a time to a well-earned rest, and married a
relative of his employer, Mr. Philips.

Philips sent him on two further voyages, both of which were run on
perfectly honest lines, and were most successful both to owner and
captain. But a later voyage had an unhappy ending. After successfully
trading with the pirates in Madagascar, Burgess was returning home,
carrying several pirates as passengers, who were returning to settle in
America, having made their fortunes. The ship was captured off the Cape of
Good Hope by an East Indiaman, and taken to Madras. Here the captain and
passengers were put in irons and sent to England to be tried. The case
against Burgess fell through, and he was liberated. Instead of at once
getting away, he loitered about London until one unlucky day he ran across
an old pirate associate called Culliford, on whose evidence Burgess was
again arrested, tried, and condemned to death, but pardoned at the last
moment by the Queen, through the intercession of the Bishop of London.
After a while he procured the post of mate in the _Neptune_, a Scotch
vessel, which was to go to Madagascar to trade liquors with the pirates
who had their headquarters in that delectable island. On arrival at
Madagascar a sudden hurricane swept down, dismasted the _Neptune_, and
sank two pirate ships. The chief pirate, Halsey, as usual, proved himself
a man of resource. Seeing that without a ship his activities were severely
restricted, he promptly, with the help of his faithful and willing crew,
seized the _Neptune_, this satisfactory state of affairs being largely
facilitated by the knowledge that the mate, Burgess, was all ripe to go on
the main chance once more. The first venture of this newly formed crew was
most successful, as they seized a ship, the _Greyhound_, which lay in the
bay, the owners of which had but the previous day bought--and paid for--a
valuable loading of merchandise from the pirates. This was now taken back
by the pirates, who, having refitted the _Neptune_, set forth seeking
fresh adventures and prizes. The further history of Burgess is one of
constant change and disappointment.

While serving under a Captain North, he was accused of betraying some of
his associates, and was robbed of all his hard-earned savings. For several
years after this he lived ashore at a place in Madagascar called
Methalage, until captured by some Dutch rovers, who soon after were
themselves taken by French pirates. Burgess, with his former Dutch
captain, was put ashore at Johanna, where, under the former's expert
knowledge, a ship was built and sailed successfully to Youngoul, where
Burgess got a post as third mate on a ship bound to the West Indies.
Before sailing, Burgess was sent, on account of his knowledge of the
language, as ambassador to the local King. Burgess, unfortunately for
himself, had in the past said some rather unkind things about this
particular ruler, and the offended monarch, in revenge, gave Burgess some
poisoned liquor to drink, which quickly brought to an end an active if
chequered career.


BURGESS, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

One of the pirates of the Bahama Islands who surrendered to King George in
1718 and received the royal pardon. He was afterwards drowned at sea.


BURK, CAPTAIN.

An Irishman, who committed many piracies on the coast of Newfoundland.
Drowned in the Atlantic during a hurricane in 1699.


CACHEMARÉE, CAPTAIN. French filibuster.

Commanded the _St. Joseph_, of six guns and a crew of seventy men. In 1684
had his headquarters at San Domingo.


CÆSAR.

A negro. One of Teach's crew hanged at Virginia in 1718. Cæsar, who was
much liked and trusted by Blackbeard, had orders from him to blow up the
_Queen Ann's Revenge_ by dropping a lighted match into the powder magazine
in case the ship was taken by Lieutenant Maynard. Cæsar attempted to carry
out his instructions, but was prevented from doing so by two of the
surrendered pirates.


CÆSAR, CAPTAIN.

One of Gasparilla's gang of pirates who hunted in the Gulf of Mexico. His
headquarters were on Sanibel Island.


CALLES, CAPTAIN JOHN, or CALLIS.

A notorious Elizabethan pirate, whose activities were concentrated on the
coast of Wales.

We quote Captain John Smith, the founder of Virginia, who writes: "This
Ancient pirate Callis, who most refreshed himselfe upon the Coast of
Wales, who grew famous, till Queene Elizabeth of Blessed Memory, hanged
him at Wapping."

Calles did not die on the gallows without an attempt at getting let off.
He wrote a long and ingenious letter to Lord Walsyngham, bewailing his
former wicked life and promising, if spared, to assist in ridding the
coast of pirates by giving particulars of "their roads, haunts, creeks,
and maintainers." One of the chief of these "maintainers," or receivers of
stolen property, was Lord O'Sullivan, or the Sulivan Bere of Berehaven.
In spite of a long and very plausible plea for pity, this "ancient and
wicked pyrate" met his fate on the gibbet at Wapping.


CAMMOCK, WILLIAM.

A seaman under Captain Bartholomew Sharp. He died at sea on December 14th,
1679, off the coast of Chile. "His disease was occasioned by a sunfit,
gained by too much drinking on shore at La Serena; which produced in him a
_celenture_, or malignant fever and a hiccough." He was buried at sea with
the usual honours of "three French vollies."


CANDOR, RALPH.

Tried for piracy with the rest of Captain Lowther's crew at St. Kitts in
March, 1723, and acquitted.


CANNIS, _alias_ CANNIS MARCY.

A Dutch pirate who acted as interpreter to Captain Bartholomew Sharp's
South Sea Expedition. Captain Cox and Basil Ringmore took him with them
after the sacking of Hilo in 1679, to come to terms with the Spanish
cavalry over the ransoming of a sugar mill. On Friday, May 27th, 1680,
while ashore with a watering party in the Gulf of Nicoya, the interpreter,
having had, no doubt, his fill of buccaneering, ran away.


CARACCIOLI, SIGNOR, _alias_ D'AUBIGNY.

An Italian renegade priest, who became an atheist, Socialist, and
revolutionist, and was living at Naples when Captain Fourbin arrived there
in the French man-of-war _Victoire_.

Caraccioli met and made great friends with a young French apprentice in
the ship, called Misson, and a place was found for him on board. The
ex-priest proved himself to be a brave man in several engagements with
the Moors and with an English warship, and was quickly promoted to be a
petty officer.

Caraccioli, by his eloquence, soon converted most of the crew to believe
in his theories, and when Captain Fourbin was killed in an action off
Martinique with an English ship, Misson took command and appointed the
Italian to be his Lieutenant, and continued to fight the English ship to a
finish. The victorious crew then elected Misson to be their captain, and
decided to "bid defiance to all nations" and to settle on some
out-of-the-way island. Capturing another English ship off the Cape of Good
Hope, Caraccioli was put in command of her, and the whole of the English
crew voluntarily joined the pirates, and sailed to Madagascar. Here they
settled, and the Italian married the daughter of a black Island King; an
ideal republic was formed, and our hero was appointed Secretary of State.

Eventually Caraccioli died fighting during a sudden attack made on the
settlement by a neighbouring tribe.


CARMAN, THOMAS.

Of Maidstone in Kent.

Hanged at Charleston in 1718 with the rest of Major Bonnet's crew.


CARNES, JOHN.

One of Blackbeard's crew. Hanged at Virginia in 1718.


CARR, JOHN.

A Massachusetts pirate, one of Hore's crew, who was hiding in Rhode Island
in 1699.


CARTER, DENNIS.

Tried for piracy in June, 1704, at the Star Tavern in Boston. One of John
Quelch's crew.


CARTER, JOHN.

Captured by Major Sewall in the _Larimore_ galley, and brought into Salem.
One of Captain Quelch's crew. Tried at Boston in 1704.


CASTILLO.

A Columbian sailor in the schooner _Panda_. Hanged for piracy at Boston on
June 11th, 1835.


LA CATA.

A most blood-thirsty pirate and one of the last of the West Indian gangs.

In 1824, when La Cata was cruising off the Isle of Pines, his ship was
attacked by an English cutter only half his size. After a furious fight
the cutter was victorious, and returned in triumph to Jamaica with the
three survivors of the pirates as prisoners. One of these was found out at
the trial to be La Cata himself. Hanged at Kingston, Jamaica.


CHANDLER, HENRY, _alias_ RAMMETHAM RISE.

Born in Devonshire, his father kept a chandler's shop in Southwark. An
English _renegado_ at Algiers, who had turned Mohammedan and had become an
overseer in the pirates' shipyards. He was a man of some authority amongst
the Moors, and in 1621 he appointed a slave called Goodale to become
master of one of the pirate ships, the _Exchange_, in which one Rawlins
also sailed. Owing to the courage and ingenuity of the latter, the
European slaves afterwards seized the ship and brought her into Plymouth;
Chandler being thrown into gaol and afterwards hanged.


CHEESMAN, EDWARD.

Taken prisoner out of the _Dolphin_, on the Banks of Newfoundland, by the
Pirate Phillips in 1724. With the help of a fisherman called Fillmore, he
killed Phillips and ten other pirates and brought the ship into Boston
Harbour.


CHEVALLE, DANIEL.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Tried for piracy at Boston in 1704.


CHILD, THOMAS.

In the year 1723, at the age of 15, he was tried for piracy at Newport,
Rhode Island. This child must have seen scores of cold-blooded murders
committed while he sailed with Low and Harris. Found to be not guilty.


CHRISTIAN, CAPTAIN.

In 1702 the town of Tolu was sacked by Captain Brown of the _Blessing_.
Brown was killed, and Christian was elected to be captain in his stead.
Davis tells us that "Christian was an old experienced soldier and
privateer, very brave and just in all his actions." He had lived for a
long while amongst the Darien Indians, with whom he was on very friendly
terms.


CHULY, DANIEL.

Tried for piracy at Boston, Massachusetts, in 1706.


CHURCH, CHARLES.

Of St. Margaret's, Westminster.

One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Hanged on July 19th, 1723, at
Newport, Rhode Island. Age


CHURCH, EDWARD.

In 1830 he served in the brig _Vineyard_, from New Orleans to
Philadelphia. Took part in the mutiny which was planned by the notorious
pirate Charles Gibbs.


CHURCH, WILLIAM.

Of the _Gertrwycht_ of Holland.

At the trial at West Africa in 1722 of the crew of Bartholomew Roberts's,
four of the prisoners--W. Church, Phil. Haak, James White, and Nicholas
Brattle--were proved to have "served as Musick on board the _Royal
Fortune_, being taken out of several merchant ships, having had an uneasy
life of it, having sometimes their Fiddles, and often their Heads broke,
only for excusing themselves, as saying they were tired, when any Fellow
took it in his Head to demand a Tune." Acquitted.


CHURCHILL, JOHN.

One of Captain George Lowther's crew. Captured by the _Eagle_ sloop at the
Island of Blanco, not far from Tortuga.

Hanged on March 11th, 1722, at St. Kitts.


CLARKE, JONATHAN.

Of Charleston, South Carolina.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Tried for piracy at Charleston in 1718,
and found to be not guilty.


CLARKE, RICHARD, _alias_ JAFAR.

A renegade English sailor, who turned "Turk"--that is, became a
Mohammedan--and was appointed chief gunner on one of the Barbary pirate
ships. Captured in the _Exchange_, and brought into Plymouth in 1622. He
was hanged.


CLARKE, ROBERT.

Governor of New Providence, Bahama Islands. Instead of trying to stamp out
the pirates, he did all he could to encourage them, by granting letters of
marque to such men as Coxon, to go privateering, these letters being quite
illegal. The proprietors of the Bahama Islands turned Clarke out and
appointed in his place Robert Lilburne in 1682.


CLIFFORD, JOHN.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew; tried at the Star Tavern at Boston in
1704 for piracy. All the accused pleaded "Not guilty" except Clifford and
two others who turned Queen's evidence.


CLINTON, CAPTAIN.

One of the notorious sixteenth century pirates "who grew famous until
Queene Elizabeth of blessed memory, hanged them at Wapping."


COBHAM, CAPTAIN.

Of Poole in Dorsetshire.

At the age of 18 he took to smuggling. His biographer tells us that even
at this comparatively early age Cobham "was cautious and prudent, and
though he intrigued with the ladies, he managed to keep it secret." Cobham
was very successful as a smuggler, on one occasion landing a cargo of ten
thousand gallons of brandy at Poole. But a little later on his vessel was
captured by a King's cutter. This annoyed the young captain, and he bought
a cutter at Bridport, mounted fourteen guns in her, and turned pirate.
Out of his very first prize, an Indiaman, which he boarded off the Mersey,
he took a sum of £40,000, and then scuttled the ship and drowned the crew.

Cobham, calling in at Plymouth, met a damsel called Maria, whom he took on
board with him, which at first caused some murmuring amongst his crew, who
were jealous because they themselves were not able to take lady companions
with them on their voyages, for, as the same biographer sagely remarks,
"where a man is married the case is altered, no man envies him his
happiness; but where he only keeps a girl, every man says, 'I have as much
right to one as he has.'" Nevertheless, Maria proved herself a great
success, for when any member of the crew was to be punished Maria would
use her influence with the captain to get him excused or his punishment
lessened, thus winning the affection of all on board. The English Channel
becoming too dangerous for Cobham, he sailed across the Atlantic and lay
in wait for vessels between Cape Breton and Prince Edward Isle, and took
several prizes. In one of these he placed all the crew in sacks and threw
them into the sea. Maria, too, took her part in these affairs, and once
stabbed to the heart, with her own little dirk, the captain of a Liverpool
brig, the _Lion_, and on another occasion, to indulge her whim, a captain
and his two mates were tied up to the windlass while Maria shot them with
her pistol. Maria always wore naval uniform, both at sea and when in port;
in fact, she entered thoroughly into the spirit of the enterprise.

Cobham now wished to retire from the sea, but Maria urged him to further
efforts, as she had set her heart on his buying her a beautiful place in
England called Mapleton Hall, near Poole.

Maria's last act at sea was to poison the whole crew of an Indiaman, who
were prisoners in irons aboard the pirate ship.

Cobham having made a vast fortune, at last decided to settle down, and he
bought a large estate near Havre from the Duc de Chartres. It was on the
coast, and had a snug little harbour of its own, where the retired pirate
kept a small pleasure yacht in which he and Maria used to go for fishing
expeditions. One day, when they were out on one of these picnics, a West
India brig lay becalmed near by, and Cobham and his crew went on board to
visit the captain of the merchant ship. But the temptation proved too
strong, and Cobham suddenly shooting the captain, Maria and the yacht's
crew quickly despatched the rest. Carrying the prize to Bordeaux, he sold
her for a good price. This was Cobham's last act of piracy, and soon
afterwards he was made a magistrate, and presided at the county courts.
Maria, it was thought, possibly owing to remorse, poisoned herself with
laudanum and died. Cobham lived to a good old age, and eventually passed
away, leaving many descendants, who, a hundred years ago, "were moving in
the first grade at Havre."


COBHAM, MRS. MARIA.

A bloodthirsty and ambitious woman pirate, the wife of Captain Cobham,
late of Poole in Dorset.


COCKLYN, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

In 1717 was in the Bahama Islands when Woodes Rogers arrived at New
Providence Island with King George's offer of pardon to those pirates who
came in and surrendered themselves. Cocklyn, like many others, after
surrendering, fell again into their wicked ways, and ended by being
hanged. Only a year after receiving the royal pardon we hear of him being
in company with Davis and La Bouse and several other notorious pirates at
Sierra Leone, when he was in command of a tall ship of twenty-four guns.

Cocklyn ended his life on the gallows.


COFRECINA, CAPTAIN.

A notorious Spanish-American pirate who was very troublesome in the South
Atlantic in the early part of the last century. Eventually captured by
Midshipman Hull Foot of the U.S. Navy in March, 1825, at St. Thomas Isle.
Executed in Porto Rico by the terrible Spanish method of the garotte.


COLE, CAPTAIN JOHN.

Commander of the _Eagle_, _alias_ the _New York Revenge's Revenge_. Tried,
condemned, and hanged in 1718 at Charleston. His was a brilliant career
while it lasted, but was cut short after a brief and meteoric spell.


COLE, SAMUEL.

One of Captain Fly's crew. Tried and condemned for piracy at Boston in
1726. On the way to the gallows the culprits were taken to church, where
they had to listen to a long sermon from Dr. Colman, bringing home to the
wretched creatures their dreadful sins and their awful future.


COLLIER, CAPTAIN EDWARD.

Commanded the _Oxford_, a King's ship, which was sent from England to
Jamaica at the earnest request of Governor Modyford, for a "nimble
frigate," to help keep control over the increasingly turbulent buccaneers.
Collier's first act was to seize a French man-of-war, a privateer called
the _Cour Volent_, of La Rochelle, commanded by M. la Vivon, his excuse
being that the Frenchmen had robbed an English vessel of provisions.
Collier was appointed to be Morgan's Vice-Admiral, and a few days later
the _Oxford_ was blown up accidentally while a conference of buccaneer
captains was taking place.

In 1670, with six ships and 400 men, the buccaneers sailed for the Spanish
Main and sacked the city of Rio de la Hacha. Collier led the left wing in
the famous and successful attack on Panama City with the rank of colonel.

Richard Brown reports that Collier could on occasions be very cruel, and
that he even executed a Spanish friar on the battlefield after quarter had
been given to the vanquished. On their return to the coast after the
sacking of Panama, Collier was accused, with Morgan and the other
commanders, of having cheated the seamen of their fair share of the
plunder, and of deserting them, and then sailing off in the ships with the
supplies of food as well as the plunder.


COLLINS, THOMAS.

This Madagascar pirate was a carpenter by trade, who had by 1716 retired
from the sea and lived in splendour in that island. Collins was made
Governor of the pirate colony, and built a small fort for its defence,
which the pirates armed with the guns taken out of their ship, which had
by long use grown old and crazy, and was of no further use to them.


COMRY, ADAM.

Surgeon to the ship _Elizabeth_, taken by Captain Bartholomew Roberts's
squadron. Gave evidence at the trial of George Wilson and another
sea-surgeon, Scudamore, that the former had borrowed from Comry a "clean
shirt and drawers, for his better appearance and reception." When visiting
Captain Bartholomew Roberts's ship, Comry was forced to serve as surgeon
on board one of Roberts's vessels.


CONDENT, CAPTAIN, _also_ CONGDON or CONDEN.

Born at Plymouth in Devonshire.

Condent was quartermaster in a New York sloop, at the Island of New
Providence, when Governor Woodes Rogers arrived there in 1718. The captain
of the sloop seems to have thought best to leave rather than wait to
welcome the new Governor. When only a few days out, one of the crew, an
Indian, who had been cruelly treated, attempted, in revenge, to blow up
the ship. This was prevented by Condent, who with great courage leapt into
the hold and shot the Indian, but not before the latter had fired at him
and broken his arm. The crew, to show the relief they felt at being saved
from a sudden death, hacked to pieces the body of the Indian, while the
gunner, ripping open the dead man's belly, tore out his heart, which he
boiled and ate.

Turning their attention from cannibalism to piracy, the pirates took a
prize, the _Duke of York_, but disputes arising, the captain and part of
the crew sailed in the prize, while Condent was elected captain of the
sloop, and headed across the Atlantic for the Cape Verde Islands, where he
found the salt fleet, of twenty small vessels, lying at anchor off the
Island of Mayo, all of which he took. Sailing next to the Island of St.
Jago, he took a Dutch ship. This proving a better ship than the sloop,
Condent transferred himself and crew into her, and named her the _Flying
Dragon_, presenting the sloop to the mate of an English prize, who he had
forced to go with him. From thence Condent sailed away for the coast of
Brazil, taking several Portuguese ships which, after plundering, he let
go. After cleaning the _Flying Dragon_ on Ferdinando Island, the pirates
took several more prizes, and then one day met with a Portuguese
man-of-war of seventy guns. Coming up with her, the Portuguese hailed the
pirates, and they answered "from London bound for Buenos Ayres." The
man-of-war, to pay a compliment to the ship of her English ally, manned
the shrouds and cheered him, and while this amicable demonstration of
marine brotherly feeling was taking place, Captain Condent came up
alongside and suddenly fired a broadside and a volley of small arms into
the man-of-war, and a smart engagement followed, in which the pirates were
worsted, and were lucky to escape.

Sailing away round the Cape of Good Hope, Condent arrived at the pirate
stronghold at the Island of Johanna, where he took on board some of
Captain Halsey's crew, and, reinforced by these skilled masters in the
craft of piracy, took several rich East Indiamen off the Malabar coast.

Calling in at the Isle of St. Mary, one of the Mascerenas group, he met
with another Portuguese ship of seventy guns, which he was fortunate
enough to make a prize of. In this ship they found amongst the passengers
the Viceroy of Goa. Carrying this rich prize to Zanzibar, they plundered
her of a large amount of money.

Having now gathered a vast fortune, they thought it time to give up
piracy, so they returned to the Island of St. Mary, where they made a
share of their plunder, and the company broke up, many of them settling
down amongst the natives. Captain Condent and some others sent from here a
petition to the Governor of Mauritius asking for a pardon, and received
answer that he would take them into his protection if they would destroy
their ships. Having done this, they sailed to Mauritius, where they
settled down, and Captain Condent married the Governor's sister-in-law.

A few years later the captain and his wife left the island and sailed to
France, settling at St. Malo, where Condent drove a considerable trade as
a merchant.


COOK, CAPTAIN EDWARD, or EDMUND.

Was on the Pacific coast with Captains Sharp and Sawkins, 1680. Being
unable to keep order amongst his unruly crew, he resigned his ship and
command to Captain John Cox, a New Englander. He commanded a barque in the
successful sacking of Porto Bello in the same year in company with Sharp,
Coxon, and others.

On land engagements his flag was a red one striped with yellow, on which
was a device of a hand and sword.


COOK, GEORGE, _alias_ RAMEDAM.

An English renegade amongst the Barbary pirates of Algiers. Was gunner's
mate when captured in the _Exchange_ in 1622. Brought to Plymouth and
hanged.


COOK, WILLIAM.

Servant to Captain Edmund Cook, and was found, on being searched, to have
on him a paper with the names of all his fellow pirates written on it, and
was suspected of having prepared it to give to some of the Spanish
prisoners. For this, Captain Walters put him in irons on January 7th,
1681.

He died on board ship on Monday, February 14th, 1681, off the coast of
Chile.


COOKE, CAPTAIN JOHN.

This buccaneer was born in the Island of St. Christopher. "A brisk, bold
man," he was promoted to the rank of quartermaster by Captain Yankey. On
taking a Spanish ship, Cooke claimed the command of her, which he was
entitled to, and would have gone in her with an English crew had not the
French members of the crew, through jealousy, sacked the ship and marooned
the Englishmen on the Island of Avache. Cooke and his men were rescued by
another French buccaneer, Captain Tristram, and taken to the Island of
Dominica. Here the English managed to get away with the ship, leaving
Tristram and his Frenchmen behind on land. Cooke, now with a ship of his
own, took two French ships loaded with wine. With this valuable cargo he
steered northward, and reached Virginia in April, 1683. He had no
difficulty in selling his wine for a good price to the New Englanders, and
with the profits prepared for a long voyage in his ship, the _Revenge_. He
took on board with him several famous buccaneers, including Dampier and
Cowley, the latter as sailing master. They first sailed to Sierra Leone,
then round the Horn to the Island of Juan Fernandez. Here Cooke was taken
ill. His next stop was at the Galapagos Islands. Eventually Cooke died a
mile or two off the coast of Cape Blanco in Mexico. His body was rowed
ashore to be buried, accompanied by an armed guard of twelve seamen. While
his grave was being dug three Spanish Indians came up, and asked so many
questions as to rouse the suspicions of the pirates, who seized them as
spies, but one escaping, he raised the whole countryside.


COOPER, CAPTAIN.

Commanded a pirate sloop, the _Night Rambler_. On November 14th, 1725, he
took the _Perry_ galley (Captain King, commander), three days out from
Barbadoes, and the following day a French sloop, and carried both prizes
to a small island called Aruba, near Curaçao, where they plundered them
and divided the spoil amongst the crew. The crews of the two prizes were
kept on the island by Cooper for seventeen days, and would have starved if
the pirate's doctor had not taken compassion on them and procured them
food.

Upton, boatswain in the _Perry_, joined the pirates, and was afterwards
tried and hanged in England.


COOPER, CAPTAIN.

On October 19th, 1663, he brought into Port Royal, Jamaica, two Spanish
prizes, one the _Maria of Seville_, a royal azogue carrying 1,000 quintals
of quicksilver for the King of Spain's mines in Mexico, besides oil, wine,
and olives. Also a number of prisoners were taken, including several
friars on their way to Campeachy and Vera Cruz. The buccaneers always
rejoiced at capturing a priest or a friar, and these holy men generally
experienced very rough treatment at the hands of the pirates.

Cooper's ship was a frigate of ten guns, and a crew of eighty men.


CORBET, CAPTAIN.

Sailed with Captain Heidon from Bantry Bay in the _John of Sandwich_ in
1564 to search for a good prize in which he might go a-pirating on his own
account. The ship was wrecked on the Island of Alderney, and all the crew
arrested. Corbett and several others escaped in a small boat.


CORNELIUS, CAPTAIN.

A contemporary of Howard Burgess North and other Madagascar pirates.


DE COSSEY, STEPHEN JAMES.

With three other pirates was tried and convicted in June, 1717, before the
Vice-Admiralty Court at Charleston. The President of the Court was Judge
Trot, a terror to all pirates, as he never failed to hang a guilty one. De
Cossey and the other prisoners were found guilty of piratically taking the
vessels _Turtle Dove_, _Penelope_, and the _Virgin Queen_.


COWARD, WILLIAM.

In November, 1689, with three men and a boy he rowed out to the ketch
_Elinor_ (William Shortrigs, master), lying at anchor in Boston Harbour,
and seized the vessel and took her to Cape Cod. The crew of the ketch
could make no resistance as they were all down with the smallpox. The
pirates were caught and locked up in the new stone gaol in Boston. Hanged
on January 27th, 1690.


COWLEY, CAPTAIN C.

M.A. Cantab.

A man of high intelligence and an able navigator. In the year 1683 he
sailed from Achamach or Cape Charles in Virginia for Dominica as sailing
master of a privateer, the _Revenge_ (eight guns and fifty-two men), in
company with Dampier and Captain John Cooke. As soon as they were away
from the land, they turned buccaneers or pirates, and sailed to Sierra
Leone in West Africa. Thence to the coast of Brazil, round the Horn, where
Cowley mentions that owing to the intense cold weather the crew were able,
each man, to drink three quarts of burnt brandy a day without becoming
drunk.

On February 14th the buccaneers were abreast of Cape Horn, and in his
diary Cowley writes: "We were choosing valentines and discoursing on the
Intrigues of Woman, when there arose a prodigious storm," which lasted
till the end of the month, driving them farther south than any ship had
ever been before; "so that we concluded the discoursing of Women at sea
was very unlucky and occasioned the storm." Cowley, who was addicted to
giving new names to islands, not only named one Pepys Island, but when he
arrived at the Galapagos Islands, he rechristened them most thoroughly,
naming one King Charles Island, while others he named after the Dukes of
York, Norfolk, and Albemarle, and Sir John Narborough. Feeling, no doubt,
that he had done enough to honour the great, and perhaps to have insured
himself against any future trouble with the authorities when he returned
home, he named one small island "Cowley's Enchanted Isle."

The Earl of Alington, Lord Culpepper, Lord Wenman, all had islands in this
group christened with their names and titles.

In September, 1684, Cowley, now in the _Nicholas_, separated from Davis,
and sailed from Ampalla for San Francisco, and then started west to cross
the Pacific Ocean. On March 14th, 1685, at seven o'clock in the morning,
after a voyage of 7,646 miles, land was at last seen, which proved to be
the Island of Guan.

The Spanish Governor was most friendly to the visitors, and when complaint
was made to him that the buccaneers had killed some of his Indian subjects
he "gave us a Toleration to kill them all if we would." Presents were
exchanged, Cowley giving the Governor a valuable diamond ring, one, no
doubt, taken off the hand of some other loyal subject of the King of
Spain. Here the pirates committed several atrocious cruelties on the
Indians, who wished to be friends with the foreigners.

In April they arrived at Canton to refit, and while there, thirteen Tartar
ships arrived laden with Chinese merchandise, chiefly valuable silks.
Cowley wanted to attack and plunder them, but his crew refused to do so,
saying "they came for gold and silver, and not to be made pedlars, to
carry packs on their backs," to Cowley's disgust, for he complains, "had
Reason but ruled them, we might all have made our Fortunes and have done
no Christian Prince nor their subjects any harm at all." Thence they
sailed to Borneo, the animals and birds of which island Cowley describes.
Sailing next to Timor, the crew mutinied, and Cowley and eighteen others
bought a boat and sailed in her to Java, some 300 leagues. Here they heard
of the death of King Charles II., which caused Cowley to get out his map
of the Galapagos Islands, and to change the name of Duke of York Island to
King James Island. At Batavia Cowley procured a passage in a Dutch ship to
Cape Town. In June, 1686, he sailed for Holland after much health drinking
and salutes of 300 guns, arriving in that country in September, and
reaching London, "through the infinite Mercy of God," on October 12th,
1686.


COX, CAPTAIN JOHN. Buccaneer.

Born in New England, and considered by some of his fellow buccaneers "to
have forced kindred upon Captain Sharp"--the leader of the fleet--"out of
old acquaintance, only to advance himself." Thus he was made Vice-Admiral
to Captain Sharp, in place of Captain Cook, whose crew had mutinied and
refused to sail any longer under his command. Cox began his captaincy by
getting lost, but after a fortnight rejoined the fleet off the Island of
Plate, on the coast of Peru, "to the great joy of us all." This island
received its name from the fact that Sir Francis Drake had here made a
division of his spoils, distributing to each man of his company sixteen
bowlfuls of doubloons and pieces of eight. The buccaneers rechristened it
Drake's Island.

Cox took part in the attack on the town of Hilo in October, 1679, sacked
the town and burnt down the large sugar factory outside. He led a mutiny
against his relative and benefactor, Captain Sharp, on New Year's Day,
1681, being the "main promoter of their design" to turn him out. Sharp
afterwards described his old friend as a "true-hearted dissembling
New-England Man," who he had promoted captain "merely for old
acquaintance-sake."


COXON, CAPTAIN JOHN. Buccaneer.

One of the most famous of the "Brethren of the Coast."

In the spring of 1677, in company of other English buccaneers, he
surprised and plundered the town of Santa Marta on the Spanish Main,
carrying away the Governor and the Bishop to Jamaica.

In 1679 Coxon, with Sharp and others, was fitting out an expedition in
Jamaica to make a raid in the Gulf of Honduras, which proved very
successful, as they brought back 500 chests of indigo, besides cocoa,
cochineal, tortoiseshell, money, and plate.

Coxon was soon out again upon a much bolder design, for in December, 1679,
he met Sharp, Essex, Allinson, Row, and other buccaneer chiefs at Point
Morant, and in January set sail for Porto Bello. Landing some twenty
leagues from the town, they marched for four days, arriving in sight of
the town on February 17th, "many of them being weak, being three days
without any food, and their feet cut with the rocks for want of shoes."
They quickly took and plundered the town, hurrying off with their spoils
before the arrival of strong Spanish reinforcements. The share of each man
in this enterprise came to one hundred pieces of eight. A warrant was
issued by Lord Carlisle, the Governor of Jamaica, for the apprehension of
Coxon for plundering Porto Bello, and another was issued soon after by
Morgan, when acting as Governor, but nothing seems to have resulted from
these. Sailing north to Boca del Toro, they careened their ships, and were
joined by Sawkins and Harris. From this place the buccaneers began, in
April, 1680, to land and cross the Isthmus of Darien, taking the town of
Santa Maria on the way. Quarrels took place between Coxon, who was, no
doubt, a hot-tempered man, and Harris, which led to blows. Coxon was also
jealous of the popular young Captain Sawkins, and refused to go further
unless he was allowed to lead one of the companies. After sacking the town
of Santa Maria, the adventurers proceeded in canoes down the river to the
Pacific. Seizing two small vessels they found there, and accompanied by a
flotilla of canoes, they steered for Panama, and, with the utmost daring,
attacked, and eventually took, the Spanish fleet of men-of-war--one of the
most remarkable achievements in the history of the buccaneers.

Coxon now quarrelled again with his brother leaders, and began a march
back across the isthmus; his party of seventy malcontents including
Dampier and Wafer, who each published accounts of their journey. By 1682
Coxon seems to have so ingratiated himself with the Jamaican authorities
as to be sent in quest of a troublesome French pirate, Jean Hamlin, who
was playing havoc with the English shipping in his vessel, _La Trompeuse_.

Later in the same year Coxon procured letters of marque from Robert
Clarke, the Governor of New Providence Island, himself nothing better than
a pirate, to go cruising as a "privateer." Coxon was continually being
arrested and tried for piracy, but each time he managed to escape the
gallows. We do not know the name of the ship Coxon commanded at this date,
but it was a vessel of eighty tons, armed with eight guns, and carrying a
crew of ninety-seven men.


COYLE, CAPTAIN RICHARD.

Born at Exeter in Devonshire.

An honest seafaring man until, when sailing as mate with Captain Benjamin
Hartley, they arrived at Ancona with a cargo of pilchards. Here the
captain took on board a new carpenter, called Richardson, who soon became
a close friend of the mate's. These two brought about a mutiny, attacked
the captain, and threw him, still alive, over the side to drown. Coyle was
elected captain, and they sailed as pirates, in which capacity they were a
disgrace to an ancient calling. After a visit to Minorca, which ended with
ignominy, they sailed to Tunis, where Coyle told such a plausible yarn as
to deceive the Governor into believing that he had been the master of a
vessel lost in a storm off the coast of Sardinia. The pirates were
supplied with money by the British Consul in Tunis; but Coyle, while in
his cups, talked too freely, so that the true story of his doings got to
the Consul's ears, who had him arrested and sent to London to be lodged in
the Marshalsea Prison. Tried at the Old Bailey, he was sentenced to death,
and was hanged at Execution Dock on January 25th, 1738.


CRACKERS, CAPTAIN.

A retired pirate who settled at Sierra Leone, and was living there in
1721. He had been famous in his day, having robbed and plundered many a
ship. He owned the best house in the settlement, and was distinguished by
having three cannons placed before his door, which he was accustomed to
fire salutes from whenever a pirate ship arrived or left the port. He was
the soul of hospitality and good fellowship, and kept open-house for all
pirates, buccaneers, and privateersmen.


CRISS, CAPTAIN JOHN, _alias_ "JACK THE BACHELOR."

A native of Lorne in the North of Ireland.

His father was a fisherman, and little Jack used to go out with him, and
then help him sell his fish at Londonderry. The lad grew up into a bold
and handsome young fellow, "and many a girl cocked cap at him and he had
great success amongst the ladies, and intrigued with every woman that gave
him any encouragement."

Tiring of the monotony and low profits of a fisherman's calling, Jack
turned smuggler, carrying cargoes of contraband goods from Guernsey to
Ireland. Making a tidy sum at this, he bought himself a French galliot,
and sailing from Cork, he began to take vessels off the coast of France,
selling them at Cherbourg. The young pirate took no risks of information
leaking out, for he drowned all his prisoners. Cruising in the
Mediterranean, Criss met with his usual success, and, not content with
taking ships, he plundered the seaport of Amalfi on the coast of Calabria.
Calling at Naples, Criss put up at the Ferdinand Hotel, where one morning
he was found dead in his bed. It was discovered afterwards that, in spite
of his nickname, he was married to three wives.


CULLEN, ANDREW.

Of Cork in Ireland.

Brother of Pierce Cullen. One of the crew of Captain Roche's ship. After
the crew had mutinied and turned pirate he posed as the supercargo.


CULLEN, PIERCE.

Of Cork in Ireland.

One of Captain Philip Roche's gang.


CULLIFORD, CAPTAIN, of the _Mocha_.

A Madagascar pirate.

Little is known of him except that one day in the streets of London he
recognized and denounced another pirate called Burgess.


CUMBERLAND, GEORGE, THIRD EARL OF, 1558-1605.

M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge.

After taking his degree at Cambridge he migrated to Oxford for the purpose
of studying geography.

So many books have been written about this picturesque and daring
adventurer that it is not necessary to do more than mention his name here,
as being perhaps the finest example of a buccaneer that ever sacked a
Spanish town.

He led twelve voyages to the Spanish Main, fitting them out at his own
expense, and encountering the same dangers and hardships as his meanest
seaman.

He married in 1577 at the age of nineteen, and sailed on his first voyage
in 1586. Cumberland was greatly esteemed by Queen Elizabeth, and always
wore in his hat a glove which she had given him.

There is sufficient evidence to show that the Earl was not prompted to
spend his life and fortune on buccaneering voyages merely by greed of
plunder, but was chiefly inspired by intense love of his country, loyalty
to his Queen, and bitter hatred of the Spaniards.


CUNNINGHAM, CAPTAIN WILLIAM.

Had his headquarters at New Providence Island, in the Bahamas. Refused the
royal offer of pardon to the pirates in 1717, and was later caught and
hanged.


CUNNINGHAM, PATRICK.

Found guilty at Newport in 1723, but reprieved.


CURTICE, JOSEPH.

One of Captain Teach's crew in the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Killed on
November 22nd, 1718, off the coast of North Carolina.


DAMPIER, CAPTAIN WILLIAM. Buccaneer, explorer, and naturalist.

Born at East Coker in the year 1652.

Brought up at first to be a shopkeeper, a life he detested, he was in 1669
apprenticed to a ship belonging to Weymouth, and his first voyage was to
France. In the same year he sailed to Newfoundland, but finding the bitter
cold unbearable, he returned to England. His next voyage, which he called
"a warm one," was to the East Indies, in the _John and Martha_, and suited
him better.

Many books have been written recounting the voyages of Dampier, but none
of these are better reading than his own narrative, published by James and
John Knapton in London. This popular book ran into many editions, the best
being the fourth, published in 1729, in four volumes. These volumes are
profusely illustrated by maps and rough charts, and also with crude cuts,
which are intended to portray the more interesting and strange animals,
birds, fishes, and insects met with in his voyages round the globe.

In 1673 Dampier enlisted as a seaman in the _Royal Prince_, commanded by
the famous Sir Edward Spragge, and fought in the Dutch war.

A year later he sailed to Jamaica in the _Content_, to take up a post as
manager of a plantation belonging to a Colonel Hellier. His restless
spirit soon revolted against this humdrum life on a plantation, and
Dampier again went to sea, sailing in a small trading vessel amongst the
islands.

Dampier's first step towards buccaneering was taken when he shipped
himself on a small ketch which was sailing from Port Royal to load logwood
at the Bay of Campeachy. This was an illegal business, as the Spanish
Government claimed the ownership of all that coast, and did their best to
prevent the trade. Dampier found some 250 Englishmen engaged in cutting
the wood, which they exchanged for rum. Most of these men were buccaneers
or privateers, who made a living in this way when out of a job afloat.
When a ship came into the coast, these men would think nothing of coming
aboard and spending thirty and forty pounds on rum and punch at a single
drinking bout.

Dampier returned afterwards to take up logwood cutting himself, but met
with little success, and went off to Beef Island. He had by this time
begun to take down notes of all that appeared to him of interest,
particularly objects of natural history. For example, he described, in his
own quaint style, an animal he found in this island.

"The Squash is a four-footed Beast, bigger than a Cat. Its Head is much
like a Foxes, with short Ears and a long Nose. It has pretty short Legs
and sharp Claws, by which it will run up trees like a Cat. The flesh is
good, sweet, wholesome Meat. We commonly skin and roast it; and then we
call it pig; and I think it eats as well. It feeds on nothing but good
Fruit; therefore we find them most among the Sapadillo-Trees. This
Creature never rambles very far, and being taken young, will become as
tame as a Dog, and be as roguish as a Monkey."

Dampier's first act of actual piracy was when he joined in an attack on
the Spanish fort of Alvarado, but although the fort was taken, the
townspeople had time to escape with all their valuables before the pirates
could reach them. Returning to England in 1678, he did not remain long at
home, for in the beginning of 1679 he sailed for Jamaica in a vessel named
the _Loyal Merchant_. Shortly after reaching the West Indies, he chanced
to meet with several well-known buccaneers, including Captains Coxon,
Sawkins, and Sharp. Joining with these, he sailed on March 25th, 1679, for
the Province of Darien, "to pillage and plunder these parts." Dampier says
strangely little about his adventures for the next two years, but a full
description of them is given by Ringrose in his "Dangerous Voyage and Bold
Adventures of Captain Sharp and Others in the South Sea," published as an
addition to the "History of the Buccaneers of America" in 1684.

This narrative tells how the buccaneers crossed the isthmus and attacked
and defeated the Spanish Fleet off Panama City. After the death of their
leader, Sawkins, the party split up, and Dampier followed Captain Sharp on
his "dangerous and bold voyage" in May, 1680.

In April, 1681, after various adventures up and down the coast of Peru and
Chile, further quarrels arose amongst the buccaneers, and a party of
malcontents, of which number Dampier was one, went off on their own
account in a launch and two canoes from the Island of Plate, made famous
by Drake, and landed on the mainland near Cape San Lorenzo. The march
across the Isthmus of Darien has been amusingly recounted by the surgeon
of the party, Lionel Wafer, in his book entitled "A New Voyage and
Description of the Isthmus of America," published in London in 1699.

[Illustration: A PAGE FROM THE LOG-BOOK OF CAPTAIN DAMPIER.

To face p. 98.]

On reaching the Atlantic, Dampier found some buccaneer ships and joined
them, arriving at Virginia in July, 1682. In this country he resided for a
year, but tells little about it beyond hinting that great troubles befell
him. In April, 1683, he joined a privateer vessel, the _Revenge_, but
directly she was out of sight of land the crew turned pirates, which had
been their intention all along. Two good narratives have been written of
this voyage, one by Dampier, and the other by Cowley, the sailing-master.
This venture ended in the famous circumnavigation of the world, and
Dampier described every object of interest he met with, including the
country and natives of the north coast of Australia, which had never been
visited before by Europeans. Dampier must have found it very difficult to
keep his journal so carefully and regularly, particularly in his early
voyages, when he was merely a seaman before the mast or a petty officer.
He tells us that he carried about with him a long piece of hollow bamboo,
in which he placed his manuscript for safe keeping, waxing the ends to
keep out the sea water.

After almost endless adventures and hardships, he arrived back in England
in September, 1691, after a voyage of eight years, and an absence from
England of twelve, without a penny piece in his pocket, nor any other
property except his unfortunate friend Prince Jeoly, whom he sold on his
arrival in the Thames, to supply his own immediate wants. Dampier's next
voyage was in the year 1699, when he was appointed to command H.M.S.
_Roebuck_, of twelve guns and a crew of fifty men and boys, and victualled
for twenty months' cruise. The object of this voyage was to explore and
map the new continent to the south of the East Indies which Dampier had
discovered on his previous voyage. Had he in this next voyage taken the
westward course, as he originally intended, and sailed to Australia round
the Horn, it is possible that Dampier would have made many of the
discoveries for which James Cook afterwards became so famous, and by
striking the east coast of Australia would very likely have antedated the
civilisation of that continent by fifty years. But he was persuaded,
partly by his timid crew, and perhaps in some measure by his own dislike
of cold temperatures, to sail by the eastward route and to double the Cape
of Good Hope. The story of this voyage is given by Dampier in his book,
published in 1709, "A Voyage to New Holland, etc., in the Year 1699."

After spending some unprofitable weeks on the north coast of Australia,
failing to find water or to make friends with the aboriginals, scurvy
broke out amongst his somewhat mutinous crew, and he sailed to New Guinea,
the coast of which he saw on New Year's Day, 1700.

By this time the _Roebuck_ was falling to pieces, her wood rotten, her
hull covered with barnacles. Eventually, using the pumps day and night,
they arrived, on February 21st, 1701, at Ascension Island, where the old
ship sank at her anchors. Getting ashore with their belongings, they
waited on this desolate island until April 3rd, when four ships arrived,
three of them English men-of-war.

I was told, only the other day, by a friend who lives in the Island of St.
Helena, and whose duties take him at least once each year to Ascension
Island, that a story still survives amongst the inhabitants of these
islands that there is hidden somewhere in the sandhills a treasure, which
Dampier is believed to have put there for safe keeping, but for some
reason never removed. But poor Dampier never came by a treasure in this or
any other of his voyages, and though the legend is a pleasant one, it is a
legend and nothing more. Dampier went on board one of the men-of-war, the
_Anglesea_, with thirty-five of his crew. Taken to Barbadoes, he there
procured a berth in another vessel, the _Canterbury_, in which he sailed
to England.

Dampier had now made so great a name for himself by his two voyages round
the globe that he was granted a commission by Prince George of Denmark to
sail as a privateer in the _St. George_, to prey on French and Spanish
ships, the terms being: "No purchase, no pay." Sailing as his consort was
the _Cinque Ports_, whose master was Alexander Selkirk, the original of
Robinson Crusoe. This voyage, fully recounted in Dampier's book, is a long
tale of adventure, hardship, and disaster, and the explorer eventually
returned to England a beggar. However, his travels made a great stir, and
he was allowed to kiss the Queen's hand and to have the honour of relating
his adventures to her.

Dampier's last voyage was in the capacity of pilot or navigating officer
to Captain Woodes Rogers in the _Duke_, which sailed with another Bristol
privateer, the _Duchess_, in 1708. The interesting narrative of this
successful voyage is told by Rogers in his book, "A Cruising Voyage Round
the World," etc., published in 1712. Another account was written by the
captain of the _Duchess_, Edward Cooke, and published in the same year.
This last voyage round the world ended at Erith on October 14th, 1711, and
was the only one in which Dampier returned with any profit other than to
his reputation as an explorer and navigator.

Dampier was now fifty-nine years of age, and apparently never went to sea
again. In fact, he henceforth disappears from the stage altogether, and is
supposed to have died in Colman Street in London, in the year 1715. Of
Dampier's early life in England little is known, except that he owned, at
one time, a small estate in Somersetshire, and that in 1678 he married "a
young woman out of the family of the Duchess of Grafton." There is an
interesting picture of Dampier in the National Portrait Gallery, painted
by T. Murray, and I take this opportunity to thank the directors for
their kind permission to reproduce this portrait.

One other book Dampier wrote, called a "Discourse of Winds," an
interesting work, and one which added to the author's reputation as a
hydrographer. There is little doubt that Defoe was inspired by the
experiences and writings of Dampier, not only in his greatest work,
"Robinson Crusoe," but also in "Captain Singleton," "Colonel Jack," "A New
Voyage Round the World," and many of the maritime incidents in "Roxana"
and "Moll Flanders."


DAN, JOSEPH.

One of Avery's crew. Turned King's witness at his trial in 1696, and was
not hanged.


DANIEL, CAPTAIN. A French filibuster.

The name of this bloodthirsty pirate will go down to fame as well as
notoriety by his habit of combining piracy with strict Church discipline.
Harling recounts an example of this as follows, the original account of
the affair being written by a priest, M. Labat, who seems to have had
rather a weak spot in his heart for the buccaneer fraternity:

"Captain Daniel, in need of provisions, anchored one night off one of the
'Saintes,' small islands near Dominica, and landing without opposition,
took possession of the house of the curé and of some other inhabitants of
the neighbourhood. He carried the curé and his people on board his ship
without offering them the least violence, and told them that he merely
wished to buy some wine, brandy and fowls. While these were being
gathered, Daniel requested the curé to celebrate Mass, which the poor
priest dared not refuse. So the necessary sacred vessels were sent for and
an altar improvised on the deck for the service, which they chanted to the
best of their ability. As at Martinique, the Mass was begun by a
discharge of artillery, and after the Exaudiat and prayer for the King,
was closed by a loud 'Vive la Roi!' from the throats of the buccaneers. A
single incident, however, somewhat disturbed the devotions. One of the
buccaneers, remaining in an indecent attitude during the Elevation, was
rebuked by the captain, and instead of heeding the correction, replied
with an impertinence and a fearful oath. Quick as a flash Daniel whipped
out his pistol and shot the buccaneer through the head, adjuring God that
he would do as much to the first who failed in his respect to the Holy
Sacrifice. The shot was fired close by the priest, who, as we can readily
imagine, was considerably agitated. 'Do not be troubled, my father,' said
Daniel; 'he is a rascal lacking in his duty and I have punished him to
teach him better.'" A very efficacious means, remarks Labat, of preventing
his falling into another like mistake. After the Mass the body of the dead
man was thrown into the sea, and the curé was recompensed for his pains by
some goods out of their stock and the present of a negro slave.


DANIEL, STEPHEN.

One of Captain Teach's crew. Hanged for piracy in Virginia in 1718.


DANSKER, CAPTAIN.

A Dutch pirate who cruised in the Mediterranean in the sixteenth century,
using the North African coast as his base. He joined the Moors and turned
Mohammedan. In 1671 Admiral Sir Edward Spragge was with a fleet at Bougie
Bay, near Algiers, where, after a sharp fight, he burnt and destroyed a
big fleet of the Moorish pirates, amongst those killed being the renegade
Dansker.


DARBY, JOHN.

A Marblehead fisherman, one of the crew of the ketch _Mary_, of Salem,
captured by Captain Pound. He joined the pirates, and was killed at
Tarpaulin Cove.


DAVIS, CAPTAIN EDWARD. Buccaneer and pirate.

Flourished from 1683-1702. According to Esquemiling, who knew Davis
personally, his name was John, but some authorities call him Edward, the
name he is given in the "Dictionary of National Biography."

In 1683 Davis was quartermaster to Captain Cook when he took the ship of
Captain Tristian, a French buccaneer, of Petit Guave in the West Indies.
Sailed north to cruise off the coast of Virginia. From there he sailed
across the Atlantic to West Africa, and at Sierra Leone came upon a Danish
ship of thirty-six guns, which he attacked and took. The pirates shifted
their crew into this ship, christening her the _Bachelor's Delight_, and
sailed for Juan Fernandez in the South Pacific, arriving there in March,
1684. Here they met with Captain Brown, in the _Nicholas_, and together
sailed to the Galapagos Islands. About this time Captain Cook died, and
Davis was elected captain in his place. Cruising along the coasts of Chile
and Peru, they sacked towns and captured Spanish ships. On November 3rd
Davis landed, and burnt the town of Paita. Their principal plan was to
waylay the Spanish Fleet on its voyage to Panama. This fleet arrived off
the Bay of Panama on May 28th, 1685, but the buccaneers were beaten and
were lucky to escape with their lives. At the Gulf of Ampalla, Davis had
to put his sick on shore, as spotted fever raged amongst the crew. Davis
then cruised for a while with the buccaneer Knight, sacking several
towns.

Deciding to return to the West Indies with their plunder, several of the
crew, who had lost all their share by gambling, were left, at their own
request, on the Island of Juan Fernandez. Davis then sailed round the
Horn, arriving safely at Jamaica with a booty of more than 50,000 pieces
of eight, besides quantities of plate and jewels.

At Port Royal, after he had accepted the offer of pardon of King James
II., Davis sailed to Virginia and settled down at Point Comfort. We hear
no more of him for the next fourteen years, until July 24th, 1702, when he
sailed from Jamaica in the _Blessing_ (Captain Brown; twenty guns,
seventy-nine men), to attack the town of Tolu on the Spanish Main, which
was plundered and burnt. Davis next sailed to the Samballoes, and, guided
by the Indians, who were friendly to the buccaneers, but hated the
Spaniards, they attacked the gold-mines, where, in spite of most cruel
tortures, they got but little gold. The crew next attacked Porto Bello,
but found little worth stealing in that much harassed town.

Davis is chiefly remarkable for having commanded his gang of ruffians in
the Pacific for nearly four years. To do this he must have been a man of
extraordinary personality and bravery, for no other buccaneer or pirate
captain ever remained in uninterrupted power for so long a while, with the
exception of Captain Bartholomew Roberts.


DAVIS, CAPTAIN HOWEL.

This Welsh pirate was born at Milford in Monmouthshire. He went to sea as
a boy, and eventually sailed as chief mate in the _Cadogan_ snow, of
Bristol, to the Guinea Coast. His ship was taken off Sierra Leone by the
pirate England, and the captain murdered. Davis turned pirate, and was
given command of this old vessel, the _Cadogan_, in which to go "on the
account." But the crew refused to turn pirate, and sailed the ship to
Barbadoes, and there handed Davis over to the Governor, who imprisoned him
for three months and then liberated him. As no one on the island would
offer him employment, Davis went to New Providence Island, the stronghold
of the West India pirates.

Arrived there, he found that Captain Woodes Rogers had only lately come
from England with an offer of a royal pardon, which most of the pirates
had availed themselves of. Davis got employment under the Governor, on
board the sloop, the _Buck_, to trade goods with the French and Spanish
settlements. The crew was composed of the very recently reformed pirates,
and no sooner was the sloop out of sight of land than they mutinied and
seized the vessel, Davis being voted captain, on which occasion, over a
bowl of punch in the great cabin, the new captain made an eloquent speech,
finishing by declaring war against the whole world. Davis proved himself
an enterprising and successful pirate chief, but preferred, whenever
possible, to use strategy and cunning rather than force to gain his ends.
His first prize was a big French ship, which, although Davis had only a
small sloop and a crew of but thirty-five men, he managed to take by a
bold and clever trick. After taking a few more ships in the West Indies,
Davies sailed across the Atlantic to the Island of St. Nicholas in the
Cape Verde Islands. Here he and his crew were a great social success,
spending weeks on shore as the guests of the Governor and chief
inhabitants. When Davis reluctantly left this delightful spot, five of his
crew were missing, "being so charmed with the Luxuries of the Place, and
the Conversation of some Women, that they stayed behind."

Davis now went cruising and took a number of vessels, and arrived
eventually at St. Jago. The Portuguese Governor of this island did not
take at all kindly to his bold visitor, and was blunt enough to say he
suspected Davis of being a pirate. This suspicion his crew took exception
to, and they decided they could not let such an insult pass, so that very
night they made a sudden attack on the fort, taking and plundering it.

Davis sailed away next morning to the coast and anchored off the Castle of
Gambia, which was strongly held for the African Company by the Governor
and a garrison of English soldiers. Davis, nothing daunted, proposed to
his merry men a bold and ingenious stratagem by which they could take the
castle, and, the crew agreeing, it was carried out with so much success
that they soon had the castle, Governor, and soldiers in their possession,
as well as a rich spoil of bars of gold; and all these without a solitary
casualty on either side. After this brilliant coup, many of the soldiers
joined the pirates. The pirates were attacked shortly afterwards by a
French ship commanded by Captain La Bouse, but on both ships hoisting
their colours, the Jolly Roger, they understood each other and
fraternized, and then sailed together to Sierra Leone, where they attacked
a tall ship they found lying there at anchor. This ship also proved to be
a pirate, commanded by one Captain Cocklyn, so the three joined forces and
assaulted the fort, which, after a sharp bombardment, surrendered. Davis
was then elected commander of the pirate fleet, but one night, when
entertaining the other captains in his cabin, all having drunk freely of
punch, they started to quarrel, and blows were threatened, when Davis,
with true Celtic eloquence, hiccupped out the following speech:

"Hearke ye, you Cocklyn and La Bouse. I find by strengthening you I have
put a rod into your Hands to whip myself, but I'm still able to deal with
you both; but since we met in Love, let us part in Love, for I find that
three of a Trade can never agree." Alone once more, Davis had prodigious
success, taking prize after prize, amongst others the _Princess_, the
second mate in which was one Roberts, soon to become a most famous pirate.
Off Anamaboe he took a very rich prize, a Hollander ship, on board of
which was the Governor of Accra and his retinue, as well as £15,000
sterling and rich merchandise. Arriving next at the Portuguese Island of
Princes, Davis posed as an English man-of-war in search of pirates, and
was most warmly welcomed by the Governor, who received him in person with
a guard of honour and entertained him most hospitably. Davis heard that
the Governor and the chief persons of the island had sent their wives to a
village a few miles away, so the pirate and a few chosen spirits decided
to pay a surprise visit on these ladies. However, the ladies, on
perceiving their gallant callers, shrieked and ran into the woods and, in
fact, made such a hullabaloo that the English Don Juans were glad to slink
away, and "the Thing made some noise, but not being known was passed
over."

Davis, ever a cunning rogue, now formed a pretty scheme to take the
Governor and chief inhabitants prisoners and to hold them for a big
ransom. This plan was spoilt by a Portuguese slave swimming to shore and
telling the Governor all about it, and worse, telling him about the little
affair of Davis and his visit to the ladies in the wood. The Governor now
laid his plans, and with such success that Davis walked unsuspecting into
the trap, and was "shot in the bowels," but it is some consolation to know
that he "dyed like a game Cock," as he shot two of the Portuguese with his
pistols as he fell.

Thus died a man noted during his lifetime by his contemporaries for his
"affability and good nature," which only goes to show how one's point of
view is apt to be influenced by circumstances.


DAVIS, GABRIEL.

Tried for piracy at the Star Tavern in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1704.


DAVIS, WILLIAM.

A Welshman.

Arrived at Sierra Leone in honest employ in the _Ann_ galley. Quarrelling
with the mate, whom he beat, he deserted his ship and went to live ashore
with the negroes, one of whom he married, with whom he settled down. One
evening, the weather being hot, and Davis being very thirsty, he sold his
bride for some punch. His wife's relations, being indignant, seized Davis,
who told them, being, perhaps, still a little under the influence of the
punch, that he did not care if they took his head off. But his "in-laws"
knew a more profitable way of being revenged than that, and sold him to
Seignior Joffee, a Christian black. Soon afterwards Captain Roberts, in
the _Royal Fortune_, arrived in the bay, and Davis ran away and joined the
pirates.

Hanged at the age of 23.


DAWES. Corsair.

An English renegade.

When Roberts was cast away on June 12th, 1692, in Nio, a small island in
the Grecian Archipelago, in His Majesty's hired ship the _Arcana_ galley,
most of the crew escaped in a French prize they had taken. Roberts
remained behind, hoping to save some of his valuables, which were in the
_Arcana_. But on June 15th a crusal, or corsair, appeared in the harbour,
which Roberts's five companions went on board of. Various designs were
made by the corsair captain to induce Roberts to come aboard. Eventually
an Englishman named Dawes (a native of Saltash in Cornwall) was sent
ashore. He had served for eight years in the corsair until taken out of
her a short time previously by the _Arcana_. Roberts writes, in his frank
style: "But Dawes, like a Dog returning to his Vomit, went on Board
again." Eventually a party of the corsair's landed under the leadership of
Dawes, and captured Roberts and carried him on board the pirate craft,
where for many years he worked as a slave.


DAWES, ROBERT.

One of the mutineers on the brig _Vineyard_ in 1830. It was the full
confession of Dawes that brought about the conviction and execution of the
ringleader, Charles Gibbs.


DAWSON, JOSEPH.

One of Captain Avery's crew of the _Charles the Second_. Tried at the Old
Bailey in 1696 for piracy, and convicted. He pleaded to be spared and to
be sent to servitude in India, but was hanged at Execution Dock.


DEAL, CAPTAIN ROBERT.

Mate to Captain Vane in 1718. He was very active off the coast of Carolina
and New England, taking many prizes. In November, 1718, when cruising
between Cape Meise and Cape Nicholas, on the lookout for ships, he met
with and fired on a vessel that appeared to be a merchantman, at the same
time running up the Jolly Roger. The apparently peaceful merchantman
replied with a broadside, and proved to be a French man-of-war. A quarrel
took place amongst the pirates, Vane and some of the crew, including
Deal, being for running away for safety, while the rest, headed by Rackam,
were in favour of fighting it out. Vane insisted on their escaping, which
they did, but next day he, Deal, and some others were turned out of the
ship and sent away on their own in a small sloop. Deal was put in command
of this sloop, but was soon afterwards captured by an English man-of-war
and brought to Jamaica, where he was tried, convicted, and hanged.


DEANE, CAPTAIN JOHN. Buccaneer.

Commanded the _St. David_. He was accused by the Governor of Jamaica in
1676 of having held up a ship called the _John Adventure_ and of taking
out of her several pipes of wine and a cable worth £100, and of forcibly
carrying the vessel to Jamaica. Deane was also reported for wearing Dutch,
French, and Spanish colours without commission, and was tried and
condemned to suffer death as a pirate. Owing to various legal, or illegal,
quibbles, Deane was reprieved.


DEDRAN, LE CAPITAINE. A French filibuster of French Domingo.

Commanded, in 1684, the _Chasseur_ (120 men, 20 guns).


DEIGLE, RICHARD.

An Elizabethan pirate. Wrecked in the _John of Sandwich_ at Alderney in
1564, when he was arrested, but escaped in a small boat.


DELANDER, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Commanded a _chatas_, or small coasting craft. He was sent by Morgan ahead
of the main body when, in January, 1671, he marched from San Lorenzo on
his great assault on Panama.


DELIZUFF. Barbary corsair.

In 1553, while Barbarossa was sailing from Algiers to Constantinople, he
was joined by Delizuff with a fleet of eighteen pirate vessels.

Delizuff was killed in an affair at the Island of Biba, and, the crews of
the two corsairs quarrelling, the ships of Delizuff stole away one dark
night.


DELVE, JONATHAN.

One of Captain Lowther's crew in the _Happy Delivery_. Was hanged at St.
Kitts in 1722.


DEMPSTER, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

In 1668 he was in command of several vessels and 300 men, blockading
Havana.


DENNIS, HENRY.

Of Bideford in Devonshire.

At first a pirate with Captain Davis, he afterwards joined Captain
Roberts's crew. Was tried for piracy at Cape Coast Castle in 1722, and
found guilty, but for some reason was reprieved and sold for seven years
to serve the Royal African Company on their plantations.


DERDRAKE, CAPTAIN JOHN, _alias_ JACK OF THE BALTIC. A Danish pirate, of
Copenhagen.

When a carpenter in the King's Dockyard at Copenhagen he was dismissed for
drunkenness. After making a few voyages to London as a ship's carpenter,
his parents died and left their son a fortune of 10,000 rix-dollars. With
this money Derdrake built himself a fast sailing brig sheathed with
copper, and for a while traded in wood between Norway and London. Becoming
impatient of the smallness of the profits in this trade, he offered his
services and ship to Peter the Great. This monarch, as was his custom,
examined the ship in person, and, approving of her, bought her, and at the
same time appointed Derdrake to be a master shipwright in the royal
dockyards on the Neva. The carpenter, always a man of violent temper, one
day quarrelled with one of his superiors, seized an axe, and slew him. His
ship then happening to be in the roads, Derdrake hurried on board her and
made sail, and went off with the cargo, which he sold in London. Arming
his vessel with twelve guns, he sailed for Norway, but on the way he was
attacked by a big Russian man-of-war. The Russian was defeated and
surrendered, and Derdrake went into her in place of his own smaller ship,
giving his new craft the ominous name of the _Sudden Death_. With a fine,
well-armed ship and a crew of seventy desperadoes, one-half English, and
the rest Norwegian and Danish, he now definitely turned pirate. Lying in
wait for English and Russian ships carrying goods to Peter the Great, the
pirates took many valuable prizes, with cargoes consisting of fittings for
ships, arms, and warm woollen clothing. For these he found a ready market
in Sweden, where no questions were asked and "cash on delivery" was the
rule.

Derdrake drowned all his prisoners, and was one of the very few pirates,
other than those found in works of fiction, who forced his victims to
"walk the plank." Not long afterwards the pirates met with and fought an
armed Swedish vessel, which was defeated, but the captain and crew escaped
in the long-boat, and, getting to shore, spread the tidings of the
pirates' doings. On hearing the news, the Governor of St. Petersburg,
General Shevelling, sent out two ships to search for and take the pirates,
offering a reward of 4,000 rix-dollars for Derdrake's head. The pirates
had just heard of this when they happened to take a Russian vessel bound
for Cronstadt, on board of which was a passenger, a sister of the very
General Shevelling. This poor lady, after being reproached by the pirates
for her brother's doings, was stabbed to death in the back by Derdrake. At
this time there was aboard the _Sudden Death_ a Danish sailor, who, having
been severely flogged for being drunk at sea, shammed sickness and
pretended to have lost the use of his limbs. The captain was deceived, and
sent the sailor, well supplied with money, to a country house at Drontheim
in Sweden, to recover. No sooner had Jack of the Baltic left than the
Danish sailor set off post-haste for St. Petersburg, where he saw the
Governor and told him of his sister's murder, and also that the pirates
were to be found at Strothing in Sweden. Two well-armed vessels were
immediately despatched, which, finding the _Sudden Death_ at anchor,
fought and sunk her, though unfortunately Derdrake was on shore and so
escaped; but the whole crew were hung up alive by hooks fixed in their
ribs and sent to drift down the Volga. Derdrake, who had a large sum of
money with him, bought an estate near Stralsund, and lived there in luxury
for fourteen years, until one day, a servant having robbed him of a sum of
money, Derdrake followed him to Stockholm, where he was recognized by the
captain of the Swedish ship who had first given information against him,
and the pirate was at once arrested, tried, and hanged.


DEW, CAPTAIN GEORGE.

Of Bermuda.

He commanded a Bermuda ship and sailed in company with Captain Tew, when
they were caught in a storm off that island, and Captain Dew, having
sprung his mast, was compelled to put back to the island for repairs.
Captain Tew continued his journey to Africa, but what became of Captain
Dew is not known.


DIABOLITO.

A Central American pirate who became very famous in the early part of the
last century. Commanded the _Catalina_ in 1823 off the coast of Cuba.


DIEGO, or DIEGO GRILLO.

A mulatto of Havana.

After the general amnesty to pirates, given in 1670, Diego, Thurston, and
others continued to attack Spanish ships and to carry their prizes to
their lair at Tortuga Island. Diego commanded a vessel carrying fifteen
guns. He succeeded in defeating three armed ships in the Bahama Channel,
which had been sent to take him, and he massacred all the Spaniards of
European birth that he found among the crews. He was caught in 1673 and
hanged.


DIPPER, HENRY.

One of the English soldiers who deserted from the Fort Loyal, Falmouth,
Maine, and joined Captain Pound, the pirate. Killed in the fight at
Tarpaulin Cove in 1689.


DOLE, FRANCIS.

Was one of Hore's crew. Lived with his wife, when not "on the account," at
his house at Charleston, near Boston. The pirate Gillam was found hiding
there by the Governor's search-party on the night of November 11th, 1699.
Dole was committed to gaol at Boston.


DOROTHY, JOHN.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Tried for piracy at Boston in June,
1704.


DOVER, DOCTOR THOMAS.

Born 1660; died 1742.

This many-sided character was educated at Caius College, Cambridge, where
he took the degree of Bachelor of Medicine. Many years afterwards, in
1721, the Royal College of Physicians made him a licentiate. For many
years Dover practised as a physician at Bristol, until the year 1708, when
he sailed from Bristol as "second captain" to Captain Woodes Rogers, with
the _Duke_ and the _Duchess_, two privateer ships fitted out for a South
Sea cruise by some Bristol merchants. Dover had no knowledge whatever of
navigation, but, having a considerable share in the adventure, he insisted
on being given a command. Sailing round the Horn, the two ships arrived,
on the night of February 1st, 1709, off the Island of Juan Fernandez,
where they observed a light. Next morning Dover went ashore in a boat, to
find and rescue the solitary inhabitant of the island, Alexander Selkirk,
the original of Robinson Crusoe. Sailing north, a Spanish ship was taken
and rechristened the _Bachelor_, and Dover was put in command of her. He
sacked Guayaquil in April, 1709, many of the crew contracting plague from
sleeping in a church where some bodies had recently been buried. Dover
undertook to treat the sick with most heroic measures, bleeding each sick
man and drawing off 100 ounces of blood.

He also took the famous _Acapulco_ ship, with a booty worth more than a
million pounds sterling. Dover returned to Bristol in October, 1711, with
a prize of great value, after sailing round the world.

Giving up piracy, he settled in practice in London, seeing his patients
daily at the Jerusalem Coffee-house in Cecil Street, Strand. He wrote a
book called "The Ancient Physician's Legacy to His Country," which ran
into seven or eight editions, in which he strongly recommended the
administration of large doses of quicksilver for almost every malady that
man is subject to. This book won him the nickname of the "Quicksilver
Doctor." He invented a diaphoretic powder containing ipecacuanha and
opium, which is used to this day, and is still known as Dover's powder.

Dover died at the age of 82, in the year 1742, and should always be
remembered for having invented Dover's powders, commanded a company of
Marines, rescued Alexander Selkirk, written a most extraordinary medical
book, and for having been a successful pirate captain.


DOWLING, CAPTAIN WILLIAM.

Of New Providence, Bahamas.

Hanged for piracy in the early part of the eighteenth century.


DRAGUT. Barbary corsair.

Started life as a pirate, and was eventually put in command of twelve
large galleys by Kheyr-ed-din. Pillaged and burnt many towns on the
Italian coast, and destroyed ships without number. Was taken prisoner by
the younger Doria, and condemned to row in the galleys for four years
until ransomed for 3,000 ducats by Kheyr-ed-din. Appointed Admiral of the
Ottoman Fleet. Ended a bloodthirsty but very successful career in 1565 by
being killed at the Siege of Malta.


DRAKE, SIR FRANCIS.

Born about 1540.

The life of the famous Admiral is too well known to require more than a
bare notice in these pages. Although the Spaniards called him "the
Pirate," he was more strictly a buccaneer in his early voyages, when he
sailed with the sole object of spoiling the Spaniards. His first command
was the _Judith_, in John Hawkins's unfortunate expedition in 1567. Drake
made several voyages from Plymouth to the West Indies and the Spanish
Main.

In 1572 he burnt Porto Bello, and a year later sacked Vera Cruz. He served
with the English Army in Ireland under Lord Essex in 1574 and 1575. In
1578 he sailed through the Straits of Magellan, plundered Valparaiso, and
also captured a great treasure ship from Acapulco. Sailing from America,
he crossed the Pacific Ocean, passed through the Indian Archipelago,
rounded the Cape of Good Hope, and arrived at Deptford in England in 1581.
At the conclusion of this voyage he was knighted by Queen Elizabeth, being
the first Englishman to sail round the world. Drake's voyages after this
were sailed under commission and letters of marque, and so lose any stigma
of being buccaneering adventures.

Drake died at Porto Bello in the year 1596.


DROMYOWE, PETER. A Breton pirate.

One of the crew of Captain du Laerquerac, who in 1537 took several English
ships in the Bristol Channel.


DRUMMOND, _alias_ TEACH, THATCH, or BLACKBEARD.


DUNBAR, NICHOLAS. Pirate.

One of the crew of the brigantine _Charles_ (Captain Quelch). Tried for
piracy at Boston in 1704.


DUNKIN, GEORGE.

Of Glasgow.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged at Charleston, South Carolina, in
November, 1718. Buried in the marsh below low-water mark.


DUNN, WILLIAM.

One of Captain Pound's crew.


DUNTON, CAPTAIN.

A citizen of London, taken prisoner by the Sallee pirates in 1636. Being a
good navigator and seaman, and the Moorish pirates being as yet
inexperienced in the management of sailing ships, Dunton was put into a
Sallee ship as pilot and master, with a crew of twenty-one Moors and five
Flemish renegadoes. He was ordered to go to the English coast to capture
Christian prisoners. When off Hurst Castle, near the Needles in the Isle
of Wight, his ship was seized and the crew carried to Winchester to stand
their trial for piracy. Dunton was acquitted, but he never saw his little
son of 10 years old, as he was still a slave in Algiers.


EASTON, CAPTAIN.

Joined the Barbary pirates in the sixteenth century, succeeding so well as
to become, according to John Smith, the Virginian, a "Marquesse in Savoy,"
whatever that may have been.


EASTON, CAPTAIN PETER.

One of the most notorious of the English pirates during the reign of James
I.

In the year 1611 he had forty vessels under his command. The next year he
was on the Newfoundland coast, where he plundered the shipping and fishing
settlements, stealing provisions and munitions, as well as inducing one
hundred men to join his fleet.

A year later, in 1613, he appears to have joined the English pirates who
had established themselves at Mamora on the Barbary coast.


EATON, EDWARD.

Of Wrexham in Wales.

One of Captain Harris's crew. Hanged at Newport, Rhode Island, on July
19th, 1723. Age 38.


ECHLIN.

An English pirate, of the _Two Brothers_, a Rhode Island built vessel,
commanded in 1730 by a one-armed English pirate called Captain Johnson.


EDDY, WILLIAM.

Of Aberdeen.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged at White Point, Charleston, South
Carolina, on November 8th, 1718, and buried in the marsh below low-water
mark.


ENGLAND, CAPTAIN.

Sailing in 1718 as mate in a sloop from Jamaica, he was taken prisoner by
the pirate Captain Winter. England joined the pirates, and was given the
command of a vessel. In this ship he sailed to the coast of West Africa,
and the first prize he took was the _Cadogan_ snow (Captain Skinner), at
Sierra Leone. Some of England's crew knew Skinner, having served in his
ship, and, owing to some quarrel, had been handed over to a man-of-war,
and deprived of the wages due to them. These men afterwards deserted the
man-of-war and joined the pirates. On Captain Skinner coming aboard
England's ship, these men took him and bound him to the windlass, and then
pelted him with glass bottles, after which they whipped him up and down
the deck, eventually one of them shooting him through the head. This
brutal treatment was none of England's doing, who was generally kind to
his prisoners.

England's next prize was the _Pearl_, which he exchanged for his own
sloop; fitted her up for the "pyratical Account," and christened her the
_Royal James_. Captain England was most successful, taking a number of
prizes, which he plundered. One ship he captured so took the eye of
England that he fitted her up and changed into her, naming her the
_Victory_. This he did in the harbour at Whydah, where he met with another
pirate, called la Bouche. The two pirates and their crews spent a holiday
at this place where, according to the well-informed Captain Johnson, "they
liv'd very wantonly for several Weeks, making free with the Negroe Women
and committing such outrageous Acts, that they came to an open Rupture
with the Natives, several of whom they kill'd and one of their Towns they
set on Fire." Leaving here, no doubt to the great relief of the negroes,
it was put to the vote of the crew to decide where they should go, and the
majority were for visiting the East Indies. Rounding the Cape of Good
Hope, they arrived at Madagascar early in 1720, where they only stopped
for water and provisions, and then sailed to the coast of Malabar in
India. Here they took several country ships, and one Dutch one, but soon
returned to Madagascar, where they went on shore, living in tents, and
hunting hogs and deer. While on this island they looked for Captain
Avery's crew, but failed to discover them. While the pirates were here
they managed to take a ship commanded by a Captain Mackra, but not without
a desperate fight. The pirates were for killing Mackra, but, owing to the
efforts of Captain England, he managed to escape.

The pirates had several times complained of the weakness, or humanity, of
their commander towards his prisoners, and they now turned him out and
elected a new captain, and marooned England and three others on the
Island of Mauritius. The captain and his companions set about building a
small boat of some old staves and pieces of deal they found washed up on
the beach. When finished they sailed to Madagascar, where, when last heard
of, they were living on the charity of some other pirates.


ERNADOS, EMANUEL.

A Carolina pirate who was hanged at Charleston in 1717.


ESMIT, ADOLF.

A Danish buccaneer, who afterwards became Governor of the Danish island of
St. Thomas, one of the Virgin Islands. The population of this island
consisted of some 350 persons, most of whom were English. Esmit did all he
could to assist the pirates, paid to fit out their ships for them, gave
sanctuary to runaway servants, seamen, and debtors, and refused to restore
captured vessels. Adolf had taken advantage of his popularity with the
inhabitants to turn out his brother, who was the rightful Governor
appointed by the Danish Government.


ESSEX, CAPTAIN CORNELIUS. Buccaneer.

In December, 1679, he met with several other well-known buccaneers in four
barques and two sloops at Point Morant, and on January 7th set sail for
Porto Bello. The fleet was scattered by a terrible storm, but eventually
they all arrived at the rendezvous. Some 300 men went in canoes and landed
about twenty leagues from the town of Porto Bello, and marched for four
days along the sea-coast.

The buccaneers, "many of them were weak, being three days without any
food, and their feet cut with the rocks for want of shoes," entered the
town on February 17th, 1680. The buccaneers, with prisoners and spoil,
left the town just in time, for a party of 700 Spanish soldiers was near
at hand coming to the rescue. The share to each man came to one hundred
pieces of eight. In 1679 Essex was brought a prisoner by a frigate, the
_Hunter_, to Port Royal, and tried with some twenty of his crew for
plundering on the Jamaican coast. Essex was acquitted, but two of his crew
were hanged.


EUCALLA, DOMINGO.

A negro. Hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, on February 7th, 1823. Made a moving
harangue to the spectators from the gallows, ending with a prayer. Of the
ten pirates executed this day, Eucalla showed the greatest courage.


EVANS, CAPTAIN JOHN. Welsh pirate.

Was master of a sloop belonging to the Island of Nevis. Afterwards being
in Jamaica and out of employment, and berths being scarce, he decided to
go "on the account," and in September, 1722, rowed out of Port Royal in a
canoe with a few chosen companions. They began piracy in a small way, by
paddling along the coast and landing at night to break into a house or two
and robbing these of anything they could carry away.

At last at Dun's Hole they found what they were looking for, a small
Bermuda sloop lying at anchor. Evans stepped aboard and informed the crew
of the sloop that he was captain of their vessel, "which was a piece of
news they knew not before." Going on shore, Evans stood treat to his crew
at the village inn, spending three pistols on liquid refreshment. He so
took the fancy of the publican by his open-handed ways that he was invited
to call again. This Evans and his companions did, in the middle of the
same night, and rifled the house and took away all they could carry
aboard their sloop.

Mounting four guns and christening their little vessel the _Scowerer_,
they set sail for Hispaniola. Good luck immediately followed, as on the
very next day they took their first prize, a Spanish sloop, an
extraordinarily rich prize for her size, for the crew were able to share a
sum of £150 a man. For a while all was _coleur de rose_, prize after prize
simply falling into their hands. But an unhappy accident was soon to bring
an end to Evans's career. The boatswain was a noisy, surly fellow, and on
several occasions the captain had words with him about his disrespectful
behaviour. The boatswain on one of these occasions so far forgot himself
as not only to use ill language to his captain but to challenge him to a
fight on the next shore they came to with pistol and sword. On reaching
land the cowardly boatswain refused to go ashore or to fight, whereupon
the captain took his cane and gave him a hearty drubbing, when the
boatswain, all of a sudden drawing a pistol, shot Evans through the head,
so that he fell down dead. Thus was brought to a tragic and sudden end a
career that showed early signs of great promise. The boatswain jumped
overboard and swam for the shore, but a boat put off and brought him back
to the vessel. A trial was at once held, but the chief gunner, unable to
bear with the slow legal procedure any further, stepped forward and shot
the prisoner dead.

The crew of thirty men now shared their plunder of some £9,000 and broke
up, each going his own way.


EVERSON, CAPTAIN JACOB, _alias_ JACOBS.

In January, 1681, Sir Henry Morgan, then Lieutenant-Governor of Jamaica,
received information that a famous Dutch buccaneer, Everson, was anchored
off the coast in an armed sloop, in company with a brigantine which he had
lately captured. This was more than the ex-pirate Governor could tolerate,
so he at once set out in a small vessel with fifty picked men. The sloop
was boarded at midnight, but Everson and a few others escaped by leaping
overboard and swimming to the shore. Most of the prisoners were
Englishmen, and were convicted of piracy and hanged.


EXQUEMELIN, ALEXANDER OLIVIER, or ESQUEMELING in English, OEXMELIN in
French. Buccaneer.

A surgeon with the most famous buccaneers, Exquemelin will always be known
as the historian who recorded the deeds of the buccaneers in his classic
book, "Bucaniers of America, or a true account of the assaults committed
upon the coasts of the West Indies, etc.," published by W. Cooke, London,
1684. This book was first published in Dutch at Amsterdam in 1678, then in
German in 1679, in Spanish in 1681. Since then almost innumerable editions
and reprints have appeared.

The author was a Fleming, who arrived at Tortuga Island in 1666 as an
engagé of the French West India Company. After serving for three years
under an inhuman master he became so ill that he was sold cheaply to a
surgeon. By the kind treatment of his new master Exquemelin soon regained
his health, and at the same time picked up the rudiments of the craft of
barber surgeon. He was in all the great exploits of the buccaneers, and
writes a clear, entertaining, and apparently perfectly accurate first-hand
account of these adventures. He returned to Europe in 1674, and shortly
afterwards published his book.


FALL, JOHN.

This buccaneer was one of Captain Sharp's crew. On the death of John
Hilliard, the ship's master, Fall was promoted to the larboard watch.
Nothing further is known of this man.


FARRINGTON, THOMAS.

One of John Quelch's crew on the brigantine _Charles_. Tried for piracy at
Boston in June, 1704, at the Star Tavern.


FENN, CAPTAIN JOHN.

In the year 1721 Captain Anstis took prize a stout ship, the _Morning
Star_, bound from Guiney to Carolina. This ship the pirates armed with
thirty-two pieces of cannon, manned her with a crew of one hundred men,
and placed Fenn in command, who had until then been gunner in Anstis's
ship, the _Good Fortune_. Fenn was a one-handed man. By carelessness, or
perhaps because of Fenn only having one hand, the _Morning Star_ was run
on to a reef in the Grand Caymans and lost. Fenn and a few others had just
been taken on board by his consort when two King's ships arrived, and the
_Good Fortune_ barely escaped capture.

Fenn was soon given another ship, one armed with twenty-four guns. In
April, 1723, while cleaning their ship at the Island of Tobago, they were
suddenly surprised by the arrival of a man-of-war, the _Winchelsea_.
Setting fire to their ship, the crew ran to hide in the woods. Fenn was
caught a few days later struggling through the jungle with his gunner.


FERDINANDO, LEWIS.

In 1699 he captured a sloop belonging to Samuel Salters, of Bermuda.


FERN, THOMAS.

A Newfoundland fish-splitter.

In August, 1723, joined with John Phillips in stealing a small vessel,
which they called the _Revenge_, and went "on the account." Fern was
appointed carpenter. Fern gave trouble afterwards over the promotion of a
prisoner, an old pirate called Rose Archer, to the rank of quartermaster.

Later on Fern headed a mutiny and attempted to sail off on his own in one
of the prize vessels. He was caught, brought back, and forgiven, but on
attempting to run away a second time, Captain Phillips killed him,
"pursuant to the pirates articles."


FERNON, WILLIAM.

A Somersetshire man.

Taken from a Newfoundland ship, he became a seaman aboard Bartholomew
Roberts's _Royal Fortune_. Died at the age of 22.


FIFE, CAPTAIN JAMES.

Surrendered to Governor Woodes Rogers at New Providence Island, Bahamas,
in June, 1718, and received the royal pardon to pirates. Was afterwards
killed by his own crew.


FILLMORE, JOHN.

A fisherman of Ipswich.

Taken out of the _Dolphin_ when fishing for cod off the Banks of
Newfoundland in 1724 by the pirate Captain Phillips, and forced to join
the pirates. Having no other means of escape he, with two others, suddenly
killed Phillips and two more pirates and brought the vessel into Boston
Harbour. Millard Fillmore, thirteenth President of the United States, was
the great grandson of John Fillmore.


FITZERRALD, JOHN.

Of Limerick.

This Irish pirate was hanged at Newport, Rhode Island, in 1723, at the age
of 21.


FLEMING, CAPTAIN. Pirate.

This notorious Elizabethan pirate did his country a great service by
bringing to Plymouth the first tidings of the approach of the Spanish
Armada in 1585.

To quote John Smith, the great Elizabethan traveller and the founder of
the colony of Virginia, "Fleming was an expert and as much sought for as
any pirate of the Queen's reign, yet such a friend to his Country, that
discovering the Spanish Armada, he voluntarily came to Plymouth, yielded
himself freely to my Lord Admirall, and gave him notice of the Spaniards
coming: which good warning came so happily and unexpectedly, that he had
his pardon, and a good reward."


FLETCHER, JOHN.

Of Edinburgh.

Tried at Newport, Rhode Island, for piracy in 1723, found "not guilty."
His age was only 17 years.


FLY, CAPTAIN WILLIAM. Pirate and prizefighter.

He was boatswain in the _Elizabeth_, of Bristol, in 1726, bound for
Guinea. Heading a mutiny on May 27th, he tossed the captain over the
ship's side, and slaughtered all the officers except the ship's surgeon.
Fly was unanimously elected captain by the crew. His first prize was the
_John and Hannah_ off the coast of North Carolina. The next the _John and
Betty_, Captain Gale, from Bardadoes to Guinea. After taking several other
vessels, he cruised off the coast of Newfoundland where he took a whaler.
Fly was caught by a piece of strategy on the part of the whaler captain,
who carried him and his crew in chains in their own ship to Great
Brewster, Massachusetts, in June, 1726. On July 4th Fly and the other
pirates were brought to trial at Boston, and on the 16th were executed. On
the day of execution Fly refused to go to church before the hanging to
listen to a sermon by Dr. Coleman. On the way to the gallows he bore
himself with great bravado, jumping briskly into the cart with a nosegay
in his hands bedecked with coloured ribbons like a prizefighter, smiling
and bowing to the spectators. He was hanged in chains at Nix's Mate, a
small island in Boston Harbour, and thus was brought to a close a brief
though brilliant piratical career of just one month.


FORREST, WILLIAM.

One of the mutinous crew of the _Antonio_ hanged at Boston in 1672.


FORSEITH, EDWARD.

One of Captain Avery's crew. Hanged at Execution Dock, 1696.


FOSTER. Buccaneer and poet.

Only two facts are known about this adventurer. One is that he was
reproved on a certain occasion by Morgan (who thought nothing of torturing
his captives) for "harshness" to his prisoners, and the other that he
wrote sentimental verse, particularly one work entitled "Sonneyettes of
Love."


FRANKLYN, CHARLES.

This Welsh pirate was a Monmouthshire man, and one of Captain Howel
Davis's crew. While at the Cape Verde Islands, Franklyn "was so charmed
with the luxuries of the place and the free conversation of the Women,"
that he married and settled down there.


FREEBARN, MATTHEW.

One of Captain Lowther's crew. Hanged at St. Kitts on March 11th, 1722.


FROGGE, WILLIAM. Buccaneer.

Was with Morgan in his attacks on Porto Bello and Panama in 1670. He kept
a diary of the chief events of these exploits, and distinctly states that
the Spaniards, and not Morgan, set fire to the city. But he was greatly
enraged against Morgan for cheating the buccaneers out of their plunder,
and giving each man only about £10 as his share.


FULWORTH, MRS. ANNE.

This lady accompanied Anne Bonny to New Providence Island from Carolina in
the guise of her mother. When Captain Rackam and Anne Bonny were
intriguing to run away from the latter's husband, "a pardoned pirate, a
likely young fellow and of a sober life," Mrs. Fulworth offered sympathy
and advice to the lovers. The scandal being brought to the ears of
Governor Woodes Rogers by a pirate called Richard Turnley, he sent for the
two ladies, "and examining them both upon it, and finding they could not
deny it, he threaten'd, if they proceeded further in it, to commit them
both to Prison, and order them to be whipp'd, and that Rackam, himself,
should be their Executioner."


GARCIA.

One of Gilbert's crew in the _Panda_. Hanged at Boston in June, 1835.


GARDINER.

Although at one time a pirate, by some means or other he became appointed
to the office of Deputy Collector at Boston in 1699. Accepted a bribe of
stolen gold from the pirate Gillam, which caused some gossip in the town.


GASPAR, CAPTAIN JOSÉ, _alias_ "GASPARILLA" or "RICHARD COEUR DE LION."

Was an officer of high rank in the Spanish Navy till 1782, when, having
been detected in stealing some jewels belonging to the Crown, he stole a
ship and turned pirate. Settling at Charlotte Harbour, he built a fort,
where he kept his female prisoners, all the male ones being killed. Here
he lived in regal state as king of the pirates, on Gasparilla Island. In
1801 he took a big Spanish ship forty miles from Boca Grande, killed the
crew, and took a quantity of gold and twelve young ladies. One of these
was a Spanish princess, whom he kept for himself; the eleven Mexican girls
he gave to his crew.

Gaspar was described as having polished manners and a great love of
fashionable clothes, and being fearless in fight; but in spite of all
these attractive qualities, the little Spanish princess would have none of
him, and was murdered.

By the year 1821 the United States Government had made matters so hot for
Gaspar that the pirate kingdom was broken up and their booty of 30,000,000
dollars divided.

As he was about to sail away, a big ship came into the bay, apparently an
English merchantman. Gaspar at once prepared to attack her, when she ran
up the Stars and Stripes, proving herself to be a heavily armed American
man-of-war. The pirate ship was defeated, and Gaspar, winding a piece of
anchor chain round his waist, jumped overboard and was drowned, his age
being 65.


GATES, THOMAS.

Hanged in Virginia in 1718 with the rest of Captain Edward Teach's crew.


GAUTIER, FRANÇOIS, or GAUTIEZ, _alias_ GEORGE SADWELL.

Native of Havre.

Cook on board the _Jane_ schooner, commanded by Captain Thomas Johnson.
While on a voyage from Gibraltar to Brazil with a valuable cargo, Gautier
and the mate killed the captain and the helmsman and steered the vessel to
Scotland, sinking her near Stornoway. Caught and tried at Edinburgh in
November, 1821, found guilty, and hanged in January on the sands of Leith,
his body being publicly dissected afterwards by the Professor of Anatomy
to Edinburgh University. The age of this French pirate at his death was
23.


GAYNY, GEORGE, or GAINY.

One of Wafer's little party lost in the jungle of Darien in 1681. In
attempting to swim across a swollen river with a line, he got into
difficulties, became entangled in the line which was tied round his neck,
and having also a bag containing 300 Spanish silver dollars on his back,
he sank and was swept away. Some time afterwards Wafer found Gayny lying
dead in a creek with the rope twisted about him and his money at his neck.


GENNINGS, CAPTAIN.

A renegade English pirate who joined the Barbary corsairs, turned
Mohammedan, and commanded a Moorish pirate vessel. Taken prisoner off the
Irish coast, he was brought to London and hanged at Wapping.


GERRARD, THOMAS.

Of the Island of Antigua.

One of Major Bonnet's crew of the _Royal James_. Tried for piracy at
Charleston in 1718, but found "not guilty."


GIBBENS, GARRAT.

Boatswain on board the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Was killed at the same time
as Captain Teach.


GIBBS, CHARLES.

Born at Rhode Island in 1794, he was brought up on a farm there. Ran away
to sea in the United States sloop-of-war _Harriet_. Was in action off
Pernambuco against H.M.S. _Peacock_, afterwards serving with credit on
board the _Chesapeake_ in her famous fight with the _Shannon_; but after
his release from Dartmoor as a prisoner of war he opened a grocery shop in
Ann Street, called the "Tin Pot," "a place full of abandoned women and
dissolute fellows." Drinking up all the profits, he was compelled to go to
sea again, and got a berth on a South American privateer. Gibbs led a
mutiny, seized the ship and turned her into a pirate, and cruised about in
the neighbourhood of Havana, plundering merchant vessels along the coast
of Cuba. He slaughtered the crews of all the ships he took. In 1819
returned to private life in New York with 30,000 dollars in gold. Taking a
pleasure trip to Liverpool, he was entrapped by a designing female and
lost all his money.

In 1830 he took to piracy once more and shipped as a seaman in the brig
_Vineyard_ (Captain W. Thornby), New Orleans to Philadelphia, with a cargo
of cotton, molasses, and 54,000 dollars in specie.

Gibbs again brought about a mutiny, murdering the captain and mate. After
setting fire to and scuttling the ship, the crew took to their boats,
landing at Barrow Island, where they buried their money in the sand.

He was hanged at New York as recently as 1831.


GIDDENS, PAUL.

One of Captain Quelch's crew. Tried at Boston in 1704.


GIDDINGS, JOHN.

Of York River, Virginia.

One of Captain Pound's crew. Wounded and taken prisoner at Tarpaulin Cove
in 1689.


GILBERT, CAPTAIN.

Commanded the schooner _Panda_. On September 20th, 1832, he took and
plundered a Salem brig, the _Mexican_, on her way from Salem to Rio de
Janeiro. A few months later Gilbert and his crew were captured by Captain
Trotter, of H.M. brig-of-war _Curlew_, and taken as prisoners to Salem and
handed over to the United States authorities. Tried at Boston in December,
1834. Hanged at the same place on June 11th, 1835. This was the last act
of piracy committed upon the Atlantic Ocean.


GILLAM, CAPTAIN JAMES, _alias_ KELLY.

A notorious pirate. When serving on board the East Indiaman _Mocha_, he
led a mutiny, and with his own hands murdered the commander, Captain
Edgecomb, in his sleep. He came back to America with Captain Kidd, and was
hiding, under the name of Kelly, when caught in 1699 at Charleston,
opposite Boston, by the Governor of Massachusetts, who described him as
"the most impudent, hardened villain I ever saw." It was said that Gillam
had entered the service of the Mogul, turned Mohammedan, and been
circumcised. To settle this last point, the prisoner was examined by a
surgeon and a Jew, who both declared, on oath, that it was so.


GILLS, JOHN.

One of Captain Teach's crew. Hanged in Virginia in 1718.


GLASBY, HARRY.

Sailed as mate in the _Samuel_, of London (Captain Cary), which was taken
in 1720 by Roberts, who made Glasby master on board the _Royal Fortune_.

Tried for piracy on the Guinea Coast in April and acquitted. Evidence was
brought at his trial to show that Glasby was forced to serve with the
pirates, for, being a "sea-artist" or sail-master, he was most useful to
them. Twice he tried to escape in the West Indies, on one occasion being
tried with two others by a drunken jury of pirates. The other deserters
were shot, but Glasby was saved by one of his judges threatening to shoot
anyone who made any attempt on him. Glasby befriended other prisoners and
gave away his share of the plunder to them. When the _Royal Fortune_ was
taken by the _Swallow_, several of the most desperate pirates,
particularly one James Philips, took lighted matches with which to ignite
the powder magazine and blow up the ship. Glasby prevented this by placing
trusted sentinels below.


GODEKINS, MASTER.

This notorious Hanseatic pirate, with another called Stertebeker, did
fearful damage to English and other merchant shipping in the North Sea in
the latter part of the fourteenth century.

On June 1st, 1395, he seized an English ship laden with salt fish off the
coast of Denmark, her value being reckoned at £170. The master and crew of
twenty-five men they slew, the only mariner saved being a boy, whom the
pirates took with them to Wismar.

These same men took another English ship, the _Dogger_ (Captain Gervase
Cat). The _Dogger_ was at anchor, and the crew fishing, when the pirates
attacked them. The captain and crew were wounded, and damage was done to
the tune of 200 nobles.

Another vessel taken was a Yarmouth barque, _Michael_ (master, Robert
Rigweys), while off Plymouth, the owner, Hugh ap Fen, losing 800 nobles.
In 1394 these Hanseatic pirates, with a large fleet, attacked the town of
Norbern in Norway, plundering the town and taking away all they could
carry, as well as the merchants, who they held for ransom. The houses they
burnt.


GOFFE, CHRISTOPHER.

Originally one of Captain Woollery's crew of Rhode Island pirates. In
November, 1687, he surrendered himself at Boston, and was pardoned. In
August, 1691, was commissioned by the Governor to cruise with his ship,
the _Swan_, between Cape Cod and Cape Ann, to protect the coast from
pirates.


GOLDSMITH, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

Of Dartmouth in Devon.

During the reign of Queen Anne, Goldsmith commanded a privateer vessel,
the _Snap Dragon_, of Dartmouth. He turned pirate and amassed great
riches.

This pirate would have been forgotten by now were it not that he died in
his bed at Dartmouth, and was buried in the churchyard there. The lines
engraved on his tombstone have been quoted in the Preface, but may be
repeated here:

    Men that are virtuous serve the Lord;
    And the Devil's by his friends ador'd;
    And as they merit get a place
    Amidst the bless'd or hellish race;
    Pray then, ye learned clergy show
    Where can this brute, Tom Goldsmith, go?
    Whose life was one continual evil,
    Striving to cheat God, Man, and Devil.


GOMEZ, JOHN, _alias_ PANTHER KEY JOHN.

Brother-in-law of the famous pirate Gasparilla.

Died, credited with the great age of 120 years, at Panther Key in Florida
in 1900.


GOODALE, JOHN.

A Devonshire man.

Goodale, who was a renegade and had turned Mohammedan, held a position of
importance and wealth amongst the Moors of Algiers. In the year 1621 he
bought from the Moors a British prize called the _Exchange_, and also, for
the sum of £7 10s., an English slave, lately captain of an English
merchant ship, whom he got cheap owing to his having a deformed hand.


GOODLY, CAPTAIN.

An English buccaneer of Jamaica, who in the year 1663 was in command of a
"junk" armed with six guns and carrying a crew of sixty men.


GORDON, CAPTAIN NATHANIEL.

Of Portland, Maine.

Commanded and owned the _Evie_, a small, full-rigged ship, which was
fitted up as a "slaver." Made four voyages to West Africa for slaves. On
his last voyage he was captured by the United States sloop _Mohican_, with
967 negroes on board. Tried in New York for piracy and found guilty and
condemned to death. Great pressure was brought on President Lincoln to
reprieve him, but without success, and Gordon was hanged at New York on
February 22nd, 1862.


GOSS, CUTHBERT.

Born at Topsham in Devon.

The compiler of these biographies regrets to have to record that this
pirate was hanged, at the comparatively tender age of 21, outside the
gates of Cape Coast Castle, within the flood-marks, in 1722. He was one of
Captain Roberts's crew, having been taken prisoner by Roberts at Calabar
in a prize called the _Mercy_ galley, of Bristol, in 1721.


GOW, CAPTAIN JOHN, _alias_ SMITH, _alias_ GOFFE. A Scotch pirate, born at
Thurso.

Although the short career of this pirate made a great noise at the time,
he did little to merit the fame which he achieved. He had the honour of
having an account of his piratical activities written by Defoe, and ninety
years later was made the hero in a novel by Walter Scott, as Captain
Cleveland.

Gow sailed from Amsterdam as a foremast hand in the _George_ galley,
commanded by Captain Ferneau, a Guernsey man. Being a brisk and
intelligent man, he was soon promoted to be second mate. They called at
Santa Cruz in Barbary to take in a cargo of beeswax to deliver at Genoa.
Sailing from Santa Cruz on November 3rd, 1724, Gow and a few others
conspired to mutiny and then to go "upon the account." The captain, as was
his custom, had all hands, except the helmsman, into his cabin at eight
o'clock each night for prayers. This particular night, after it was dark,
the conspirators went below to the hammocks of the chief mate, the
supercargo, and the surgeon and cut all their throats. They did the same
to the captain, who was then thrown overboard though still alive.

Gow being now elected captain and one Williams, a thorough rogue, mate,
they renamed the vessel the _Revenge_, armed her with eighteen guns, and
cruised off the coast of Spain, taking an English sloop with a cargo of
fish from Newfoundland, commanded by Captain Thomas Wise of Poole. Their
second prize was a Glasgow ship loaded with herrings and salmon.

They next sailed to Madeira, where Gow presented the Governor with a box
of Scotch herrings. About this time Williams, the first mate, insulted Gow
by accusing him of cowardice because he had refused to attack a big French
ship, and snapped his pistol at him. Two seamen standing near shot
Williams, wounding him severely, and to get rid of him they put him aboard
one of their prizes. Discussions now took place as to where to sail, and
Gow, who was in love with a lass in the Orkney Islands, suggested sailing
thither, as being a good place to traffic their stolen goods.

On arriving at Carristown they sold most of their cargo, and one of the
crew, going on shore, bought a horse for three pieces of eight and rode
to Kirkwall and surrendered himself. Next day ten more men deserted,
setting out in the long-boat for the mainland of Scotland, but were taken
prisoners in the _Forth_, of Edinburgh. By now the whole countryside was
alarmed. Gow's next move was to land his men and plunder the houses of the
gentry. They visited a Mrs. Honnyman and her daughter, but these ladies
managed to get their money and jewellery away in safety. Gow's crew
marched back to their ship with a bagpiper playing at their head.

They now sailed to Calfsound, seized three girls and took them aboard.
Then to the Island of Eda to plunder the house of Mr. Fea, an old
schoolmate of Gow's. Arriving there on February 13th, by bad management
they ran their vessel on the rocks. The bo'son and five men went ashore
and met Mr. Fea, who entertained them at the local public-house. By a
simple stratagem, Mr. Fea seized first the bo'son and afterwards the five
men. Soon after this, Fea trapped Gow and all the rest of his crew of
twenty-eight men. Help was sent for, and eventually the _Greyhound_
frigate arrived and took Gow and his crew to London, arriving off Woolwich
on March 26th, 1725. The prisoners were taken to the Marshalsea Prison in
Southwark, and there found their old companion, Lieutenant Williams. Four
men turned King's evidence--viz., George Dobson, Job Phinnies, Tim Murphy,
and William Booth.

The trial at Newgate began on May 8th, when Gow was sullen and reserved
and refused to plead. He was ordered to be pressed to death, which was the
only form of torture still allowed by the law. At the last moment Gow
yielded, and pleaded "not guilty." Gow was found guilty, and hanged on
June 11th, 1725, but "as he was turned off, he fell down from the Gibbit,
the rope breaking by the weight of some that pulled his leg. Although
he had been hanging for four minutes, he was able to climb up the ladder a
second time, which seemed to concern him very little, and he was hanged
again."

[Illustration: PRESSING A PIRATE TO PLEAD.

To face p. 140.]

His body was then taken to Greenwich and there hanged in chains, to be a
warning to others.


GRAFF, LE CAPITAINE LAURENS DE. Filibuster.

Commanded _Le Neptune_, a ship armed with fifty-four guns and a crew of
210 men, in the West Indies in the seventeenth century.


GRAHAM, CAPTAIN.

Commanded a shallop, with a crew of fourteen men, in 1685. Sailed in
company with Captain Veale up and down the coast of Virginia and New
England.


GRAMBO.

Was "boss" of Barataria, the smugglers' stronghold off the Island of
Grande Terre, near Louisiana, until shot by Jean Lafitte in 1811.


GRAMMONT, SIEUR DE. French filibuster.

One of the great buccaneers. Born in Paris, he entered the Royal Marines,
in which he distinguished himself in several naval engagements.

He commanded a frigate in the West Indies, and captured near Martinique a
Dutch ship with a cargo worth £400,000, which he carried to Hispaniola,
but there lost all of it through gambling, and, not daring to return to
France, he joined the buccaneers.

He sailed to Curaçoa in 1678 with the Count d'Estrees' fleet, which was
wrecked on a coral reef off the Isle d'Aves. De Grammont was left behind
to salve what he could from the wreck. After this, with 700 men he sailed
to Maracaibo, spending six months on the lake, seizing the shipping and
plundering all the settlements in the neighbourhood.

In June, 1680, de Grammont, with an obsolete commission and a small party
of men, made a brilliant night assault on La Guayra, the seaport of
Caracas. Only forty-seven men took part in the actual attack on the town,
which was guarded by two forts and by cannon upon the walls. The pirates
were attacked next day by 2,000 Spaniards from Caracas, but with the
greatest skill and bravery de Grammont got almost all his party away,
though wounded himself in the throat. He carried away with him amongst his
prisoners the Governor of the town.

He retired to the Isle d'Aves to nurse his wound, and later went to Petit
Goave.

In 1683 took part in the successful English and French attack on Vera
Cruz, and afterwards, when Vanhorn died of gangrene, de Grammont, his
lieutenant, carried his ship back to Petit Goave. In 1685 he received a
fresh commission from de Cossey, the Governor of Dominica, and joined
forces with the famous buccaneer Laurens de Graff at the Isle of Vache,
and sailed with 11,000 men for Campeachy. Taking the town, he reduced it
to ashes and blew up the fortress, returning with the plunder to
Hispaniola. Before leaving, however, to celebrate the Festival of St.
Louis, they burnt a huge bonfire, using 200,000 crowns worth of logwood.

Grammont at this time commanded a fine ship, _Le Hardy_ (fifty guns and a
crew of 300 men).

In 1686 de Grammont was granted a commission of "Lieutenant du Roi," in
order to keep him from harassing the Spaniards, and yet not to lose his
valuable services to his country.

In order to have one last fling at the old free buccaneering life before
settling down to the more sedate and respectable calling of an officer in
the French King's navy, de Grammont sailed off with a party of 180
desperadoes, but was never heard of again.


GRAND, PIERRE LE.

A native of Dieppe in Normandy.

Le Grand was the man who, having made one great and successful exploit,
had the good sense to retire. He was the first pirate to take up his
quarters at Tortuga Island, and was known amongst the English as "Peter
the Great." His name will go down to posterity for his "bold and insolent"
action when in a small open boat with a handful of men he seized a great
Spanish galleon.

Pierre had been out on the "grand account" for a long while, meeting with
no success. When almost starving and in despair, a great Spanish fleet
hove in sight, and one ship, bigger than the rest, was observed sailing at
some little distance behind the other vessels. The mad idea entered the
head of the now desperate pirate to take this ship. The pirates all took
an oath to their captain to fight without fear and never to surrender. It
was dusk, and in these tropical latitudes night follows day very quickly.
Before the attack, orders were given to the surgeon to bore a hole in the
bottom of the boat so that it would quickly sink, thus taking away any
hope of escape should the enterprise fail. This was done, and the boat was
paddled quietly alongside the great warship, when the crew, armed only
with a pistol and a sword a-piece, clambered up the sides and jumped
aboard. Quickly and silently the sleeping helmsman was killed, while
Pierre and a party of his men ran down into the great cabin, where they
surprised the Spanish admiral playing cards with his officers. The
admiral, suddenly confronted by a band of bearded desperadoes in his cabin
with a pistol aimed at his head, ejaculated "Jesus bless us! are these
devils or what are they?" While this was going on others of the pirates
had hurried to the gun-room, seized the arms, killing every Spaniard who
withstood them. Pierre knew, as scarcely any other successful pirate or
gambler ever did, the right moment to stop. He at once put ashore all the
prisoners he did not want for working the ship, and sailed straight back
to France; where he lived the rest of his life in comfortable obscurity,
and never again returned to piracy.

The news of this exploit spread rapidly over the West Indies, and caused
the greatest excitement amongst the pirate fraternity of Tortuga and
Hispaniola.

Men left their work of killing and drying beef, while others deserted
their plantations to go a-pirating on the Spaniards, in much the same way
as men went to a gold rush years after. Those who had no boat would
venture forth in canoes looking for rich Spanish treasure ships.

It was this wild deed of Pierre le Grand that was the beginning of piracy
in the West Indies, towards the latter half of the seventeenth century.


GRANGE, ROGER.

One of Captain Lowther's crew of the _Happy Delivery_. Tried for piracy at
St. Kitts in 1722, but acquitted.


DE GRAVES, CAPTAIN HERBERT.

This Dutch pirate sailed as captain of his own merchant vessel during the
reign of King Charles II. He took to landing his crew on the south coast
of England and raiding gentlemen's houses. The first he ever pillaged was
that of a Mr. Sturt, in Sussex. In those days, when banks were almost
unknown, the houses of the rich often contained great sums of money. De
Graves was wont to sail along the Devonshire coast, sometimes landing and
robbing a house, sometimes taking a ship, which he would carry to
Rotterdam and sell. He made several daring raids into Cowes and Lowestoft,
getting off with valuable plunder.

In the war between England and the Dutch, Graves was given command of a
fire-ship. This vessel he handled very capably, and in the action off the
Downs he ran her on board the _Sandwich_, setting her on fire. James, Duke
of York, escaped from the _Sandwich_ with great difficulty, while the Earl
of Albemarle and most of the crew perished. At the conclusion of the war,
De Graves returned to piracy, but his ship was wrecked in a storm close to
Walmer Castle. The captain and a few of his crew were saved, and, being
made prisoners, were hanged on a tree.


GREAVES, CAPTAIN, _alias_ "RED LEGS." West Indian pirate.

Born in Barbadoes of prisoners who had been sent there as slaves by
Cromwell. Most of these slaves were natives of Scotland and Ireland, and,
owing to their bare knees, generally went by the name of Red Legs. Young
Greaves was left an orphan, but had a kind master and a good education.
His master dying, the lad was sold to another and a cruel one. The boy ran
away, swam across Carlisle Bay, but by mistake clambered on to the wrong
ship, a pirate vessel, commanded by a notoriously cruel pirate called
Captain Hawkins. Finding himself driven to the calling of piracy, Greaves
became very efficient, and quickly rose to eminence. He was remarkable for
his dislike of unnecessary bloodshed, torture of prisoners, and killing of
non-combatants. These extraordinary views brought about a duel between
himself and his captain, in which the former was victorious, and he was at
once elected commander.

Greaves now entered a period of the highest piratical success, but always
preserved very strictly his reputation for humanity and morality. He never
tortured his prisoners, nor ever robbed the poor, nor maltreated women.

His greatest success of all was his capture of the Island of Margarita,
off the coast of Venezuela.

On this occasion, after capturing the Spanish Fleet, he turned the guns of
their warships against the forts, which he then stormed, and was rewarded
by a huge booty of pearls and gold.

Red Legs then retired to the respectable life of a planter in the Island
of Nevis, but was one day denounced as a pirate by an old seaman. He was
cast into a dungeon to await execution, when the great earthquake came
which destroyed and submerged the town in 1680, and one of the few
survivors was Greaves. He was picked up by a whaler, on board of which he
served with success, and later on, for his assistance in capturing a gang
of pirates, he received pardon for his earlier crimes.

He again retired to a plantation, and was noted for his many acts of piety
and for his generous gifts to charities and public institutions,
eventually dying universally respected and sorrowed.


GREENSAIL, RICHARD.

One of Blackbeard's crew in the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Hanged in Virginia
in 1718.


GREENVILLE, HENRY.

Hanged at Boston in 1726 with Captain Fly and Samuel Cole.


GRIFFIN, JACK.

Chief mate of a Bristol vessel. One of the chief mutineers on board the
_Bird_ galley in 1718, off Sierra Leone, when he befriended the captain of
the _Bird_, with whom he had been at school. Took part in a feast to
celebrate the success of the mutiny, the meal being cooked in a huge
caldron in which the slaves' food was prepared. In this caldron were
boiled, on this occasion, fowls, ducks, geese, and turkeys, which were
unplucked; several Westphalian hams were added, and a "large sow with
young embowled." The health of King James III., the Pretender, was drunk
with full honours.


GRIFFIN, JOHN.

Of Blackwall, Middlesex.

Taken out of the _Mercy_ galley and appointed carpenter on board the
_Royal Fortune_ by Captain Roberts. Condemned to be hanged at Cape Coast
Castle, but pardoned and sold to the Royal African Company as a slave for
seven years.


GRIFFIN, RICHARD.

A gunsmith of Boston.

Sailed with Captain Pound. Wounded in a fight at Tarpaulin Cove, a bullet
entering his ear and coming out through his eye.


GROGNIET, CAPTAIN.

A French buccaneer who in 1683 was in company with Captain L'Escayer, with
a crew of some 200 French and 80 English freebooters. He joined Davis and
Swan during the blockade of Panama in 1685, and was in the unsuccessful
attempt in May, 1685, on the Spanish treasure fleet from Lima. In July of
the same year Grogniet, with 340 French buccaneers, parted company from
Davis at Quibo, plundered several towns, and then, foolishly, revisited
Quibo, where they were discovered by a Spanish squadron in January, 1686,
and their ship was burnt while the crew was on shore. They were rescued
by Townley, with whom they went north to Nicaragua, and sacked Granada. In
May, 1686, Grogniet and half the Frenchmen crossed the isthmus. In the
January following, Grogniet reappeared, and, joining with the English,
again plundered Guayaquil, where he was severely wounded, and died soon
afterwards.


GULLIMILLIT, BRETI.

Taken with other South American pirates by H.M. sloop _Tyne_, and hanged
at Kingston, Jamaica, in 1823.


GUTTEREZ, JUAN.

Hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, on February 7th, 1823.


GUY, CAPTAIN.

Commanded the frigate _James_ (fourteen guns, ninety men). Belonged to
Tortuga Island and Jamaica in 1663.


HAINS, RICHARD.

One of Captain Low's crew. When Low took a Portuguese ship at St.
Michael's in the Azores in 1723, he, with unusual kindness, simply burnt
the ship and let the crew go to shore in a boat. While the prisoners were
getting out the boat, Richard Hains happened to be drinking punch out of a
silver tankard at one of the open ports, and took the opportunity to drop
into the boat among the Portuguese and lie down in the bottom, so as to
escape with them. Suddenly remembering his silver tankard, he climbed
back, seized the tankard, and hid again in the boat, somehow, by great
good fortune, being unobserved by those on the ship, and so escaped almost
certain death both for himself and the Portuguese sailors.


HALSEY, CAPTAIN JOHN.

This famous South Sea pirate was born on March 1st, 1670, at Boston, and
received a commission from the Governor of Massachusetts to cruise as a
privateer on the Banks. No sooner was he out of sight of land than Halsey
turned pirate. Taking a ship or two, he sailed to the Canary Islands,
picking up a rich Spanish ship there. He next doubled the Cape of Good
Hope, and paid a call on the "brethren" at Madagascar. He then sailed to
the Red Sea, another happy hunting ground of the pirates, and met a big
Dutch ship armed with sixty guns. Halsey astounded his men by announcing
his sudden determination to attack only Moorish ships in the future. The
indignant crew mutinied, threw Captain Halsey and his chief gunner in
irons, and proceeded to attack the Dutchman. The mutinous pirates got the
worst of the encounter, and released Halsey, who only just managed to get
his ship away. Luck seems to have deserted Halsey for a while, for not a
Moorish ship could he meet with, so much so that his scruples against
taking Christian ships eased enough to permit him to bag a brace of
English ships, the _Essex_ and the _Rising Eagle_.

The captain of the former proved to be a very old and dear friend of
Halsey's quartermaster, and to show a friendly feeling, Halsey allowed the
captain to keep all his personal belongings. Nevertheless, they took a
comfortable booty, comprising some fifty thousand pounds in English gold,
out of the _Essex_, and another ten thousand out of the _Rising Eagle_.

The pirates, being strict business men, produced invoices and sold the two
ships back to their legal owners for cash, and having settled this affair
to everybody's satisfaction, Halsey and his consort returned to
Madagascar. Here they were visited by the captain of a Scotch ship, the
_Neptune_, which had come to trade liquor, probably rum, but possibly
whisky, with the pirates. A sudden hurricane arose, destroying both the
pirate ships and damaging the _Neptune_. Halsey, ever a man of resource,
thereupon seized the Scotch ship, and, with even greater enterprise, at
once attacked a ship, the _Greyhound_, which lay at anchor, which was
loaded with stolen merchandise which the pirates had only just sold to the
captain of the _Greyhound_, and for which they had been paid.

The end was now drawing near, for in 1716 Captain Halsey was taken ill of
some tropical fever and died. He was a popular commander, respected, ever
loved by his men, for he was a humane man, never killing his prisoners
unless necessity compelled. A contemporary eyewitness of his funeral rites
leaves the following account of his burial:

"With great solemnity, the prayers of the Church of England being read
over him and his sword and pistols laid on his coffin, which was covered
with a ship's Jack. As many minute guns were fired as he was old--viz.,
46--and three English vollies and one French volley of small arms." The
chronicler continues: "His grave was made in a garden of watermelons and
fenced in to prevent his being rooted up by wild pigs."

This last a truly touching thought on the part of the bereaved.


HAMAN, CAPTAIN JOHN.

He lived all alone with his wife and family on a small and otherwise
uninhabited island in the Bahamas.

About the year 1720, he sailed into New Providence Harbour in his 40-ton
sloop, intending to settle there. Captain Rackam and Anne Bonny stole this
vessel and eloped in her.

Writing of Captain Haman, Johnson tells us "his Livelihood and constant
Employment was to plunder and pillage the Spaniards, whose Sloops and
Launces he had often surprised about Cuba and Hispaniola, and sometimes
brought off a considerable Booty, always escaping by a good Pair of Heels,
insomuch that it became a Bye-Word to say, 'There goes John Haman, catch
him if you can.' His Business to Providence now was to bring his Family
there, in order to live and settle, being weary, perhaps, of living in
that Solitude, or else apprehensive if any of the Spaniards should
discover his Habitation, they might land, and be revenged of him for all
his Pranks."


HAMLIN, CAPTAIN JEAN.

A famous French filibuster who turned pirate.

Set out in 1682 from Jamaica in a sloop with 120 other desperadoes in
pursuit of a French ship that was "wanted" by the Jamaican Governor.
Having overtaken the ship, _La Trompeuse_, he seized her, fitted her up as
a man-of-war, and then started out on a wild piratical cruise, taking
eighteen Jamaican vessels, barbarously ill-treating the crews, and
completely demoralizing the trade of the island. Two other ships were now
sent to find and destroy the new _La Trompeuse_, but Hamlin escaped and
sailed to the Virgin Islands, and was most hospitably received by the
Governor of the Danish Island of St. Thomas, one Adolf Esmit, who was
himself a retired pirate. Using this island as his headquarters Hamlin
cruised about and took several English ships.

In May, 1683, he appeared on the West Coast of Africa disguised as an
English man-of-war. Off the coast of Sierra Leone, he took seventeen Dutch
and English ships, returning to Dominica in July, 1683, finally reaching
the friendly St. Thomas Island, being warmly welcomed back by the pirate
Governor. Three days afterwards, H.M.S. _Francis_ arrived on the lookout
for pirates, and attacked and burnt Hamlin's ship. Hamlin, with the help
of the Governor, managed to escape with his life.


HANDS, ISRAEL, also known as BASILICA HANDS.

Sailing-master with the famous Teach or Blackbeard. One day when Teach was
entertaining a pilot and Hands in his cabin, after they had been drinking
and chatting awhile seated round the cabin table, on which stood a lighted
candle, Blackbeard suddenly drew his pistols, blew out the candle, and
crossing his arms, fired both his pistols under the table. Hands was shot
in the knee, and crippled for life. Teach's explanation to the angry
demands of his guests as to the reason for this extraordinary conduct
produced the reply that "if he did not shoot one or two of them now and
then, they'd forget who he was." Hands after this deserted, but was
captured at Bath in Carolina by Brand. Hands, probably in revenge for
being wantonly shot by Teach, turned King's evidence at the inquiry held
at Charleston, and brought very serious accusations against one of the
most prominent men in the colony, Knight, who was secretary to the Chief
Justice, and a deputy collector of Customs.

Hands was tried for piracy in Virginia in December, 1718, but pardoned.
When last heard of was seen begging his bread in London.


HANSEL, CAPTAIN.

He behaved himself so courageously at the taking of Porto Bello in 1669,
that a party of some 400 men, in four ships, chose Hansel to be their
admiral in an attempt on the town of Comana, near Caracas. This attack was
a most complete failure, the pirates being driven off "with great loss
and in great confusion." When Hansel's party arrived back at Jamaica, they
found the rest of Morgan's men had returned before them, who "ceased not
to mock and jeer at them for their ill success at Comana, after telling
them, 'Let us see what money you brought from Comana, and if it be as good
silver as that which we bring from Maracaibo.'"


HARDING, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

In 1653 he captured a rich prize, a Barbadoes vessel. For this he was
tried for piracy at Boston.


HARDY, RICHARD.

One of Captain Bartholomew Roberts's crew. Hanged at Cape Coast Castle,
West Coast of Africa, on April 6th, 1722, at the age of 25 years.

It is recorded that, owing to the lack of expert knowledge in the niceties
of carrying out executions, Hardy was led to the scaffold with his hands
tied behind him. This annoyed Hardy very much, and it is mentioned in the
official account of his execution that the prisoner indignantly declared
"that he had seen many a Man hang'd, but this Way of the Hands being ty'd
behind them, he was a Stranger to, and never saw before in his Life."


HARPER, ABRAHAM.

Born at Bristol.

He was cooper on board Captain Roberts's _Royal Fortune_. When the pirates
took a prize, it was Harper's duty to see that all the casks and coopers'
tools were removed from the prize to the pirate craft.

Hanged at the age of 23, with the rest of the crew, in 1722.


HARRIS, CAPTAIN.

Joined the Barbary corsairs during the reign of Queen Elizabeth, turned
Mohammedan, and rose to command a Moorish pirate vessel. Cruised off the
coast of Ireland, was taken prisoner by an English ship, and hanged at
Wapping.


HARRIS, HUGH.

Of Corfe Castle, Dorsetshire.

One of Roberts's crew; tried and condemned to be hanged in 1722, but
reprieved and sold to the Royal African Company to serve for seven years
in their plantations.


HARRIS, JAMES.

One of Roberts's crew.


HARRIS, PETER.

Born in Kent.

This buccaneer was known amongst the brethren of the coast as "a brave and
Stout Soldier."

In 1680 he took a leading part in the march of the buccaneers across the
Isthmus of Darien, but during the attack on the Spanish Fleet off Panama
he was shot in both legs, and died of his wounds.


HARRIS, RICHARD.

A Cornishman.

One of Captain Roberts's crew and the oldest, being 45 years of age when
he was hanged, an unusually advanced age to reach in this most "unhealthy"
profession.


HARRISON, CAPTAIN.

Sailed in October, 1670, in company with Captains Prince and Ludbury, into
Port Royal, after a successful expedition with 170 men up the San Juan
River in Nicaragua, when they plundered the unfortunate city of Granada.
This city had suffered so much from previous attacks from the buccaneers
that the plunder came to only some £20 per man on this occasion.

Modyford, the Governor of Jamaica, "reproved the captains for acting
without commissions, but did not deem it prudent to press the matter too
far"; in fact, instead of arresting Harrison and his crew, he sent them to
join Morgan the Buccaneer, who was then gathering together a great fleet
of buccaneers at the Isle of Vache.


HARVEY, CAPTAIN.

Arrived at New London in 1685 in company with another pirate, Captain
Veale; posed as an honest merchant, but, being recognized, left in great
haste.


HARVEY, WILLIAM.

Tried for piracy with the rest of Gow's crew at Newgate in 1725, and
acquitted.


HARWOOD, JOHN.

Tried for piracy at Boston in 1704. One of the crew of the brigantine
_Charles_ (Captain John Quelch, Commander).


HATTSELL, CAPTAIN.

This buccaneer served as an officer with Mansfield in his successful and
daring night attack on the Island of Providence, when, with only 200 men,
the fort was captured and the Spanish Governor taken prisoner. Captain
Hattsell was left behind with thirty-five men to hold the island, while
Mansfield sailed to the mainland with his prisoners, who had surrendered
on condition that they should be safely conducted there.


HAWKINS, CAPTAIN.

A seventeenth-century Barbadoes pirate. Notorious for his cruelty, which
led to his fighting a duel with one of his crew, Greaves, _alias_ Red
Legs, by whom he was defeated, his victor being elected captain in his
place.


HAWKINS, SIR JOHN.

Born in 1532.

This famous Elizabethan seaman sailed in 1561 to the Canary Islands, and
traded in negro slaves between Africa and Hispaniola. Afterwards became an
officer in the Royal Navy. Died at sea off Porto Bello, in 1595, when
serving with Drake in the West Indies.


HAWKINS, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

In the year 1689 cruised off the coast of New England, burning and
plundering the shipping. The Bay colony sent out an armed sloop, the
_Mary_ (Samuel Pease, commander), in October of that year, to attempt to
capture Hawkins. Pease found the pirate in Buzzard's Bay. Hawkins ran up a
red flag and a furious engagement began. The crew of the _Mary_ at last
boarded the pirates, and the captain, Pease, was so severely wounded that
he died.


HAWKINS, THOMAS.

Born at Boston.

Turned pirate and cruised with Captain Pound. Tried for piracy at Boston
in 1690, but reprieved. Sent to England, but on the voyage was killed in a
fight with a French privateer.


HAYES, CAPTAIN, nicknamed "Bully Hayes." A South Sea pirate.

In 1870 was arrested by the English Consul at Samoa for piracy. There
being no prison in this delightful island, the Consul ran Hayes's ship on
shore, and waited for a man-of-war to call and take his prisoner away.
Hayes spent his time, while under open arrest, attending native picnic
parties, at which he was the life and soul, being, when off duty, a man of
great charm of manner and a favourite with the ladies. Presently another
pirate arrived, one Captain Pease, in an armed ship with a Malay crew.
Hayes and Pease quarrelled violently, and the Consul had great trouble to
keep the two pirates from coming to blows. This animosity was all a sham
to throw dust in the Consul's eyes, for one night Pease sailed away with
Hayes, whom he had smuggled on board his ship.


HAZEL, THOMAS.

Of Westminster.

Hanged in Rhode Island in 1723 at the advanced age, for a pirate, of 50.
This is one of the longest lived pirates we have been able to hear of.


HEAMAN, PETER, _alias_ ROGERS.

A French pirate, born in 1787.

Sailed from Gibraltar in May, 1821, as mate on board the schooner _Jane_
(Captain Thomas Johnson), bound for Bahia, Brazil, with a very rich cargo
of beeswax, silk, olives, and other goods, as well as eight barrels of
Spanish dollars.

When about seventeen days out, in the middle of the night, Heaman attacked
one of the crew, James Paterson, and beat him to death. On the captain
coming up on deck to find out what all the noise was about, Heaman beat
him to death with a musket, being assisted by the cook, Francis Gautier,
also a Frenchman. The two conspirators then proceeded to imprison the rest
of the crew in the forecastle, and threw the dead bodies of the captain
and the sailor overboard. For two days the murderers tried to suffocate
the crew by burning pitch and blowing the smoke into the forecastle.
Failing to accomplish this they let the crew out after each had sworn on
the Bible not to inform on them. The course was now altered, and they
sailed towards Scotland. The barrels of dollars were broken open and the
coins placed in bags. In June they reached the Island of Barra, where
Gautier went ashore, wearing the late captain's green coat, and bought a
large boat. Next, they sailed to Stornoway, where they arrived in July,
and here they sank their schooner. The crew rowed ashore in the long-boat,
sharing out the dollars as they went, using an old tin as a measure, each
man getting 6,300 dollars as his share. Their boat was smashed on the
rocks when landing, but they got their plunder safely ashore and hid it
amongst the stones on the beach. Early next morning the mutineers were
visited by the Customs officer. After he had left, the cabin boy, a
Maltese, ran after him and told him the true story of the murders and
robbery. A party of islanders was got together, the mutineers arrested and
taken to Edinburgh, where Heaman and Gautier were tried for piracy and
murder, and on November 27th found guilty and condemned to death. They
were both hanged on January 9th, 1822, on the sands of Leith, within the
flood mark, and afterwards their bodies were delivered to Dr. Alexander
Munro, Professor of Anatomy in the University of Edinburgh, to be publicly
dissected by him.


HEATH, PELEG.

One of William Coward's crew. Condemned to be hanged at Boston in 1690,
but afterwards reprieved.


HEIDON, CAPTAIN.

Arrested for piracy in 1564 for having captured a Flemish ship. This
vessel he manned with thirteen Scotchmen in addition to his own crew, and
sailed off the coast of Spain. Here he took a prize containing a cargo of
wine, which he carried to the Island of Bere in Bantry Bay. The wine was
sold to Lord O'Sullivan. Heidon now fitted up another ship, the _John of
Sandwich_. Was wrecked in her on the Island of Alderney and Heidon was
arrested, but managed to escape in a small boat with some others of the
pirates.


HENLEY, CAPTAIN.

In 1683 sailed from Boston "bound for the Rack," afterwards going to the
Red Sea, where he plundered Arab and Malabar ships.


HERDUE, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Commanded a frigate of four guns, crew of forty men, at Tortuga Island, in
1663.


HERNANDEZ, AUGUSTUS.

Hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, in 1823.


HERNANDEZ, JUAN.

Captured with nine other pirates by H.M. sloop-of-war _Tyne_ and taken to
Jamaica. Hanged on February 7th, 1823, at Kingston.


HERRIOTT, DAVID.

Master of the _Adventure_, from Jamaica, taken by Teach in 1718. He joined
the pirates, and later, when Major Stede Bonnet separated from Teach, he
took Herriott to be his sailing-master. Taken prisoner with Bonnet and his
crew of the _Royal James_ by Colonel Rhet, at Cape Fear, North Carolina,
September 27th, 1718. Herriott and the boatswain, Ignatius Pell, turned
King's evidence at the trial of the pirates held at Charleston. On October
25th, Bonnet and Herriott escaped from prison, in spite of the fact that
the latter had turned King's evidence. Herriott was shot on Sullivan
Island a few days later.


HEWETT, WILLIAM, or HEWET, or HEWIT.

Of Jamaica.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Tried for piracy at Charleston in 1718,
and hanged at White Point on November 8th, and buried in the marsh below
low-water mark.


HIDE, DANIEL.

Of Virginia.

One of the crew of Captain Charles Harris, who, with Captain Low, played
havoc on the shipping off the American coast from New York to Charleston.
Hanged at Newport, Rhode Island, in July, 1723, at the age of 23.


HILL, CORPORAL JOHN.

In charge of the guard at Fort Royal, Falmouth, Maine, which all deserted
one night, and went to sea with the pirate Captain Pound. Killed at
Tarpaulin Cove in 1689.


HILLIARD, JOHN.

Was "chief man" of the company of Captain Bartholomew Sharp on his
"dangerous voyage" to the South Seas. Died on January 2nd, 1681, of
dropsy; buried at sea with the usual buccaneers' honours.


HINCHER, DR. JOHN.

Of Edinburgh University.

Tried for piracy in July, 1723, at Newport, Rhode Island, but acquitted.
This young doctor, his age was only 22, was taken off a prize by Captain
Low against his will, to act as ship's surgeon with the pirates.


HIND, ISRAEL, or HYNDE.

Of Bristol.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Hanged at Cape Coast Castle in 1722, at the
age of 30.


HINGSON, JOHN.

One of Wafer's party left behind and lost in the forest when Dampier
crossed the Isthmus of Darien on foot in 1681.


HITCHENS, ROBERT.

A Devonshire man, born in the year 1515.

Took to piracy early in life. Sailed with the pirate Captain Heidon, and
was wrecked on Alderney in the year 1564. Arrested and tried for piracy,
and was hanged in chains at low-water mark at St. Martin's Point,
Guernsey, in 1564, at the age of 50.


HOLDING, ANTHONY.

One of John Quelch's crew of the brigantine _Charles_. Tried for piracy at
Boston in 1704.


HOLFORD, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Of Jamaica.

An old friend of the notorious pirate Vane. In 1718 he happened to arrive
in his ship at a small uninhabited island in the Bay of Honduras to find
Vane on shore and destitute. Vane thought he would be saved by Holford,
but the latter was quite frank in refusing, saying: "I shan't trust you
aboard my ship unless I carry you a prisoner, for I shall have you
caballing with my men, knock me on the head, and run away with my ship
a-pyrating." It was owing to Holford that Vane was eventually taken a
prisoner to Jamaica and there hanged.


HOLLAND, CAPTAIN RICHARD.

An Irishman.

Commanded a Spanish pirate vessel in the West Indies in 1724. The crew
consisted of sixty Spaniards, eighteen French, and eighteen English
sailors. Holland had originally belonged to the Royal Navy, but deserted
from the _Suffolk_ at Naples, and took shelter in a convent in that city.
In August, 1724, Holland's ship took as prizes the _John and Mary_, the
_Prudent Hannah of Boston_, and the _Dolphin_, of Topsham, all on their
way to Virginia. From out of the _John and Mary_ he took thirty-six men
slaves, some gold dust, the captain's clothes, four great guns and small
arms, and 400 gallons of rum.


HOPKINS, MR. Buccaneer and apothecary.

First lieutenant to Captain Dover (a doctor of physic) on board the
_Duchess_ privateer, of Bristol. Mr. Hopkins was an apothecary by
profession, not a sailor, but being a kinsman to the captain, no doubt was
given promotion. He sailed from Bristol on August 2nd, 1708.


HORE, CAPTAIN.

About 1650 Hore turned from a privateer into a pirate, and was very active
and successful in taking prizes between New York and Newport, occasionally
sailing to Madagascar to waylay ships of the East India Company.


HORNIGOLD, CAPTAIN BENJAMIN.

Commanded a sloop in 1716 and cruised off the Guinea coast with Teach,
taking a big French Guinea ship. He then sailed to the Bahama Islands,
where, in 1718, Woodes Rogers had just arrived with the offer of a pardon
to all pirates who surrendered themselves. Teach went off again "on the
account," but Hornigold surrendered. Shortly afterwards Hornigold was
wrecked on a reef and drowned.


HOW, THOMAS.

A native of Barnstaple in Devon.

One of Captain Bartholomew Roberts's crew. Condemned to death for piracy,
but reprieved and sold to the Royal African Company to work on their
plantations for seven years.


HOWARD, THOMAS.

Born in London, the son of a Thames lighterman. Sailing to Jamaica, he
deserted his ship and, with some companions of a like mind, stole a canoe
and set off to the Grand Cayman Islands, and there met with some 200
buccaneers and pirates. Joining with these, they took several vessels,
lastly a well-armed Spanish ship. In her they cruised off the coast of
Virginia, taking a large New England brigantine, of which Howard was
appointed quartermaster. Their next prize was a fine Virginian galley,
twenty-four guns, crowded with convicts being transplanted to America.
These passengers were only too willing to join the pirates.

Next, they sailed away to Guinea, where they took numerous prizes. Here
they were attacked by a big Portuguese ship of thirty-six guns, which they
defeated. Having by now got together a well appointed pirate fleet, they
sailed round the Cape of Good Hope to Madagascar, the happy home of the
South Sea pirates. Their ship, the _Alexander_, was wrecked and lost on a
reef, and Howard, together with the English and Dutch members of the crew,
seized the treasure, and drove off the Portuguese and Spanish sailors and
also the captain, and got to shore in a boat. They then broke up their
ship, and lived for a while by fishing and hunting. On one of these
hunting parties, the men ran away and left Howard behind.

Howard was found by the King of Anquala, who took care of him until he was
picked up by a ship. Later on, Howard became captain of a fine vessel, the
_Prosperous_, thirty-six guns, which he and some other pirates had seized
at Madagascar. In her, Howard went cruising, eventually in company with
Captain Bowen, attacking a Moorish fleet off St. John's Island. Howard
followed the Moorish ships up a river, and, after a fierce fight, seized
the largest and richest prize, a ship containing upward of a million
dollars worth of goods. Howard, having now made a considerable fortune,
retired from the piratical life and went to India, and there married a
native woman and settled down. Howard, who was a morose, sour kind of man,
ill-treated his wife, and he was at length murdered by some of her
relations.


HUGGIT, THOMAS.

Of London.

Hanged at Newport, Rhode Island, in July, 1723. Age 30.


HULL, CAPTAIN EDWARD.

Commanded the _Swallow_ "frigott" in which he sailed from Boston in 1653,
and captured several French and Dutch ships. He afterwards sold his
vessels and went with his share of the plunder to England, where he
settled down.


HUNTER, ANDREW.

One of Captain Lowther's crew. Hanged at St. Kitts on March 11th, 1722.


HUSK, JOHN.

One of Blackbeard's crew in the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Killed off North
Carolina in 1718.


HUTNOT, JOSEPH.

One of the crew of the notorious brigantine _Charles_, commanded by
Captain Quelch. Tried for piracy at the Star Tavern, Boston, in 1704.


HUTT, CAPTAIN GEORGE, or HOUT. Buccaneer.

An Englishman who succeeded Captain Townley when the latter was killed
during a gallant fight with three Spanish galleons in 1686 near Panama.


INGRAM, GUNNER WILLIAM.

Was one of Captain Anstis's crew in the _Good Fortune_ when that pirate
took the _Morning Star_. After the prize had been converted to the
pirates' use, Ingram was appointed gunner. Later, when Ingram came to be
tried for piracy, evidence was produced to prove that he had joined the
pirates of his own free will, and, in fact, had on all occasions been one
of the forwardest in any action, and altogether "a very resolute hardened
Fellow." He was hanged.


IRELAND, JOHN. Pirate.

"A wicked and ill-disposed person," according to the royal warrant of King
William III. granted to "our truly and dearly beloved Captain William
Kidd" to go in the year 1695 to seize this and other pirates who were
doing great mischief to the ships trading off the coast of North America.


IRVINE, CAPTAIN.

One of the last pirates in the Atlantic. Very active in the early part of
the nineteenth century.


JACKMAN, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

In 1665 took part with Morris and Morgan in a very successful raid on
Central America, ascending the river Tabasco in the province of Campeachy
with only 107 men. Led by Indians by a detour of 300 miles, they surprised
and sacked the town of Villa de Mosa. Dampier describes this small town as
"standing on the starboard side of the river, inhabited chiefly by
Indians, with some Spaniards." On their return to the mouth of the river,
Jackman's party found the Spaniards had seized their ship, and some three
hundred of them attacked the pirates, but the Spaniards were easily beaten
off.

The freebooters next attacked Rio Garta, and took it with only thirty men,
crossed the Gulf of Honduras to rest on the Island of Roatan, and then
proceeded to the Port of Truxillo, which they plundered. They next sailed
down the Mosquito coast, burning and pillaging as they went.

Anchoring in Monkey Bay, they ascended the San Juan River in canoes one
hundred miles to Lake Nicaragua. The pirates described the Lake of
Nicaragua as being a veritable paradise, which, indeed, it must have been
prior to their visit. Hiding by day amongst the many islands and rowing by
night, on the fifth night they landed near the city of Granada, just one
year after Mansfield's visit. The buccaneers marched right into the
central square of the city without being observed by the Spaniards, who
were taken completely by surprise, so that the English were soon masters
of the city, and for sixteen hours they plundered it. Some 1,000 Indians,
driven to rebellion by the cruelty and oppression of the Spaniards,
accompanied the marauders and wanted to massacre the prisoners,
particularly "the religious," but when they understood that the buccaneers
were not remaining in Granada, they thought better of it, having, no
doubt, a shrewd inkling of what to expect in the future when their
rescuers had left.


JACKSON, CAPTAIN WILLIAM. Buccaneer.

In 1642 he gathered together a crew of more than a thousand buccaneers in
the Islands of St. Kitts and Barbadoes, and sailed with these in three
ships to the Spanish Main, plundering Maracaibo and Truxillo.

On March 25th, 1643, Jackson's little fleet dropped anchor in the harbour,
what was afterwards to be known as Kingston, in the Island of Jamaica,
which was then still in the possession of Spain. Landing 500 of his men,
he attacked the town of St. Jago de la Vega, which he took after a hard
fight and with the loss of some forty of his men. For sparing the town
from fire he received ransom from the Spaniards of 200 beeves, 10,000
pounds of cassava bread, and 7,000 pieces of eight. The English sailors
were so delighted by the beauty of the island that in one night
twenty-three of them deserted to the Spaniards.


JACKSON, NATHANIEL.

One of Captain Edward Teach's crew. Killed at North Carolina in 1718.


JAMES, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Belonged to Jamaica and Tortuga. In 1663 was in command of a frigate, the
_American_ (six guns, crew of seventy men).


JAMES, CAPTAIN.

A buccaneer captain who was in 1640 temporarily appointed "President" of
Tortuga Island by the Providence Company, while their regular Governor,
Captain Flood, was in London, clearing himself of charges preferred
against him by the planters.


JAMES, CAPTAIN.

About 1709 commanded a pirate brigantine off Madagascar. Sailed for some
time in company with a New York pirate called Ort Van Tyle.


JAMES, CHARLES.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew taken in the _Larimore_ galley at Salem.
Tried for piracy at Boston in 1704.


JAMISON, _alias_ MONACRE NICKOLA.

Born at Greenock in Scotland, the son of a rich cloth merchant, he
received a polite education, spoke several languages, and was described as
being of gentlemanly deportment.

He served as sailing-master to Captain Jonnia when he took the schooner
_Exertion_. The captain and crew were eventually saved by Nickola. Years
afterwards Nickola went to Boston, and lived with Captain Lincoln of the
_Exertion_, and made a living by fishing for mackerel in the warm season,
and during the winter by teaching navigation to young gentlemen.


JANQUAIS, CAPTAIN.

A French filibuster of San Domingo.

His ship, _La Dauphine_, carried thirty guns and a crew of 180 men.


JEFFERYS, BENJAMIN.

Of Bristol.

Taken by Roberts in the _Norman_ galley in April, 1721. Roberts allowed
those of the crew who did not wish to join the pirates to return to the
_Norman_, but Jefferys had made such friends on the pirate ship that he
was too drunk to go, and also was abusive in his cups, telling his hosts
there was not one man amongst them. For this he received six lashes with
the cat-o'-nine-tails from every member of the crew, "which disordered him
for some weeks." But Jefferys eventually proved himself a brisk and
willing lad, and was made bos'on's mate. He was hanged a year later at the
age of 21.


JENNINGS.

A Welshman who in 1613 was settled on the Barbary coast with some thirty
other British pirates.


JENNINGS, CAPTAIN.

This Welsh pirate had been a man of good position, education, and property
before he took to piracy, which he did for the love of the life and not
from necessity. He was held in high esteem by his fellow-pirates at their
stronghold in the Bahamas. When notice was brought of King George's pardon
in 1717, a meeting was held of all the pirates at which Jennings presided.
After much discussion, Jennings boldly gave out that he himself meant to
surrender, whereupon some hundred and fifty other pirates declared their
intention of doing likewise. On the new Governor's arrival from England
they received their certificates, though the greater part of them soon
went back to piracy, or, to quote the expressive Captain Johnson,
"returned again like the Dog to the Vomit."


JOBSON, RICHARD, or COBSON or GOPSON.

His original calling was that of a druggist's assistant in London. He
combined piracy with the study of divinity. He was one of Dampier's party
which crossed the Isthmus of Darien in 1681, and was left behind with
Wafer, who tells us in his book that Gopson "was an ingenious man and a
good scholar, and had with him a Greek testament which he frequently read
and would translate extempore into English to such of the company as were
disposed to hear him."

After great sufferings in the tropical jungle in the wet season, Jobson
and his friends reached the "North Sea" to find an English buccaneer
vessel lying at anchor off the shore. On rowing out to the ship the canoe
upset, and Jobson and his gun were thrown overboard, but the former was
rescued, though he died a few days later on board the vessel owing to the
exposure he had been subjected to. He was buried in the sand at Le Sounds
Cay with full honours--that is, a volley of guns and colours flown at
half-mast.


JOCARD, LE CAPITAINE.

A French filibuster who in 1684 had his headquarters in San Domingo.

He commanded the _Irondelle_, a ship armed with eighteen guns and a crew
of 120 men.


JOHNSON, CAPTAIN. A successful and very bloody pirate.

Of Jamaica.

Immediately after the publication of peace by Sir Thomas Lynch, Governor
of Jamaica in 1670, which included a general pardon to all privateers,
Johnson fled from Port Royal with some ten followers, and shortly after,
meeting with a Spanish ship of eighteen guns, managed to take her and kill
the captain and fourteen of the crew. Gradually collecting together a
party of a hundred or more English and French desperadoes he plundered
many ships round the Cuban coast. Tiring of his quarrelsome French
companions he sailed to Jamaica to make terms with the Governor, and
anchored in Morant Bay, but his ship was blown ashore by a hurricane.
Johnson was immediately arrested by Governor Lynch, who ordered Colonel
Modyford to assemble the justices and to proceed to trial and immediate
execution. Lynch had had bitter experiences of trying pirates, and knew
that the sooner they were hanged the better. But Modyford, like many other
Jamaicans, felt a strong sympathy for the pirates, and he managed to get
Johnson acquitted in spite of the fact that Johnson "confessed enough to
hang a hundred honester persons." It is interesting to read that half an
hour after the dismissal of the court Johnson "came to drink with his
judges." Governor Lynch, now thoroughly roused, took the matter into his
own hands. He again placed Johnson under arrest, called a meeting of the
council, from which he dismissed Colonel Modyford, and managed to have the
former judgment reversed. The pirate was again tried, and in order that no
mistake might happen, Lynch himself presided over the court. Johnson, as
before, made a full confession, but was condemned and immediately
executed, and was, writes Lynch, "as much regretted as if he had been as
pious and as innocent as one of the primitive martyrs." This second trial
was absolutely illegal, and Lynch was reproved by the King for his rash
and high-handed conduct.


JOHNSON, CAPTAIN BEN.

When a lad he had served as a midshipman in an East Indiaman, the _Asia_,
but having been caught red-handed robbing the purser of brandy and wine,
he was flogged and sent to serve as a sailor before the mast. In 1750,
while in the Red Sea, he deserted his ship and entered the service of the
Sultan of Ormus. Finding Johnson to be a clever sailor, the Sultan
appointed him admiral of his pirate fleet of fourteen vessels. The young
admiral became a convert to Brahminism, and was ceremoniously blessed by
the arch-priests of the Temple. Amongst his crew Johnson had some two
hundred other Englishmen, who also became followers of Brahmin, each of
whom was allowed, when in port, a dancing girl from the Temple.

Johnson proved a most capable and bloodthirsty pirate, playing havoc with
the shipping of the Red Sea, taking also several towns on the coast, and
putting to death his prisoners, often after cruel tortures. His boldest
exploit was to attack the fortified town of Busrah. This he did, putting
the Sheik and most of the inhabitants to death, and taking back to his
master, the Sultan, vast plunder of diamonds, pearls, and gold.

On another occasion Johnson landed his crews on the Island of Omalee, at
the entrance to the Persian Gulf, a favourite place of pilgrimage, and
raided the temples of the Indian God Buddha. Putting to death all the two
thousand priests, he cut off the noses and slit the upper lips of seven
hundred dancing girls, only sparing a few of the best looking ones, whom
he carried away with him along with plunder worth half a million rupees.

On their way back to the Red Sea the pirates met with an English East
Indiaman, which they took and plundered, and Johnson, remembering his
previous sufferings in the same service, murdered the whole crew.

Shortly afterwards Johnson and ten of his English officers contrived to
run away from their master, the Sultan, in his best and fastest lateen
vessel, with an enormous booty. Sailing up to the head of the Persian
Gulf, Johnson managed to reach Constantinople with his share of the
plunder, worth £800,000. With this as an introduction, he was hospitably
received, and was made a bashaw, and at the end of a long life of
splendour died a natural death.


JOHNSON, CAPTAIN HENRY, _alias_ "HENRIQUES THE ENGLISHMAN."

A West Indian pirate, born in the North of Ireland.

Commanded the _Two Brothers_, a Rhode Island-built sloop, eighteen guns,
crew of ninety, mostly Spaniards. On March 20th, 1730, he took the _John
and Jane_ (Edward Burt, master), from Jamaica, off Swan Island. The _John
and Jane_ was armed with eight carriage and ten swivel guns, and a crew of
only twenty-five men. After a gallant resistance for five hours the
pirates boarded and took the English ship. The few survivors were stripped
naked, and preparations made to hang them in pairs. This was prevented by
Captain Johnson and an English pirate called Echlin. There was a Mrs.
Groves, a passenger, in the _John and Jane_, whose husband and the English
surgeon had both been killed at the first onslaught of the pirates. This
poor lady was hidden in the hold of the ship during the action, and was
only informed afterwards of the death of her husband. The pirates now
dragged her on deck, "stript her in a manner naked," and carried her as a
prize to the Spanish captain, Pedro Poleas, who immediately took her to
the "great cabin and there with horrible oaths and curses insolently
assaulted her Chastity." Her loud cries of distress brought Captain
Johnson into the cabin, who, seeing what was on hand, drew his pistol and
threatened to blow out the brains of any man who attempted the least
violence upon her. He next commanded everything belonging to Mrs. Groves
to be returned to her, which was done--including her clothing. The gallant
conduct of Johnson is the more surprising and pleasing since he had the
reputation of being as bloody and ruthless a pirate as ever took a ship or
cut an innocent throat. He only had one hand, and used to fire his piece
with great skill, laying the barrel on his stump, and drawing the trigger
with his right hand.

In all the American "plantations" there were rewards offered for him alive
or dead.

The end of this "penny-dreadful" pirate is unrecorded, but was probably a
violent one, as this type of pirate seldom, if ever, died in his bed.


JOHNSON, ISAAC.

One of Captain Quelch's crew. Tried for piracy at the Star Tavern at
Boston in 1704.


JOHNSON, JACOB.

Taken prisoner by Captain Roberts out of the _King Solomon_, he joined the
pirates.


JOHNSON, JOHN, or JAYNSON.

Born "nigh Lancaster."

Taken out of the _King Solomon_. One of Roberts's crew. Hanged in 1722 at
the age of 22.


JOHNSON, MARCUS.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Hanged in 1722. Stated in his death warrant
to be a native of Smyrna. Died at the age of 21.


JOHNSON, ROBERT.

From Whydah in West Africa.

Tried for piracy with the rest of Captain Roberts's crew, and hanged in
1722 at the age of 32. At his trial he pleaded that he did not enter with
the pirates of his own free will, and called witnesses to prove that at
the time he was captured he was so very drunk that he had to be hoisted
out of his own ship, the _Jeremiah and Ann_, into the pirate ship in
tackles.


JOHNSTON, THOMAS.

Of Boston.

Known as "the limping privateer." Sailed with Captain Pound. Wounded in
the jaw in the fight at Tarpaulin Cove. Tried for piracy at Boston, and
hanged on January 27th, 1690.


JONES, CAPTAIN PAUL.

Probably few persons, even in Great Britain, would to-day call Paul Jones
a pirate, but this was not always the case. In all books on pirates
written shortly after the American war, Paul Jones figured as a notorious
character.

This famous privateer, let us call him, was born at Kirkcudbright in
Scotland in 1728, the son of Mr. Paul, head gardener to Lord Selkirk, and
was christened John Paul. So much has been written about this man in
books, easily procurable for reference, that little need be said about him
here.

Starting life as a sailor before the mast, he quickly showed abilities
which led to his promotion to the rank of mate in an English ship trading
in the West India Islands, and later he was made master. On the
declaration of war with America, Jones joined the rebels, and was given
command of a privateer, and from 1777 he became a terror to English
shipping around the British Isles.

One of his most startling exploits was his surprise visit in his ship, the
_Ranger_, to his old home with the object of kidnapping his former
employer, Lord Selkirk.

On September 23rd, 1779, he fought his famous action off Scarborough
against a British convoy from the Baltic under the command of Captain
Pearson, in the _Serapis_, and Captain Piercy in the _Countess of
Scarborough_. Jones had left the _Ranger_ for a frigate called the _Bonne
Homme Richard_ of forty guns and a crew of three hundred and seventy men,
and had also under his command four other ships of war. A furious
engagement took place, the utmost bravery being shown on either side; the
English ships at last being compelled to surrender, but not until the
enemy had themselves suffered fearful damage to both their crews and
ships. After the conclusion of peace, Paul Jones, once the darling of two
continents, faded into obscurity and even poverty, and died in Paris in
the year 1792 at the age of 64.


JONES. SEAMAN.

A mariner. "A brisk young fellow" who served with Captain Bartholomew
Roberts's crew. On one occasion Captain Roberts had reason to think that
one of his men had spoken disrespectfully to him, so, as a warning to the
rest, he killed him. The dead man's greatest friend was Jones, who,
hearing what had happened, had a fierce fight with Roberts. This severe
breach of discipline was punished by Jones receiving two lashes on the
back from every man on board. Jones after this sailed with Captain Anstis
in the _Good Fortune_.


JONES, THOMAS.

Found to be "not guilty" at a trial for piracy at Newport, Rhode Island,
in 1723. One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Age 17.


JONES, WILLIAM.

Tried for piracy at Boston, 1704.


JONES, WILLIAM.

Of London.

Age 28. Hanged at Rhode Island, 1723.


JONNIA, CAPTAIN.

A Spaniard.

Commanded in 1821 a fast schooner, carrying a crew of forty men, armed
with muskets, cutlasses, blunderbusses, long knives, dirks, two
carronades--one a twelve, the other a six-pounder. They had aboard with
them three Mexican negresses. The pirates took and plundered the Boston
schooner _Exertion_, on December 17th, 1821, the crew being considerably
drunk at the time. The plunder they took to Principe in the Island of
Cuba. The pirates took everything from their prisoners, even their
clothes, but as a parting gift sent the captain a copy of the "Family
Prayer Book" by the Rev. Mr. Brooks. The prisoners were marooned on a
small mangrove quay, but they eventually escaped. Jonnia and some of his
crew were afterwards captured by an English ship and taken to Kingston,
Jamaica, and there hanged.


JOSE, MIGUEL.

Hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, in February, 1823. This old man's last words
on the scaffold were: "No he robado, no he matado ningune, muero
innocente."


JUDSON, RANDALL.

One of Captain Roderigo's crew. Tried for piracy at Cambridge,
Massachusetts, in June, 1675, and sentenced to be hanged; "presently after
the lecture," which was delivered by the Rev. Increase Mather. Afterwards
pardoned, but fined and banished from the colony.


KELLWANTON.

A notorious pirate in the sixteenth century. Was captured in the Isle of
Man in 1531.


KENNEDY, CAPTAIN.

Began life as a pickpocket and housebreaker in London. He was Captain
Roberts's lieutenant, and was afterwards given command of a prize, the
_Rover_.

Kennedy could never, even when a captain, forget his old trade. It is
recorded that he stole a black suit of clothes from the captain of the
_Bird_ at Sierra Leone in 1718. These he put on with the captain's best
wig and sword. He then swaggered about on board in these till his
fellow-pirates drenched him with buckets of claret, so that he had to
disrobe and throw the garments overboard.

Owing to a quarrel with Captain Roberts, Kennedy went off in his ship, the
_Rover_, and sailed to Barbadoes. His first prize, a Boston ship, was a
distinct novelty, being commanded by one Captain Knot, a Quaker, who lived
up to the principles of his sect by allowing no pistol, sword, or cutlass,
or other weapon aboard his vessel. The crew, finding Kennedy had no
knowledge whatever of navigation, threatened to throw him overboard, but
because he was a man of great personal courage they did not in the end
carry out their threat. The crew next decided to give over piracy and to
set sail for Ireland. This island they altogether missed through bad
navigation, and they ran the ship ashore on the north of Scotland. The
crew landed and passed themselves off as shipwrecked mariners, but owing
to their drinking and rioting in each village they came to, the whole
countryside was soon roused. Kennedy slipped away and reached Ireland.
Having soon spent all his ill-gotten gains in Dublin, he came to Deptford
and set up a house of ill-fame, adding occasionally to his income from
this source by a little highwaymanry. One of the ladies of his house at
Deptford, to be revenged for some slight or other, gave information to the
watch, and Kennedy was imprisoned at Marshalsea and afterwards tried for
robbery and piracy. Kennedy turned King's evidence against some of his old
associates, but this did not save his neck, for he was condemned and
hanged at Execution Dock.


KHEYR-ED-DIN. Corsair.

Brother of the famous Barbarossa. When the latter was defeated and killed
by the Spaniards, Kheyr-ed-din sent an ambassador to Constantinople,
begging for help to protect Algiers. He was appointed Governor of Algiers
by the Sultan of Turkey in 1519. Now greatly increased both in ships and
power, he scoured the whole Mediterranean for Italian and Spanish prizes.
He raided the Spanish coast and carried off slaves from the Balearic
Islands. He next took and destroyed the fortress of Algiers, and employed
7,000 Christian slaves to build a new one and also a great mole to protect
the harbour. Invited by Solyman the Magnificent to help him against the
Christian Admiral Andria Doria, in August, 1533, he sailed from Algiers
with his fleet, being joined on the way by another noted corsair,
Delizuff.

A year afterwards, at the age of 73, Kheyr-ed-din set out from
Constantinople with a vast fleet, sacking towns and burning all Christian
ships that were so unfortunate as to fall in his way. He returned to the
Bosphorus with huge spoil and 11,000 prisoners. He sacked Sardinia, then
sailed to Tunis, which he vanquished.

Charles V. of Spain now began to collect a large fleet and an army of
25,000 men and sailed to Tunis. A fierce fight followed; the Christians
broke into the town, massacred the inhabitants and rescued some 20,000
Christian slaves. Kheyr-ed-din escaped with a few followers, but soon was
in command of a fleet of pirate galleys once more. A terrific but
undecisive naval battle took place off Prevesa between the Mohammedans and
the Christians, the fleet of the latter being under the command of Andrea
Doria; and Kheyr-ed-din died shortly afterwards at Constantinople at a
great age.


KIDD, CAPTAIN WILLIAM, sometimes ROBERT KIDD or KID.

In the whole history of piracy there is no name that has so taken the
world's fancy than has that of William Kidd. And yet, if he be judged by
his actions as a pirate, he must be placed amongst the second- or even
third-rate masters of that craft. He took but two or three ships, and
these have been, after two hundred years, proved to be lawful prizes taken
in his legal capacity as a privateer.

Kidd was born at Greenock in Scotland about the year 1655, and was the son
of the Rev. John Kidd. Of his early life little record is left, but we
know that in August, 1689, he arrived at St. Nevis in the West Indies, in
command of a privateer of sixteen guns. In 1691, while Kidd was on shore,
his crew ran away with his ship, which was not surprising, as most of his
crew were old pirates. But that Kidd was an efficient seaman and a capable
captain is shown by the number of times he was given the command of
different privateer vessels, both by the Government of New York and by
privateer owners.

In 1695 Kidd was in London, and on October 10th signed the articles which
were to prove so fatal for him. In January, 1696, King William III. issued
to his "beloved friend William Kidd" a commission to apprehend certain
pirates, particularly Thomas Tew, of Rhode Island, Thomas Wake, and
William Maze, of New York, John Ireland, and "all other Pirates,
Free-booters, and Sea Rovers of what Nature soever."

This privateer enterprise was financed chiefly by Lord Bellomont, but the
other adventurers (on shore and in safety) were the Lord Chancellor; the
Earl of Orford, the First Lord of the Admiralty; the Earl of Romney and
the Duke of Shrewsbury, Secretaries of State; Robert Livingston, Esq., of
New York; and lastly, Captain Kidd himself.

The ship the _Adventure_ galley was bought and fitted up, and Kidd sailed
away in her to suppress piracy, particularly on the coast of America.
Nothing was heard of him till August, 1698, when ugly rumours began to get
about of piracies committed by Kidd in the Indian Ocean. In December of
the same year a general pardon was offered to all pirates who should
surrender themselves, with two exceptions--namely, Captain Avery and
Captain Kidd. In May, 1699, Kidd suddenly appeared in a small vessel at
New York, with rich booty. His chief patron, Lord Bellomont, was now
Governor, and was placed in the most awkward position of having to carry
out his orders and arrest Kidd for piracy and send him in chains to
England in H.M.S. _Advice_, which ship had been sent specially to New York
to carry back Kidd, Bradish, and other pirates to England.

The trial of Kidd proved a scandal, for someone had to suffer as scapegoat
for the aristocratic company privateers, and the lot fell to the luckless
Kidd. Kidd was charged with piracy and with murder. The first charge of
seizing two ships of the Great Mogul could have been met by the production
of two documents which Kidd had taken out of these ships, and which, he
claimed, proved that the ships were sailing under commissions issued by
the French East India Company, and made them perfectly lawful prizes.
These commissions Kidd had most foolishly handed over to Lord Bellomont,
and they could not be produced at the trial, although they had been
exhibited before the House of Commons a little while previously.

It is an extraordinary and tragic fact that these two documents, so vital
to Kidd, were discovered only lately in the Public Records Office--too
late, by some 200 years, to save an innocent man's life.

As it happened, the charge of which Kidd was hanged for was murder, and
ran thus: "Being moved and seduced by the instigations of the Devil he did
make an assault in and upon William Moore upon the high seas with a
certain wooden bucket, bound with iron hoops, of the value of eight pence,
giving the said William Moore one mortal bruise of which the aforesaid
William Moore did languish and die." This aforesaid William Moore was
gunner in the _Adventure_ galley, and was mutinous, and Kidd, as captain,
was perfectly justified in knocking him down and even of killing him; but
as the court meant Kidd to "swing," this was quite good enough for finding
him guilty. The unfortunate prisoner was executed at Wapping on May 23rd,
1701, and his body afterwards hanged in chains at Tilbury.

[Illustration: A PIRATE BEING HANGED AT EXECUTION DOCK, WAPPING.

To face p. 182.]

A popular ballad was sung to commemorate the life and death of Kidd, who,
for some reason, was always called Robert Kidd by the populace. It
consists of no less than twenty-four verses, and we here give fifteen of
them:


THE BALLAD OF CAPTAIN KIDD

    My name was Robert Kidd, when I sailed, when I sailed,
        My name was Robert Kidd, when I sailed,
            My name was Robert Kidd,
            God's laws I did forbid,
    And so wickedly I did, when I sailed.

    My parents taught me well, when I sailed, when I sailed,
        My parents taught me well, when I sailed,
            My parents taught me well,
            To shun the gates of hell,
    But 'gainst them I rebelled, when I sailed.

    I'd a Bible in my hand, when I sailed, when I sailed,
        I'd a Bible in my hand, when I sailed,
            I'd a Bible in my hand,
            By my father's great command,
    And sunk it in the sand, when I sailed.

    I murdered William Moore, as I sailed, as I sailed,
        I murdered William Moore, as I sailed,
            I murdered William Moore,
            And laid him in his gore,
    Not many leagues from shore, as I sailed.

    I was sick and nigh to death, when I sailed, when I sailed,
        I was sick and nigh to death, when I sailed,
            I was sick and nigh to death,
            And I vowed at every breath,
    To walk in wisdom's ways, as I sailed.

    I thought I was undone, as I sailed, as I sailed,
        I thought I was undone, as I sailed,
            I thought I was undone,
            And my wicked glass had run,
    But health did soon return, as I sailed.

    My repentance lasted not, as I sailed, as I sailed,
        My repentance lasted not, as I sailed,
            My repentance lasted not,
            My vows I soon forgot,
    Damnation was my lot, as I sailed.

    I spyed the ships from France, as I sailed, as I sailed,
        I spyed the ships of France, as I sailed,
            I spyed the ships from France,
            To them I did advance,
    And took them all by chance, as I sailed.

    I spyed the ships of Spain, as I sailed, as I sailed,
        I spyed the ships of Spain, as I sailed,
            I spyed the ships of Spain,
            I fired on them amain,
    'Till most of them was slain, as I sailed.

    I'd ninety bars of gold, as I sailed, as I sailed,
        I'd ninety bars of gold, as I sailed,
            I'd ninety bars of gold,
            And dollars manifold,
    With riches uncontrolled, as I sailed.

    Thus being o'er-taken at last, I must die, I must die,
        Thus being o'er-taken at last, I must die,
            Thus being o'er-taken at last,
            And into prison cast,
    And sentence being passed, I must die.

    Farewell, the raging main, I must die, I must die,
        Farewell, the raging main, I must die,
            Farewell, the raging main,
            To Turkey, France and Spain,
    I shall n'er see you again, I must die.

    To Execution Dock I must go, I must go,
        To Execution Dock I must go,
            To Execution Dock,
            Will many thousands flock,
    But I must bear the shock, and must die.

    Come all ye young and old, see me die, see me die,
        Come all ye young and old, see me die,
            Come all ye young and old,
            You're welcome to my gold,
    For by it I've lost my soul, and must die.

    Take warning now by me, for I must die, for I must die,
        Take warning now by me, for I must die,
            Take warning now by me,
            And shun bad company,
    Lest you come to hell with me, for I die.


KILLING, JAMES.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew, who gave evidence against him at his
trial at Charleston in 1718.


KING, CHARLES.

Attempted to escape in the _Larimore_ galley, but was captured and brought
into Salem. Tried at Boston with the rest of Quelch's crew in June, 1704.


KING, FRANCIS.

One of Captain Quelch's crew captured in the _Larimore_ galley by Major
Sewall, and brought into Salem Harbour on June 11th, 1704. Tried at Boston
and condemned to be hanged. Was reprieved while standing on the gallows.


KING, JOHN.

One of Captain Quelch's crew taken out of the _Larimore_ galley. Tried at
Boston in June, 1704.


KING, MATTHEW.

Of Jamaica.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Was hanged at Charleston, South
Carolina, on November 8th, 1718, and buried in the marsh below low-water
mark.


KNEEVES, PETER.

Of Exeter in Devon.

Sailed with Captain Charles Harris, and was tried for piracy with the rest
of his crew at Rhode Island in 1723. Hanged at Newport at the age of 32.


KNIGHT, CAPTAIN W. Buccaneer.

In 1686 Knight was cruising off the coast of Peru and Chile with Swan,
Townley, and Davis. At the end of that year, having got a fair quantity of
plunder, he sailed round the Horn to the West Indies.


KNIGHT, CHRISTOPHER.

One of Captain Coward's crew. Tried for piracy at Boston in January, 1690,
and found guilty, but afterwards reprieved.


KNOT, CAPTAIN.

An old Massachusetts pirate who retired from the sea and was settled in
Boston in 1699. His wife gave information to the Governor, the Earl of
Bellomont, of the whereabouts of a pirate called Gillam, who was "wanted."


KOXINGA. His real name was Kuo-hsing Yeh, Koxinga being the Portuguese
version.

The son of a Chinese pirate, Cheng Chih-lung, by a Japanese mother, he was
born in 1623.

From early youth Koxinga was inspired with a hatred of the Manchus, who
had imprisoned his father.

The young pirate soon became so successful in his raids along the coast of
China that the Emperor resorted to the extraordinary expedient of ordering
the inhabitants of more than eighty seaboard towns to migrate ten miles
inland, after destroying their homes.

There can be no doubt that Koxinga was a thorough-going cut-throat pirate,
worked solely for his own ambitious ends and to satisfy his revengeful
feelings, but the fact that he fought against the alien conquerors, the
Dutch in Formosa, and defeated them, caused him to be regarded as a hero
pirate.

His father was executed at Peking, which only increased his bitterness
against the reigning house. Koxinga made himself what was, to all intents
and purposes, the ruler of Formosa, and the island became, through him,
part of the Chinese Empire.

After his death, which took place in 1662, he received official
canonization.

The direct descendant of Koxinga, the pirate, is one of the very few
hereditary nobles in China.


LACY, ABRAHAM.

Of Devonshire.

Hanged at the age of 21 at Rhode Island in 1723.


DU LAERQUERAC, CAPTAIN JOHN.

This Breton pirate was captured in 1537 by a Bristol seaman called John
Wynter. Du Laerquerac, with other pirates from Brittany, had been holding
up ships on their way to the great fair of St. James at Bristol. On being
arrested, he denied that he had "spoiled" any English ships, but on being
further pressed to confess, admitted that he had taken a few odds and
ends, such as ropes, sailors' clothes, some wine, fish, a gold crown in
money and eleven silver halfpence, as well as four daggers and a
"couverture."


LAFITTE, CAPTAIN JEAN.

Jean and his brother first appeared in New Orleans in the year 1809.
Though blacksmiths by profession, they soon took to smuggling goods
brought by privateersmen and pirates. The headquarters of this trade was
on the Island of Grande Terre in Barataria Bay. This island was inhabited
and governed by ex-pirates; one Grambo being the acknowledged chief, until
he was shot by Jean Lafitte.

In 1813, the Baratarians were denounced by the Governor of Louisiana as
pirates. This made no difference to the pirate smugglers, who grew more
and more rich and insolent. The Governor then secured an indictment
against Jean and his brother, Pierre, who retained the very best and most
expensive lawyers in the State to defend them, and they were acquitted. In
1814, war was declared with England, and Jean was invited by the English
to fight on their side, with the offer of a commission in the navy and a
large sum of money. He refused this, and eventually General Jackson
accepted his offer of the services of himself and his Baratarians, who
proved invaluable in the Battle of Orleans, serving the guns. He
disappeared completely after the war until 1823, when a British sloop of
war captured a pirate ship with a crew of sixty men under the command of
the famous Lafitte, who was amongst those who fell fighting.


LAGARDE, LE CAPITAINE.

A French filibuster of San Domingo, who in 1684 commanded a small ship,
_La Subtille_ (crew of thirty men and two guns).


LAMBERT, JOHN.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Hanged on Charles River, Boston Side,
on Friday, June 30th, 1704. In a broadside published at Boston in July of
the same year, Lambert's conduct on the gallows is described thus: "He
appeared much hardened and pleaded much on his Innocency. He desired all
men to beware of Bad Company and seemed to be in great Agony near his
Execution."


LANDER, DANIEL.

One of Captain Pound's crew.


LANDRESSON, CAPTAIN MICHEL, _alias_ BREHA.

Filibuster.

Accompanied Pain in his expedition against St. Augustine in 1683. He was a
constant source of annoyance to the Jamaicans. His ship was called _La
Trompeuse_, but must not be confused with the famous ship of that name
belonging to Hamlin. Landresson, when he had got a good booty of gold,
jewels, cocoa, etc., would go to Boston to dispose of it to the godly
merchants of New England. In 1684 a Royal proclamation was published in
Massachusetts, warning all Governors that no succour or aid was to be
given to any of the outlaws, but, in spite of this, Landresson was
received with open arms and the proclamations in the streets torn down.

In 1684 he was at San Domingo, in command of _La Fortune_ (crew of 100
men and fourteen guns). At this time the filibuster was disguised under
the _alias_ of Le Capitaine Breha.

Captured in 1686 by the Armada de Barlorento, and hanged with several of
his companions.


LANE, CAPTAIN.

In 1720 Lane was one of Captain England's crew when he took the _Mercury_
off the coast of West Africa. The _Mercury_ was fitted up as a pirate
ship, named the _Queen Ann's Revenge_, and Lane was voted captain of her.
Lane left Captain England and sailed to Brazil, where he took several
Portuguese ships and did a great deal of mischief.


LARIMORE, CAPTAIN THOMAS, or LARRAMORE.

Commanded the _Larimore_ galley. In 1704 was with the pirate Quelch and
several other pirates, and, among other prizes, seized a Portuguese ship,
the _Portugal_, from which they took gold dust, bar and coined gold, and
other treasure, and at the same time "acted divers villainous Murders."
For these Larimore was tried, condemned and hanged at Boston, June 11th,
1704.


LAWRENCE, NICHOLAS.

Tried for piracy with the rest of Quelch's crew at Boston in 1704.


LAWRENCE, RICHARD.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Tried for piracy at Boston in 1704.


LAWSON, EDWARD.

Born in the Isle of Man.

One of Captain Harris's crew. Hanged at Newport, Rhode Island, in July,
1723, at the age of 20.


L'ESCAYER. A French filibuster.

In 1685, in company with Grogniet, Davis, and Swan, sacked Paita and
Guayaquil and blockaded Panama. Afterwards sailed with Townley and his
English pirates and again plundered Guayaquil. Suffered a severe defeat at
the hands of the Spaniards at Quibo, afterwards being rescued by Townley,
with whom he and his crew of buccaneers sacked Granada in Nicaragua.


LESSONE, CAPTAIN. French filibuster.

In 1680 he joined Sharp, Coxon, and other English buccaneers in an attack
on Porto Bello. Putting 300 men into canoes, they landed some sixty miles
from the city and marched for four days, arriving in a weak state through
hardship and lack of food, but in spite of this they took the city on
February 17th, 1680.


LEVERCOTT, SAM.

Hanged in 1722 at the Island of St. Kitts, with the rest of Captain
Lowther's crew.


LEVIT, JOHN.

Of North Carolina.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged at White Point, Charleston, South
Carolina, on November 8th, 1723.


LEWIS, JAMES.

After being a prisoner in France, he managed to reach Spain, and was with
Avery when he seized the ship _Charles the Second_. Tried for piracy at
the Old Bailey in 1696 and hanged.


LEWIS, NICHOLAS.

One of Captain George Lowther's crew. Hanged at St. Kitts on March 11th,
1722.


LEWIS, WILLIAM.

The greatest triumph and most important exploit of this pirate was the
attacking, and eventually taking, of a powerful French ship of twenty-four
guns.

Lewis enjoyed a longer career than most of the brethren, and by 1717 he
was already one of the leading piratical lights of Nassau, and his end did
not come till ten years later. In 1726, he spent several months on the
coast of South Carolina and Virginia, trading with the inhabitants the
spoils he had taken from vessels in the Atlantic. He learnt his trade
under the daring pirate Bannister, who was brought into Port Royal,
hanging dead from his own yard-arm. On this occasion, Lewis and another
boy were triced up to the corvette's mizzen-peak like "two living flags."

Lewis, amongst other accomplishments, was a born linguist, and could speak
with fluency in several languages, even the dialect of the Mosquito
Indians. He was once captured by the Spaniards, and taken to Havana, but
escaped with a few other prisoners in a canoe, seized a piragua, and with
this captured a sloop employed in the turtle trade, and by gradually
taking larger and larger prizes, Lewis soon found himself master of a fine
ship and a crew of more than fifty men. He renamed her the _Morning Star_,
and made her his flagship.

On one occasion when chasing a vessel off the Carolina coast, his fore and
main topmasts were carried away. Lewis, in a frenzy of excitement,
clambered up the main top, tore out a handful of his hair, which he tossed
into the wind, crying: "Good devil, take this till I come." The ship, in
spite of her damaged rigging, gained on the other ship, which they took.
Lewis's sailors, superstitious at the best of times, considered this
intimacy of their captain with Satan a little too much, and soon
afterwards one of the Frenchmen aboard murdered Lewis in his sleep.


LEYTON, FRANCIS.

One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Hanged for piracy at Newport, Rhode
Island, on July 19th, 1723. Age 39.


LIMA, MANUEL.

Taken by H.M. sloop _Tyne_, and hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, in February,
1823.


LINCH, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Of Port Royal, Jamaica.

In 1680 Lionel Wafer, tiring of the life of a civil surgeon at Port Royal,
left Jamaica to go on a voyage with Captains Linch and Cook to the Spanish
Main.


LING, CAPTAIN WILLIAM.

A notorious pirate of New Providence. Captured and hanged shortly after
accepting King George's pardon of 1718.


LINISLER, THOMAS.

Of Lancashire.

One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Hanged at Rhode Island in 1723 at
the age of 21.


LITHGOW, CAPTAIN.

Famous in his day for his activities in the West Indies, this pirate had
his headquarters at New Providence in the Bahamas.


LIVER, WILLIAM, _alias_ EVIS.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged for piracy at Charleston, South
Carolina, in 1718.


LO, MRS. HON-CHO.

This Chinese woman pirate was the widow of another noted pirate who was
killed in 1921. She took command after the death of her husband, and soon
became a terror to the countryside about Pakhoi, carrying on the work in
the best traditions of the craft, being the Admiral of some sixty
ocean-going junks. Although both young and pretty, she won a reputation
for being a thorough-going murderess and pirate.

During the late revolution, Mrs. Lo joined General Wong Min-Tong's forces,
and received the rank of full Colonel. After the war, she resumed her
piracies, occasionally for the sake of variety, surprising and sacking a
village or two, and from these she usually carried away some fifty or
sixty girls to sell as slaves.

Her career ended quite suddenly in October, 1922.


LODGE, THOMAS. Poet, buccaneer, and physician.

Born about 1557, he was the son of Sir Thomas Lodge, grocer, and Lord
Mayor of London in 1563. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and
Trinity College, Oxford. The poet engaged in more than one freebooting
expedition to Spanish waters between 1584 and 1590, and he tells us that
he accompanied Captain Clarke in an attack on the Azores and the Canaries.
"Having," he tells his friend Lord Hunsdon, "with Captain Clarke made a
voyage to the Islands of Terceras and the Canaries, to beguile the time
with labour, I writ this book, rough, as hatched in the storms of the
ocean, and feathered in the surges of many perilous seas." On August 26th,
1591, Lodge sailed from Plymouth with Sir Thomas Cavendish in the
_Desire_, a galleon of 140 tons. The freebooters sailed to Brazil and
attacked the town of Santa, while the people were at Mass. They remained
there from December 15th until January 22nd, 1592. Some of the Englishmen,
of whom Lodge was one, took up their quarters in the College of the
Jesuits, and this literary buccaneer spent his time amongst the books in
the library of the Fathers.

Leaving Brazil, the small fleet sailed south to the Straits of Magellan.
While storm-bound amongst the icy cliffs of Patagonia, Lodge wrote his
Arcadian romance "Margarite of America."

From the point of view of plunder, this expedition was a dismal failure,
and the _Desire_ returned and reached the coast of Ireland on June 11th,
1593. The crew had been reduced to sixteen, and of these only five were
even in tolerable health.

At the age of 40, Lodge deserted literature and studied medicine, taking
his degree of Doctor of Physics at Avignon in 1600. His last original work
was a "Treatise on the Plague," published in 1603. After practising
medicine with great success for many years, Thomas Lodge died, it is said,
of the plague, in the year 1625, at the age of 68.


LONG, ZACHARIAH.

Of the Province of Holland.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged at White Point, Charleston, in
1718, and buried in the marsh below low-water mark.


LOPEZ, JOHN.

Of Oporto.

This Portuguese pirate sailed in the _Royal James_, and was hanged with
the rest of the crew at Charleston, South Carolina, on November 8th,
1718.


LORD, JOHN.

A soldier. Deserted from Fort Loyal, Falmouth, Maine. Killed at Tarpaulin
Cove in 1689.


LOW, CAPTAIN EDWARD, or LOE.

Born in Westminster, he began in very early life to plunder the boys of
their farthings, and as he grew bigger used to gamble with the footmen who
waited in the lobby of the House of Commons. While still quite small one
of his elder brothers used to carry little Edward hidden in a basket on
his back, and when in a crowd the future pirate would, from above, snatch
the hats and even the wigs off the heads of passing citizens and secret
them in the basket and so get away with them. The Low family were the
originators of this ingenious and fascinating trick, and for a time it was
most successful, until the people of the city took to tying on their hats
and wigs with bands to prevent their sudden removal. When he grew up, Ned
went to Boston and earned an honest living as a rigger, but after a while
he tired of this and sailed in a sloop to Honduras to steal log-wood. Here
Low quarrelled with his captain, tried to shoot him, and then went off in
an open boat with twelve other men, and the very next day they took a
small vessel, in which they began their "war against all the world." Low
soon happened to meet with Captain Lowther, the pirate, and the two agreed
to sail in company. This partnership lasted until May 28th, 1722, when
they took a prize, a brigantine from Boston, which Low went into with a
crew of forty-four men. This vessel they armed with two guns, four
swivels, and six quarter-casks of powder, and saying good-bye to Lowther,
sailed off on their own account. A week later a prize fell into their
hands, which was the first of several. Things soon became too hot for Low
along the American coast and the West Indies, as several men-of-war were
searching for him; so he sailed to the Azores, taking on his way a big
French ship of thirty-four guns, and later, in the harbour of St. Michael,
he seized several vessels which he found at anchor there. Here they burnt
the French ship, but let the crew all go, except the cook, who, they said,
"being a greasy fellow would fry well in the fire, so the poor man was
bound to the main mast and burnt in the ship to the no small derision of
Low and his Mirmidons."

Low and his crew now began to treat their prisoners with great brutality.
However, on one occasion the biter was bitten. It happened that one of the
drunken crew, playfully cutting at a prisoner, missed his mark and
accidentally slashed Captain Low across his lower jaw, the sword opening
his cheek and laying bare his teeth. The surgeon was called, who at once
stitched up the wound, but Low found some fault with the operation, as
well he might, seeing that "the surgeon was tollerably drunk" at the time.
The surgeon's professional pride was outraged by this criticism of his
skill by a layman, and he showed his annoyance in a ready, if
unprofessional, manner, by striking "Low such a blow with his Fists, that
broke out all the Stitches, and then bid him sew up his Chops himself and
be damned, so that the captain made a very pitiful Figure for some time
after." Low took a large number of prizes, but he was not a sympathetic
figure, and the list of his prizes and brutalities soon becomes irksome
reading. Low, still in the _Fancy_, and accompanied by Captain Harris in
the _Ranger_, then sailed back to the West Indies, and later to South
Carolina, where he took several prizes, one the _Amsterdam Merchant_
(Captain Willard), belonging to New England, and as Low never missed an
opportunity of showing his dislike of all New Englanders, he sent the
captain away with both his ears cut off and with various other wounds
about his body.

Low and Harris now made a most unfortunate mistake in giving chase to a
ship which on close quarters proved to be not a merchant vessel, but
H.M.S. _Greyhound_. After a short fight, the coward Low slipped away, and
left his consort, Harris, to carry on an unequal contest until he was
compelled to surrender his ship.

Low's cruelties became more and more disgusting, and there can be little
doubt that he was really by this time a lunatic.

In July, 1723, Low took a new ship for himself, naming himself Admiral,
and sporting a new black flag with a red skeleton upon it. He again
cruised off the Azores, the Canaries, and the Guinea coast, but what the
end was of this repulsive, uninteresting, and bloody pirate has never been
known.


LOWTHER, CAPTAIN GEORGE.

Sailed as second mate from the Thames in the _Gambia Castle_, a ship
belonging to the African Company, sixteen guns and a crew of thirty men.
On board as passengers were Captain Massey and a number of soldiers.
Arriving at their destination, Massey quarrelled with the merchants on
shore, and, a few days later, with Lowther, seized the ship, which he
renamed the _Delivery_. They now went a-pirating, their first prize being
a Boston ship, and cruising about off the Island of Hispaniola, several
more were taken, but nothing very rich. Lowther quarrelled with Captain
Massey, who, being a soldier, wished to land on some island to plunder the
French settlements, but this was not agreed to, and Massey and his
followers were sent away in a sloop. Life for Lowther now became a series
of successes, prizes being taken, and visits to land being occasionally
made for the crew to enjoy a drunken revel.

Having met with Captain Low, for a while the two sailed together, and
took the _Greyhound_, a merchantman, and several more rich prizes. Lowther
now commanded a small pirate fleet, and styled himself Admiral, his
flagship being the _Happy Delivery_. While careening their ships in the
Gulf of Matigue, they were suddenly attacked by the natives, and the
pirates barely escaped in a sloop with their lives. Lowther soon improved
himself by seizing a brigantine, and in her shaped his course to the coast
of South Carolina, a favourite resort for the pirates. Here he attacked an
English ship, but was so roughly handled that he was glad to run his ship
ashore and escape.

In 1723 he steered for Newfoundland, taking many small vessels there, and
returning to the West Indies. While cleaning his ship at the Isle of
Blanco, he was suddenly attacked by a South Sea Company's ship, the
_Eagle_, and the pirates were compelled to surrender. Lowther and a dozen
of his crew escaped by climbing out of the cabin window, and, reaching the
island, hid themselves in the woods. All were caught except Lowther and
three men and a boy. He was shortly afterwards found lying dead with a
pistol by his side, and was supposed to have shot himself. Three of his
crew who were caught were carried to St. Christopher's, and there tried
for piracy and hanged.


LUDBURY, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Sailed in company with Captains Prince and Harrison in October, 1670,
ascended the San Juan River in Nicaragua with a party of 170 men, and
surprised and plundered the city of Granada.


LUKE, CAPTAIN MATTHEW.

This Italian pirate had his headquarters at Porto Rico, and specialized in
attacking English ships. In 1718 he took four of these and murdered all
the crews. In May, 1722, Luke made a terrible mistake. Perceiving what he
thought to be a merchant ship, he attacked her, to find out all too late
that she was an English man-of-war, the _Lauceston_. Luke and his crew
were taken to Jamaica and hanged. One of his crew confessed to having
killed twenty English sailors with his own hands.


LUSHINGHAM, CAPTAIN.

In 1564 this pirate was at Berehaven in the South of Ireland, having just
sold a cargo of wine out of a Spanish prize to the Lord O'Sullivan, when
some of Queen Elizabeth's ships arrived in the bay in search of pirates.
By Lord O'Sullivan's help the pirates escaped, but Lushingham was killed
"by a piece of ordnance" as he was in the act of waving his cap towards
the Queen's ships.


LUSSAN, LE SIEUR RAVENEAU DE.

This French filibuster was a man of much better birth and education than
the usual buccaneer. Also, he was the author of a most entertaining book
recording his adventures and exploits as a buccaneer, called "Journal du
Voyage fait a la Mer de sud avec les Flibustiers de l'Amerique en 1684."

Pressure from his creditors drove de Lussan into buccaneering, as being a
rapid method of gaining enough money to satisfy them and to enable him to
return to the fashionable life he loved so well in Paris. De Lussan was,
according to his own account, a man of the highest principles, and very
religious. He never allowed his crew to molest priests, nuns, or churches.
After taking a Spanish town, the fighting being over, he would lead his
crew of pirates to attend Mass in the church, and when this was done--and
not until then--would he allow the plundering and looting to begin.

De Lussan was surprised and grieved to find that his Spanish prisoners had
a most exaggerated idea of the brutality of the buccaneers, and on one
occasion when he was conducting a fair young Spanish lady, a prisoner, to
a place of safety, he was overwhelmed when he discovered that the reason
of her terror was that she believed she was shortly to be eaten by him and
his crew. To remedy this erroneous impression, it was the custom of the
French commander to gather together all his prisoners into the church or
the plaza, and there to give them a lecture on the true life and character
of the buccaneers.

The student who wishes to learn more about the adventures of de Lussan can
do so in his book. There he will read, amongst other interesting events,
particulars about the filibuster's surprising and romantic affair with the
beautiful and wealthy Spanish widow who fell so violently in love with
him.

It happened on one occasion that Raveneau and his crew, having taken a
town on the West Coast of South America after a somewhat bloody battle,
had, as usual, attended Mass in the Cathedral, before setting out to
plunder the place.

Entering one of the chief houses in the town, de Lussan discovered the
widow of the late town treasurer dissolved in tears, upon which the tender
buccaneer hastened, with profound apologies, discreetly to withdraw, but
calling again next day to offer his sympathy he found the widow had
forgotten all about the late treasurer, for she had fallen violently in
love with her gallant, handsome, and fashionably dressed visitor.

After various adventures, de Lussan arrived safely back in Paris with
ample means in his possession not only to satisfy his creditors, but also
to enable him to live there as a gentleman of fortune and fashion.


MACHAULY, DANIEL, or MACCAWLY, or MCCAWLEY.

A Scotch pirate. One of Captain Gow's crew. Hanged at Execution Dock at
Wapping on June 11th, 1725.


MACKDONALD, EDWARD.

One of Captain George Lowther's crew in the _Happy Delivery_. Hanged at
St. Kitts on March 11th, 1722.


MACKET, CAPTAIN, or MAGGOTT.

On March 23rd, 1679, Macket, who commanded a small vessel of fourteen
tons, with a crew of twenty men, was at Boca del Toro with Coxon, Hawkins,
and other famous buccaneers, having just returned from the sacking of
Porto Bello.

Shortly afterwards the fleet sailed to Golden Island, off the coast of
Darien, and from thence set out to attack Santa Maria and Panama.


MACKINTOSH, WILLIAM.

Of Canterbury in Kent.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Hanged at Cape Coast Castle in 1722 at the
age of 21.


MAGNES, WILLIAM, or MAGNUS.

Born at Minehead in Somersetshire in 1687. Quartermaster of the _Royal
Fortune_ (Captain Bartholomew Roberts). Tried for piracy at Cape Coast
Castle, and hanged in chains in 1718, for taking and plundering the _King
Solomon_.


MAIN, WILLIAM.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Hanged in April, 1722, at the age of 28
years.


MAIN, WILLIAM.

Boatswain to Captain Bartholomew Roberts in the _Royal Fortune_. Was blown
up, the explosion being caused by one of the crew firing his pistol into
some gunpowder when the ship was taken by H.M.S. _Swallow_ in 1722.


MAINTENON, MARQUIS DE.

Arrived in the West Indies from France in 1676. In 1678 commanded _La
Sorcière_, a frigate, and, in company with other French filibusters from
Tortuga Island, cruised off the coast of Caracas. He ravaged the islands
of Margarita and Trinidad. He met with but little success, and soon
afterwards his fleet scattered.


MAINWARING, CAPTAIN HENRY.

A notorious Newfoundland pirate.

On June 4th, 1614, when off the coast of that island, in command of eight
vessels, he plundered the fishing fleet, stealing what provisions and
stores he was in need of, also taking away with him all the carpenters and
mariners he wanted for his own fleet.

It was his custom, when taking seamen, to pick one out of every six. In
all he took 400 men, some of whom joined him willingly, while others were
"perforstmen." Sailing across the Atlantic to the coast of Spain,
Mainwaring took a Portuguese ship and stole from out of her a good store
of wine, and out of a French prize 10,000 dried fish. A few years later
this pirate was pardoned and placed in command of a squadron and sent to
the Barbary coast in an unsuccessful attempt to drive out the pirates who
were settled there. Here he may well have met with his old friend Captain
Peter Easton, who had also been a Newfoundland pirate, but in 1613 had
joined the Barbary corsairs.


EL MAJORCAM, CAPTAIN ANTONIO.

At one time an officer in the Spanish Navy. Became a notorious West Indian
pirate, but about 1824 he retired from the sea to become a highwayman on
shore.


MANSFIELD, JO.

One of Captain Bartholomew Roberts's men. Must not be confused with Edward
Mansfield, the famous buccaneer.

A native of the Orkney Islands. At one time was a highwayman. Later on
deserted from the _Rose_, man-of-war. Volunteered to join the pirates at
the island of Dominica, and was always keen to do any mischief. He was a
bully and a drunkard.

When Roberts's ship was attacked by H.M.S. _Swallow_ and had surrendered
after a sharp fight, Mansfield, who had been below all the while, very
drunk, came staggering and swearing up on deck, with a drawn cutlass in
his hand, crying out to know who would go on board the prize with him, and
it was some time before his friends could persuade him of the true
condition of things.

At his trial at Cape Coast Castle he said little in his defence, but
pleaded that the cause of his backsliding was drunkenness. Hanged in the
year 1722 at the age of 30.


MANSFIELD, CAPTAIN EDWARD, or MANSVELT.

A Dutchman born in the Island of Curacao.

He was the chief of the buccaneers, and at his death was succeeded by
Henry Morgan. He was the first buccaneer to cross the Isthmus of Darien to
the Pacific Ocean. Noted for his charm of manner, he was very popular with
the buccaneers of all nationalities. In 1663 he commanded a brigantine
carrying four guns and a crew of sixty men. Was chosen admiral of the
fleet of buccaneers that gathered at Bleufields Bay in Jamaica in
November, 1665, at the invitation of Modyford, the Governor, when he
appointed young Henry Morgan to be his vice-admiral. This fleet was to
sail and attempt to seize the Island of Curacao, and consisted of fifteen
ships and a mixed crew of 500 buccaneers. On the way there they landed in
Cuba, although England was at peace with Spain, and marched forty miles
inland, to surprise and sack the town of Sancti Spiritus, from which they
took a rich booty.

Mansfield, "being resolved never to face the Governor of Jamaica until he
had done some service to the King," next made a very daring attack on the
Island of Old Providence, which the Spaniards had fortified and used as a
penal settlement. This was successful, and Mansfield, with great humanity,
landed all the prisoners on the mainland of America. For a long while it
had been Mansfield's dream to make this island a permanent home of the
buccaneers, as it was close to the Spanish Main, with the towns of Porto
Bello and Vera Cruz, and on the trade route of the Spanish galleons,
taking their rich cargoes to Spain.

Mansfield's next exploit was to ascend the San Juan River and to sack
Granada, the capital of Nicaragua. From there he coasted south along Costa
Rica, burning plantations, smashing the images in the churches,
ham-stringing cows and mules, and cutting down fruit-trees.

He returned in June, 1665, to Port Royal, with a rich booty. For this
inexcusable attack on a country at peace with England, Governor Modyford
mildly reproved him!

Mansfield, now an old man, died suddenly at the Island of Tortuga, off
Hispaniola, when on a visit to the French pirates there. Another account
says that he was captured by the Spaniards and taken by them to Porto
Bello, and there put to death.


MARTEEN, CAPTAIN DAVID. Buccaneer.

In 1665 he had his headquarters in Jamaica.


MARTEL, CAPTAIN JOHN.

An old Jamaican privateer. After the Peace of Utrecht, being out of
employment, he took to piracy. His career as a pirate was very successful
so long as it lasted. Cruising off Jamaica, Cuba, and other islands, he
continued taking ship after ship, with one particularly rich prize, a West
African ship containing gold-dust, elephants' teeth, and slaves. His
original command was a sloop of eight guns and a crew of eighty men, but
after a short while he commanded a small fleet consisting of two ships
(each armed with twenty guns), three sloops, and several armed prizes.
With these Martel entered a bay in a small island called Santa Cruz, near
Porto Rico, to careen and refit. This was in December, 1716, but news had
leaked out of the pirate's whereabouts, and soon there arrived on the
scene Captain Hume, of H.M.S. _Scarborough_. Martel tried to escape, but
his ship ran aground, and many of the pirates were killed, but a few, with
Martel, got ashore and hid on the island. None of them were heard of again
except Martel, and it was supposed that they had died of hunger. In the
space of three months Martel took and plundered thirteen vessels, all of
considerable size. Two years later he was back in New Providence Island,
when Governor Rogers arrived with King George's offer of pardon to the
pirates, and Martel was one of those who surrendered.


MARTIN, JOHN.

Hanged in Virginia in 1718 with the rest of Blackbeard's crew.


MASSEY, CAPTAIN JOHN.

As a lieutenant, he "served with great applause" in the army in Flanders,
under the command of the Duke of Marlborough.

He afterwards sailed from the Thames in the _Gambia Castle_, a ship of the
African Company, in command of a company of soldiers which was being sent
to garrison the fort. The merchants of Gambia were supposed to victual
this garrison, but the rations supplied were considered by Massey to be
quite insufficient. He quarrelled with the Governor and merchants, and
took his soldiers back on board the ship, and with Lowther, the second
mate, seized the ship and turned pirate. Lowther and Massey eventually
quarrelled, for the latter, being a soldier, "was solicitous to move in
his own sphere"--that is, he wanted to land his troops and plunder the
French West Indian settlements. In the end Massey and a few followers were
permitted to go off in a captured sloop, and in this sailed for Port
Royal, Jamaica. Arrived there, "with a bold countenance he went to the
Governor" and told a long and plausible tale of how he had managed to
escape from the pirates at the first opportunity. He deceived the
sympathetic Governor, and was sent with Captain Laws to hunt for Lowther.
Returning to Jamaica without finding Lowther, he was granted a
"certificate of his surrender," and came to England as a passenger.

On reaching London, he wrote a narrative of the whole affair--or as much
as he deemed wise--to the African Company, who, receiving the story with
far less credulity than the Governor of Jamaica, returned him answer "that
he should be fairly hanged," and very shortly afterwards he was, at
Tyburn on July 26th, 1723.


MAY, WILLIAM.

A London mariner. One of Captain Avery's crew, left behind in Madagascar
very sick. A negro, hearing that an Englishman was there, came to him and
nursed and fed him. This negro spoke good English, having lived at Bethnal
Green.

May was promoted afterwards to be captain of a ship in the Red Sea. He was
described by a shipmate as being "a true cock of the Game and an old
sportsman." Hanged at London in 1696.


MAZE, CAPTAIN WILLIAM, or MACE, or MAISE.

A notorious pirate; particularly mentioned in the royal warrant
authorizing Captain Kidd to go and capture certain "wicked and
ill-disposed persons."

Arrived in command of a big ship at New York in 1699, loaded with booty
taken in the Red Sea.


McCARTHY, CAPTAIN DENNIS.

Of New Providence, Bahama Islands.

This pirate and prize-fighter was one of those who refused King George's
pardon in 1717, and was eventually hanged by his late fellow-pirates. On
the gallows he made the following dying speech:

"Some friends of mine have often said I should die in my shoes, but I
would rather make them liars." And so, kicking off his shoes, he was
hanged.


MEGHLYN, HANS VAN.

A pirate of Antwerp, who owned a vessel of forty-five tons, painted black
with pitch, and carried a crew of thirty. In 1539 he was cruising off
Whitstable, on the lookout for vessels entering or leaving the Thames.
Cromwell had been warned by Vaughan to look out for this pirate ship.


DE MELTON.

A well-known pirate in the sixteenth century. Was with Kellwanton when he
was captured in the Isle of Man in 1531, but de Melton managed to escape
with some of the crew and get away in their ship to Grimsby.


MELVIN, WILLIAM.

This Scotch pirate was hanged, with other members of Gow's crew, at
Wapping in June, 1725.


MENDOZA, ANTONIO.

A Spaniard from San Domingo.

Mention is made of this unlucky mariner in a very interesting document
which Mr. A. Hyatt Verrill was fortunate enough to acquire quite recently
in the island of St. Kitts. It runs as follows:

"An assize and generall Gaole delivrie held at St. Christophers Colonie
from ye nineteenthe daye of Maye to ye 22n. daye off ye same Monthe 1701
Captaine Josias Pendringhame Magustrate &c. The Jurye of our Soveraigne
Lord the Kinge Doe presente Antonio Mendoza of Hispaniola and a subjecte
of ye Kinge of Spain for that ye said on or about ye 11 Daye of Apryl 1701
feloneousely delibyrately and malliciousley and encontrarye to ye laws off
Almightie God and our Soveraigne Lord the Kinge did in his cuppes saucely
and arrogantyly speak of the Governour and Lord the Kinge and bye force
and armies into ye tavernne of John Wilkes Esq. did entre and there did
Horrible sware and cursse and did felonoslye use threatteninge words and
did strike and cutte most murtherouslye severalle subjects of our
Soveraigne Lord the Kinge. Of w'h Indictment he pleadeth not Guiltie
butte onne presente Master Samuel Dunscombe mariner did sware that said
Antonio Mendoza was of his knowenge a Blood-thirste piratte and Guiltie of
diabolicalle practises & ye Grande Inquest findinge yt a trewe bill to be
tryd by God and ye Countrye w'h beinge a Jurie of 12 men sworne finde him
Guiltie & for the same he be adjuged to be carryd to ye Fort Prison to
have both his earres cutt close by his head and be burnet throughe ye
tongue with an Hot iron and to be caste chained in ye Dungon to awaitte ye
plesyure of God and Our Soveraigne Lord the Kinge."


MEYEURS.

A South Sea pirate, killed when taking part with Captain Williams in a
raid against an Arab settlement at Bayu.


MICHEL, CAPITAINE. Filibuster.

His ship, _La Mutine_, was armed with forty-four guns and carried a crew
of 200 men.


MICHEL LE BASQUE. A French filibuster.

In company with the butcher L'Onnais and 650 other buccaneers, he pillaged
the town of Maracaibo in Venezuela, in the year 1667. A very successful
but ruthless buccaneer.


DON MIGUEL.

In 1830 commanded a squadron of small pirate vessels off the Azores. After
seizing a Sardinian brig off St. Michael's, was himself captured by a
British frigate.


MIGUEL, FRANCESCO.

Hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, in 1823.


MILLER, JOHN.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Hanged at Boston on June 30th, 1704. A
broadsheet published at the time, describing the scenes at the execution,
tells us that Miller "seemed much concerned, and complained of a great
Burden of Sins to answer for, expressing often: 'Lord, what shall I do to
be Saved?'"


MILLER, THOMAS.

Quartermaster on the pirate ship _Queen Ann's Revenge_, and killed on
November 22nd, 1718.


MISNIL, SIEUR DU.

A French filibuster who commanded a ship, _La Trompeuse_ (one hundred men
and fourteen guns).


MISSON, CAPTAIN.

This unique pirate came of an ancient French family of Provence. He was
the youngest of a large family, and received a good education. At the age
of 15 he had already shown unusual distinction in the subjects of humanity
and logic, and had passed quite tolerably in mathematics. Deciding to
carve a fortune for himself with his sword, he was sent to the Academy at
Angiers for a year, and at the conclusion of his military studies his
father would have bought him a commission in a regiment of musketeers. But
young Misson had been reading books of travel, and begged so earnestly to
be allowed to go to sea that his father got him admitted as a volunteer on
the French man-of-war _Victoire_, commanded by Monsieur Fourbin. Joining
his ship at Marseilles, they cruised in the Mediterranean, and the young
volunteer soon showed great keenness in his duties, and lost no
opportunity of learning all he could about navigation and the
construction of ships, even parting with his pocket-money to the boatswain
and the carpenter to receive special instruction from them.

Arriving one day at Naples, Misson obtained permission from the captain to
visit Rome, a visit that eventually changed his whole career.

It happened that while in Rome the young sailor met a priest, a Signor
Caraccioli, a Dominican, who held most unclerical views about the
priesthood; and, indeed, his ideas on life in general were, to say the
least, unorthodox. A great friendship was struck up between these two,
which at length led the priest to throw off his habit and join the crew of
the _Victoire_. Two days out from port they met and fought a desperate
hand-to-hand engagement with a Sallee pirate, in which the ex-priest and
Misson both distinguished themselves by their bravery. Misson's next
voyage was in a privateer, the _Triumph_, and, meeting one day an English
ship, the _Mayflower_, between Guernsey and Start Point, the merchantman
was defeated after a gallant resistance.

Rejoining the _Victoire_, Misson sailed from Rochelle to the West Indies,
and Caraccioli lost no opportunity of preaching to young Misson the gospel
of atheism and communism, and with such success that the willing convert
soon held views as extreme as those of his teacher. These two apostles now
began to talk to the crew, and their views, particularly on the rights of
private property, were soon held by almost all on board. A fortunate event
happened just then to help the new "cause." Meeting with an English
man-of-war, the _Winchester_, off the island of Martinique, a smart
engagement took place between the two ships, at the very commencement of
which Captain Fourbin and three of the officers on the French ship were
killed. The fight ended by the English ship blowing up, and an era of
speech-making may be said to have now begun.

Firstly, Signor Caraccioli, stepping forward, made a long and eloquent
address to Misson, inviting him to become captain of the _Victoire_, and
calling upon him to follow the example of Alexander the Great with the
Persians, and that of the Kings Henry IV. and VII. of England, reminding
him how Mahomet, with but a few camel-drivers, founded the Ottoman Empire,
also how Darius, with a handful of companions, got possession of Persia.
Inflamed by this speech, young Misson showed what he could do, when,
calling all hands up on deck, he made his first, but, as events proved, by
far from last, speech. The result was a triumph of oratory, the excited
French sailors crying out: "Vive le Capitaine Misson et son Lieutenant le
Scavant Caraccioli!" Misson, returning thanks in a few graceful words,
promised to do his utmost as their commander for their new marine
republic. The newly elected officers retiring to the great cabin, a
friendly discussion began as to their future arrangements. The first
question that arose was to choose what colours they should sail under. The
newly elected boatswain, Mathew le Tondu, a brave but simple mariner,
advised a black one, as being the most terrifying. This brought down a
full blast of eloquence from Caraccioli, the new lieutenant, who objected
that "they were no pirates, but men who were resolved to affect the
Liberty which God and Nature gave them," with a great deal about
"guardians of the Peoples Rights and Liberties," etc., and, gradually
becoming worked up, gave the wretched boatswain, who must have regretted
his unfortunate remark, a heated lecture on the soul, on shaking "the Yoak
of Tyranny" off their necks, on "Oppression and Poverty" and the miseries
of life under these conditions as compared to those of "Pomp and
Dignity." In the end he showed that their policy was not to be one of
piracy, for pirates were men of no principle and led dissolute lives; but
_their_ lives were to be brave, just, and innocent, and their cause the
cause of Liberty; and therefore, instead of a black flag, they should live
under a white ensign, with the motto "For God and Liberty" embroidered
upon it.

The simple sailors, debarred from these councils, had gathered outside the
cabin, but were able to overhear this speech, and at its conclusion,
carried away by enthusiasm, loud cries went up of "Liberty! Liberty! We
are free men! Vive the brave Captain Misson and the noble Lieutenant
Caraccioli!" Alas! it is impossible in the space of this work to do
justice to the perfectly wonderful and idealistic conditions of this
pirate crew. Their speeches and their kind acts follow each other in
fascinating profusion. We can only recommend those who feel disposed to
follow more closely the history of these delightful pirates, to read the
account printed in English in 1726, if they are fortunate enough to come
by a copy.

The first prize taken by these pirates under the white flag was an English
sloop commanded by one Captain Thomas Butler, only a day's sail out from
St. Kitts. After helping themselves to a couple of puncheons of rum and a
few other articles which the pirates needed, but without doing any
unkindness to the crew, nor stripping them, as was the usual custom of
pirates on such occasions, they let them go, greatly to the surprise of
Captain Butler, who handsomely admitted that he had never before met with
so much "candour" in any similar situation, and to further express his
gratitude he ordered his crew to man ship, and at parting called for three
rousing British cheers for the good pirate and his men, which were
enthusiastically given.

Sailing to the coast of Africa, Misson took a Dutch ship, the
_Nieuwstadt_, of Amsterdam. The cargo was found to consist of gold dust
and seventeen slaves. In the latter Captain Misson recognized a good text
for one of his little sermons to his crew, so, calling all hands on deck,
he made the following observations on the vile trade of slavery, telling
his men:

"That the Trading for those of our own Species, cou'd never be agreeable
to the Eyes of divine Justice. That no Man had Power of the Liberty of
another; and while those who profess a more enlightened Knowledge of the
Deity, sold Men like Beasts; they prov'd that their Religion was no more
than Grimace, and that they differ'd from the Barbarians in Name only,
since their Practice was in nothing more humane. For his Part, and he
hop'd he spoke the Sentiments of all his brave Companions, he had not
exempted his Neck from the galling Yoak of Slavery, and asserted his own
Liberty, to enslave others. That however, these Men, were distinguished
from the Europeans by their Colour, Customs, or religious Rites, they were
the Work of the same omnipotent Being, and endued with equal Reason.
Wherefore, he desired they might be treated like Freemen (for he wou'd
banish even the Name of Slavery from among them) and be divided into
Messes among them, to the end they might the sooner learn their language,
be sensible of the Obligations they had to them, and more capable and
zealous to defend that Liberty they owed to their Justice and Humanity."
This speech was met with general applause, and once again the good ship
_Victoire_ rang with cries of "Vive le Capitaine Misson!" The negroes were
freed of their irons, dressed up in the clothes of their late Dutch
masters, and it is gratifying to read that "by their Gesticulations, they
shew'd they were gratefully sensible of their being delivered from their
Chains." But alas! a sad cloud was creeping insidiously over the fair
reputation of these super-pirates. Out of the last slave ship they had
taken, a number of Dutch sailors had volunteered to serve with Misson and
had come aboard as members of his crew. Hitherto no swearword was ever
heard, no loose or profane expression had pained the ears of Captain
Misson or his ex-priestly lieutenant. But the Dutch mariners began to lead
the crew into ways of swearing and drunkenness, which, coming to the
captain's notice, he thought best to nip these weeds in the bud; so,
calling both French and Dutch upon deck, and desiring the Dutch captain to
translate his remarks into the Dutch language, he told them that--

"Before he had the Misfortune of having them on Board, his Ears were never
grated with hearing the Name of the great Creator profaned, tho' he, to
his Sorrow, had often since heard his own Men guilty of that Sin, which
administer'd neither Profit nor Pleasure, and might draw upon them a
severe Punishment: That if they had a just Idea of that great Being, they
wou'd never mention him, but they wou'd immediately reflect on his Purity,
and their own Vileness. That we so easily took Impression from our
Company, that the Spanish Proverb says: 'Let a Hermit and a Thief live
together, the Thief wou'd become Hermit, or the Hermit thief': That he saw
this verified in his ship, for he cou'd attribute the Oaths and Curses he
had heard among his brave Companions, to nothing but the odious Example of
the Dutch: That this was not the only Vice they had introduced, for before
they were on Board, his Men were Men, but he found by their beastly
Pattern they were degenerated into Brutes, by drowning that only Faculty,
which distinguishes between Man and Beast, Reason. That as he had the
Honour to command them, he could not see them run into these odious Vices
without a sincere Concern, as he had a paternal Affection for them, and he
should reproach himself as neglectful of the common Good, if he did not
admonish them; and as by the Post which they had honour'd him, he was
obliged to have a watchful Eye over their general Interest; he was obliged
to tell them his Sentiments were, that the Dutch allured them to a
dissolute Way of Life, that they might take some Advantage over them:
Wherefore, as his brave Companions, he was assured, wou'd be guided by
reason, he gave the Dutch Notice, that the first whom he catch'd either
with an Oath in his Mouth or Liquor in his Head, should be brought to the
Geers, whipped and pickled, for an Example to the rest of his Nation: As
to his Friends, his Companions, his Children, those gallant, those
generous, noble and heroick Souls he had the Honour to command, he
entreated them to allow a small Time for Reflection, and to consider how
little Pleasure, and how much Danger, might flow from imitating the Vices
of their Enemies; and that they would among themselves, make a Law for the
Suppression of what would otherwise estrange them from the Source of Life,
and consequently leave them destitute of his Protection."

This speech had the desired effect, and ever afterwards, when any one of
the crew had reason to mention the name of his captain, he never failed to
add the epithet "Good" before it.

These chaste pirates soon took and plundered many rich merchant ships, but
always in the most gentlemanly manner, so that none failed to be "not a
little surprised at the Regularity, Tranquillity and Humanity of these
new-fashioned Pyrates." From out of one of these, an English vessel, they
took a sum of £60,000, but during the engagement the captain was killed.
Poor Captain Misson was broken-hearted over this unfortunate mishap, and
to show as best he could his regret, he buried the body on shore, and,
finding that one of his men was by trade a stonecutter, raised a monument
over the grave with, engraved upon it, the words: "Here lies a gallant
English-Man." And at the conclusion of a very moving burial service he
paid a final tribute by "a triple Discharge of 50 small Arms and fired
Minute Guns."

Misson now sailed to the Island of Johanna in the Indian Ocean, which
became his future home. Misson married the sister of the local dusky
queen, and his lieutenant led to the altar her niece, while many of the
crew also were joined in holy wedlock to one or more ladies of more humble
social standing.

Already Misson has received more space than he is entitled to in a work of
reference of this kind, but his career is so full of charming incidents
that one is tempted to continue to unseemly length. Let it suffice to say
that for some years Misson made speeches, robbed ships, and now and again,
when unavoidably driven to it, would reluctantly slaughter his enemies.

Finally, Misson took his followers to a sheltered bay in Madagascar, and
on landing there made a little speech, telling them that here they could
settle down, build a town, that here, in fact, "they might have some Place
to call their own; and a Receptacle, when Age or Wounds had render'd them
incapable of Hardship, where they might enjoy the Fruits of their Labour,
and go to their Graves in Peace."

This ideal colony was called Libertatia, and was run on strictly
Socialistic lines, for no one owned any individual property; all money was
kept in a common treasury, and no hedges bounded any man's particular plot
of land. Docks were made and fortifications set up. Soon Misson had two
ships built, called the _Childhood_ and the _Liberty_, and these were sent
for a voyage round the island, to map and chart the coast, and to train
the released slaves to be efficient sailors. A Session House was built,
and a form of Government arranged. At the first meeting Misson was elected
Lord Conservator, as they called the President, for a term of three years,
and during that period he was to have "all the Ensigns of Royalty to
attend him." Captain Tew, the English pirate, was elected Admiral of the
Fleet of Libertatia, Caraccioli became Secretary of State, while the
Council was formed of the ablest amongst the pirates, without distinction
of nation or colour. The difficulty of language, as French, English,
Portuguese, and Dutch were equally spoken, was overcome by the invention
of a new language, a kind of Esperanto, which was built up of words from
all four. For many years this ideally successful and happy pirate Utopia
flourished; but at length misfortunes came, one on top of the other, and a
sudden and unexpected attack by the hitherto friendly natives finally
drove Misson and a few other survivors to seek safety at sea, but,
overtaken by a hurricane, their vessel foundered, and Misson and all his
crew were drowned; and thus ended the era of what may be called "piracy
without tears."

      He was the mildest-manner'd man
    That ever scuttled ship or cut a throat.
                                            BYRON.


MITCHELL, CAPTAIN.

An English buccaneer of Jamaica, who flourished in 1663.


MITCHELL, JOHN.

Of Shadwell Parish, London.

One of the crew of the _Ranger_. Condemned to death, but reprieved and
sold to the Royal African Company.


M'KINLIE, PETER. Irish pirate.

Boatswain in a merchant ship which sailed from the Canaries to England in
the year 1765. On board were three passengers, the adventurous Captain
Glass and his wife and daughter. One night M'Kinlie and four other
mutineers murdered the commander of the vessel, Captain Cockeran, and
Captain Glass and his family, as well as all the crew except two
cabin-boys. After throwing their bodies overboard, M'Kinlie steered for
the coast of Ireland, and on December 3rd arrived in the neighbourhood of
the harbour of Ross. Filling the long-boat with dollars, weighing some two
tons, they rowed ashore, after killing the two boys and scuttling the
ship. On landing, the pirates found they had much more booty than they
could carry, so they buried 250 bags of dollars in the sand, and took what
they could with them to a village called Fishertown. Here they regaled
themselves, while one of the villagers relieved them of a bag containing
1,200 dollars. Next day they walked into Ross, and there sold another bag
of dollars, and with the proceeds each man bought a pair of pistols and a
horse and rode to Dublin. In the meanwhile the ship, instead of sinking,
was washed up on the shore. Strong suspicion being roused in the
countryside, messengers were sent post-haste to inform the Lords of the
Regency at Dublin that the supposed pirates were in the city. Three of
them were arrested in the Black Bull Inn in Thomas Street, but M'Kinlie
and another pirate, who had already taken a post-chaise for Cork,
intending to embark there on a vessel for England, were arrested on the
way.

The five pirates were tried in Dublin, condemned and executed, their
bodies being hung in chains, on December 19th, 1765.


MONTBARS, THE EXTERMINATOR.

A native of Languedoc. He joined the buccaneers after reading a book which
recorded the cruelty of the Spaniards to the American natives, and this
story inspired him with such a hatred of all Spaniards that he determined
to go to the West Indies, throw in his lot with the buccaneers, and to
devote his whole life and energies to punishing the Spaniards. He carried
out his resolve most thoroughly, and treated all Spaniards who came into
his power with such cruelty that he became known all up and down the
Spanish Main as the Exterminator. Eventually Montbars became a notorious
and successful buccaneer or pirate chief, having his headquarters at St.
Bartholomew, one of the Virgin Islands, to which he used to bring all his
prisoners and spoils taken out of Spanish ships and towns.


MONTENEGRO.

A Columbian. One of Captain Gilbert's crew in the pirate schooner _Panda_.
Hanged at Boston in 1835.


DE MONT, FRANCIS.

Captured in South Carolina in 1717. Tried at Charleston, and convicted of
taking the _Turtle Dove_ and other vessels in the previous July. Hanged in
June, 1717.


MOODY, CAPTAIN CHRISTOPHER.

A notorious pirate. Very active off the coast of Carolina, 1717, with two
ships under his command. In 1722 was with Roberts on board the _Royal
Fortune_, being one of his chief men or "Lords." Taken prisoner, and tried
at Cape Coast Castle, and hanged in chains at the age of 28.


MOORE. Gunner.

A gunner aboard Captain Kidd's ship the _Adventure_. When Kidd's mutinous
crew were all for attacking a Dutch ship, Kidd refused to allow them to,
and Moore threatened the captain, who seized a bucket and struck Moore on
the head with it, the blow killing him. Kidd was perfectly justified in
killing this mutinous sailor, but eventually it was for this act that he
was hanged in London.


MORGAN, CAPTAIN.

This pirate must not be confused with the buccaneer, Sir Henry Morgan.
Little is known about him except that he was with Hamlin, the French
pirate, in 1683, off the coast of West Africa, and helped to take several
Danish and English ships. Soon the pirates quarrelled over the division of
their plunder and separated into two companies, the English following
Captain Morgan in one of the prizes.


MORGAN, COLONEL BLODRE, or BLEDRY.

This buccaneer was probably a relation of Sir Henry Morgan. He was an
important person in Jamaica between 1660 and 1670. At the taking of Panama
by Henry Morgan in 1670 the Colonel commanded the rearguard of 300 men. In
May, 1671, he was appointed to act as Deputy Governor of Providence Island
by Sir James Modyford.


MORGAN, LIEUT.-COLONEL EDWARD. Buccaneer.

Uncle and father-in-law of Sir Henry Morgan.

In 1665, when war had been declared on Holland, the Governor of Jamaica
issued commissions to several pirates and buccaneers to sail to and attack
the Dutch islands of St. Eustatius, Saba, and Curacao. Morgan was put in
command of ten ships and some 500 men; most of them were "reformed
prisoners," while some were condemned pirates who had been pardoned in
order to let them join the expedition.

Before leaving Jamaica the crews mutinied, but were pacified by the
promise of an equal share of all the spoils that should be taken. Three
ships out of the fleet slipped away on the voyage, but the rest arrived at
St. Kitts, landed, and took the fort. Colonel Morgan, who was an old and
corpulent man, died of the heat and exertion during the campaign.


MORGAN, LIEUT.-COLONEL THOMAS.

Sailed with Colonel Edward Morgan to attack St. Eustatius and Saba
Islands, and after these were surrendered by the Dutch, Thomas Morgan was
left in charge.

In 1686 he sailed in command of a company of buccaneers to assist Governor
Wells, of St. Kitts, against the French. The defence of the island was
disgraceful, and Morgan's company was the only one which displayed any
courage or discipline, and most of them were killed or wounded, Colonel
Morgan himself being shot in both legs.

Often these buccaneer leaders altered their titles from colonel to
captain, to suit the particular enterprise on which they were engaged,
according if it took place on sea or land.


MORGAN, SIR HENRY. Buccaneer.

This, the greatest of all the "brethren of the coast," was a Welshman,
born at Llanrhymmy in Monmouthshire in the year 1635. The son of a
well-to-do farmer, Robert Morgan, he early took to the seafaring life.
When quite a young man Morgan went to Barbadoes, but afterwards he
settled at Jamaica, which was his home for the rest of his life.

Morgan may have been induced to go to the West Indies by his uncle,
Colonel Morgan, who was for a time Deputy Governor of Jamaica, a post Sir
Henry Morgan afterwards held.

Morgan was a man of great energy, and must have possessed great power of
winning his own way with people. That he could be absolutely unscrupulous
when it suited his ends there can be little doubt. He was cruel at times,
but was not the inhuman monster that he is made out to be by Esquemeling
in his "History of the Bucaniers." This was largely proved by the evidence
given in the suit for libel brought and won by Morgan against the
publishers, although Morgan was, if possible, more indignant over the
statement in the same book that he had been kidnapped in Wales and sold,
as a boy, and sent to be a slave in Barbadoes. That he could descend to
rank dishonesty was shown when, returning from his extraordinary and
successful assault on the city of Panama in 1670, to Chagres, he left most
of his faithful followers behind, without ships or food, while he slipped
off in the night with most of the booty to Jamaica. No doubt, young Morgan
came to Jamaica with good credentials from his uncle, the Colonel, for the
latter was held in high esteem by Modyford, then Governor of Barbadoes,
who describes Colonel Morgan as "that honest privateer."

Colonel Morgan did not live to see his nephew reach the pinnacle of his
success, for in the year 1665 he was sent at the head of an expedition to
attack the Dutch stronghold at St. Eustatius Island, but he was too old to
stand the hardships of such an expedition and died shortly afterwards.

By this time Morgan had made his name as a successful and resolute
buccaneer by returning to Port Royal from a raiding expedition in Central
America with a huge booty.

In 1665 Morgan, with two other buccaneers, Jackman and Morris, plundered
the province of Campeachy, and then, acting as Vice-Admiral to the most
famous buccaneer of the day, Captain Mansfield, plundered Cuba, captured
Providence Island, sacked Granada, burnt and plundered the coast of Costa
Rica, bringing back another booty of almost fabulous wealth to Jamaica. In
this year Morgan married a daughter of his uncle, Colonel Morgan.

In 1668, when 33 years of age, Morgan was commissioned by the Jamaican
Government to collect together the privateers, and by 1669 he was in
command of a big fleet, when he was almost killed by a great explosion in
the _Oxford_, which happened while Morgan was giving a banquet to his
captains. About this time Morgan calmly took a fine ship, the _Cour
Volant_, from a French pirate, and made her his own flagship, christening
her the _Satisfaction_.

In 1670 the greatest event of Morgan's life took place--the sacking of
Panama. First landing a party which took the Castle of San Lorenzo at the
mouth of the Chagres River, Morgan left a strong garrison there to cover
his retreat and pushed on with 1,400 men in a fleet of canoes up the river
on January 9th, 1671. The journey across the isthmus, through the tropical
jungle, was very hard on the men, particularly as they had depended on
finding provisions to supply their wants on the way, and carried no food
with them. They practically starved until the sixth day, when they found a
barn full of maize, which the fleeing Spaniards had neglected to destroy.
On the evening of the ninth day a scout reported he had seen the steeple
of a church in Panama. Morgan, with that touch of genius which so often
brought him success, attacked the city from a direction the Spaniards had
not thought possible, so that their guns were all placed where they were
useless, and they were compelled to do just what the buccaneer leader
wanted them to do--namely, to come out of their fortifications and fight
him in the open. The battle raged fiercely for two hours between the brave
Spanish defenders and the equally brave but almost exhausted buccaneers.
When at last the Spaniards turned and ran, the buccaneers were too tired
to immediately follow up their success, but after resting they advanced,
and at the end of three hours' street fighting the city was theirs. The
first thing Morgan now did was to assemble all his men and strictly forbid
them to drink any wine, telling them that he had secret information that
the wine had been poisoned by the Spaniards before they left the city.
This was, of course, a scheme of Morgan's to stop his men from becoming
drunk, when they would be at the mercy of the enemy, as had happened in
many a previous buccaneer assault.

Morgan now set about plundering the city, a large part of which was burnt
to the ground, though whether this was done by his orders or by the
Spanish Governor has never been decided. After three weeks the buccaneers
started back on their journey to San Lorenzo, with a troop of 200
pack-mules laden with gold, silver, and goods of all sorts, together with
a large number of prisoners. The rearguard on the march was under the
command of a kinsman of the Admiral, Colonel Bledry Morgan.

On their arrival at Chagres the spoils were divided, amidst a great deal
of quarrelling, and in March, 1671, Morgan sailed off to Port Royal with a
few friends and the greater part of the plunder, leaving his faithful
followers behind without ships or provisions, and with but £10 apiece as
their share of the spoils.

On May 31st, 1671, the Council of Jamaica passed a vote of thanks to
Morgan for his successful expedition, and this in spite of the fact that
in July, a year before, a treaty had been concluded at Madrid between
Spain and England for "restraining depredations and establishing peace" in
the New World.

In April, 1672, Morgan was carried to England as a prisoner in the
_Welcome_ frigate. But he was too popular to be convicted, and after being
acquitted was appointed Deputy Governor of Jamaica, and in November, 1674,
he was knighted and returned to the West Indies. In 1672 Major-General
Banister, who was Commander-in-Chief of the troops in Jamaica, writing to
Lord Arlington about Morgan, said: "He (Morgan) is a well deserving
person, and one of great courage and conduct, who may, with His Majesty's
pleasure, perform good public service at home, or be very advantageous to
this island if war should again break forth with the Spaniards."

While Morgan was in England he brought an action for libel against William
Crooke, the publisher of the "History of the Bucaniers of America." The
result of this trial was that Crooke paid £200 damages to Morgan and
published a long and grovelling apology.

Morgan was essentially a man of action, and a regular life on shore proved
irksome to him, for we learn from a report sent home by Lord Vaughan in
1674 that Morgan "frequented the taverns of Port Royal, drinking and
gambling in unseemly fashion," but nevertheless the Jamaican Assembly had
voted the Lieutenant-Governor a sum of £600 special salary. In 1676
Vaughan brought definite charges against Morgan and another member of the
Council, Robert Byndloss, of giving aid to certain Jamaica pirates.

Morgan made a spirited defence and, no doubt largely owing to his
popularity, got off, and in 1678 was granted a commission to be a captain
of a company of 100 men.

The Governor to succeed Vaughan was Lord Carlisle, who seems to have liked
Morgan, in spite of his jovial "goings on" with his old buccaneer friends
in the taverns of Port Royal, and in some of his letters speaks of
Morgan's "generous manner," and hints that whatever allowances are made to
him "he will be a beggar."

In 1681 Sir Thomas Lynch was appointed to be Governor, and trouble at once
began between him and his deputy. Amongst the charges the former brought
against Morgan was one of his having been overheard to say, "God damn the
Assembly!" for which he was suspended from that body.

In April, 1688, the King, at the urgent request of the Duke of Albemarle,
ordered Morgan to be reinstated in the Assembly, but Morgan did not live
long to enjoy his restored honours, for he died on August 25th, 1688.

An extract from the journal of Captain Lawrence Wright, commander of
H.M.S. _Assistance_, dated August, 1688, describes the ceremonies held at
Port Royal at the burial of Morgan, and shows how important and popular a
man he was thought to be. It runs:

"Saturday 25. This day about eleven hours noone Sir Henry Morgan died, &
the 26th was brought over from Passage-fort to the King's house at Port
Royall, from thence to the Church, & after a sermon was carried to the
Pallisadoes & there buried. All the forts fired an equal number of guns,
wee fired two & twenty & after wee & the Drake had fired, all the merchant
men fired."

Morgan was buried in Jamaica, and his will, which was filed in the Record
Office at Spanish Town, makes provision for his wife and near relations.


MORRICE, HUMPHREY.

Of New Providence, Bahama Islands.

Hanged at New Providence in 1718 by his lately reformed fellow-pirates,
and on the gallows taxed them with "pusillanimity and cowardice" because
they did not rescue him and his fellow-sufferers.


MORRIS, CAPTAIN JOHN.

Of Jamaica.

A privateer until 1665, he afterwards became a buccaneer with Mansfield.
Took part in successful raids in Central America, plundering Vildemo in
the Bay of Campeachy; he also sacked Truxillo, and then, after a journey
by canoe up the San Juan River to take Nicaragua, surprised and plundered
the city of Granada in March, 1666.


MORRIS, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

One of the pirates of New Providence, Bahamas, who, on pardon being
offered by King George in 1717, escaped, and for a while carried on piracy
in the West Indian Islands. Caught and hanged a few years afterwards.


MORRIS, JOHN.

One of Captain Bartholomew Roberts's crew. When the _Royal Fortune_
surrendered to H.M.S. _Swallow_, Morris fired his pistol into the
gunpowder in the steerage and caused an explosion that killed or maimed
many of the pirates.


MORRISON, CAPTAIN.

A Scotch pirate, who lived on Prince Edward Island.

For an account of his career, see Captain NELSON.


MORRISON, WILLIAM.

Of Jamaica.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged at White Point, Charleston, South
Carolina, on November 8th, 1718, and buried in the marsh below low-water
mark.


MORTON, PHILIP.

Gunner on board "Blackbeard's" ship, the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Killed on
November 22nd, 1718, in North Carolina, during the fight with Lieutenant
Maynard.


MULLET, JAMES, _alias_ MILLET.

Of London.

One of the crew of the _Royal James_, in which vessel Major Stede Bonnet
played havoc with the shipping along the coasts of South Carolina and New
England. Hanged at Charleston in 1718.


MULLINS, DARBY.

This Irish pirate was born in the north of Ireland, not many miles from
Londonderry. Being left an orphan at the age of 18, he was sold to a
planter in the West Indies for a term of four years.

After the great earthquake at Jamaica in 1691, Mullins built himself a
house at Kingston and ran it as a punch-house--often a very profitable
business when the buccaneers returned to Port Royal with good plunder.
This business failing, he went to New York, where he met Captain Kidd, and
was, according to his own story, persuaded to engage in piracy, it being
urged that the robbing only of infidels, the enemies of Christianity, was
an act, not only lawful, but one highly meritorious.

At his trial later on in London his judges did not agree with this view of
the rights of property, and Mullins was hanged at Execution Dock on May
23rd, 1701.


MUMPER, THOMAS.

An Indian of Mather's Vineyard, New England.

Tried for piracy with Captain Charles Harris and his men, but found to be
"not guilty."


MUNDON, STEPHEN.

Of London.

Hanged for piracy at Newport, Rhode Island, on July 19th, 1723, at the age
of 20.


MUSTAPHA. Turkish pirate.

In 1558 he sailed, with a fleet of 140 vessels, to the Island of Minorca.
Landed, and besieged the fortified town of Ciudadda, which at length
surrendered. The Turks slew great numbers of the inhabitants, taking the
rest away as slaves.


NAU, CAPTAIN JEAN DAVID, _alias_ FRANCIS L'OLLONAIS.

A Frenchman born at Les Sables d'Ollone.

In his youth he was transported as an indented labourer to the French
Island of Dominica in the West Indies. Having served his time L'Ollonais
went to the Island of Hispaniola, and joined the buccaneers there, living
by hunting wild cattle and drying the flesh or boucan.

He then sailed for a few voyages as a sailor before the mast, and acted
with such ability and courage that the Governor of Tortuga Island,
Monsieur de la Place, gave him the command of a vessel and sent him out
to seek his fortune.

At first the young buccaneer was very successful, and he took many Spanish
ships, but owing to his ferocious treatment of his prisoners he soon won a
name for cruelty which has never been surpassed. But at the height of this
success his ship was wrecked in a storm, and, although most of the pirates
got ashore, they were at once attacked by a party of Spaniards, and all
but L'Ollonais were killed. The captain escaped, after being wounded, by
smearing blood and sand over his face and hiding himself amongst his dead
companions. Disguised as a Spaniard he entered the city of Campeachy,
where bonfires and other manifestations of public relief were being held,
to express the joy of the citizens at the news of the death of their
terror, L'Ollonais.

Meeting with some French slaves, the fugitive planned with them to escape
in the night in a canoe, this being successfully carried out, they
eventually arrived back at Tortuga, the pirate stronghold. Here the
enterprising captain stole a small vessel, and again started off "on the
account," plundering a village called De los Cagos in Cuba. The Governor
of Havana receiving word of the notorious and apparently resurrected
pirate's arrival sent a well-armed ship to take him, adding to the ship's
company a negro executioner, with orders to hang all the pirate crew with
the exception of L'Ollonais, who was to be brought back to Havana alive
and in chains.

Instead of the Spaniards taking the Frenchman, the opposite happened, and
everyone of them was murdered, including the negro hangman, with the
exception of one man, who was sent with a written message to the Governor
to tell him that in future L'Ollonais would kill every Spaniard he met
with.

Joining with a famous filibuster, Michael de Basco, L'Ollonais soon
organized a more important expedition, consisting of a fleet of eight
vessels and 400 men. Sailing to the Gulf of Venezuela in 1667, they
entered the lake, destroying the fort that stood to guard the entrance.
Thence sailing to the city of Maracaibo they found all the inhabitants had
fled in terror. The filibusters caught many of the inhabitants hiding in
the neighbouring woods, and killed numbers of them in their attempts to
force from the rest the hiding-places of their treasure. They next marched
upon and attacked the town of Gibraltar, which was valiantly defended by
the Spaniards, until the evening, when, having lost 500 men killed, they
surrendered. For four weeks this town was pillaged, the inhabitants
murdered, while torture and rape were daily occurrences. At last, to the
relief of the wretched inhabitants, the buccaneers, with a huge booty,
sailed away to Corso Island, a place of rendezvous of the French
buccaneers. Here they divided their spoil, which totalled the great sum of
260,000 pieces of eight, which, when divided amongst them, gave each man
above one hundred pieces of eight, as well as his share of plate, silk,
and jewels.

Also, a share was allotted for the next-of-kin of each man killed, and
extra rewards for those pirates who had lost a limb or an eye. L'Ollonais
had now become most famous amongst the "Brethren of the Coast," and began
to make arrangements for an even more daring expedition to attack and
plunder the coast of Nicaragua. Here he burnt and pillaged ruthlessly,
committing the most revolting cruelties on the Spanish inhabitants. One
example of this monster's inhuman deeds will more than suffice to tell of.
It happened that during an attack on the town of San Pedros the buccaneers
had been caught in an ambuscade and many of them killed, although the
Spaniards had at last turned and fled. The pirates killed most of their
prisoners, but kept a few to be questioned by L'Ollonais so as to find
some other way to the town. As he could get no information out of these
men, the Frenchman drew his cutlass and with it cut open the breast of one
of the Spaniards, and pulling out his still beating heart he began to bite
and gnaw it with his teeth like a ravenous wolf, saying to the other
prisoners, "I will serve you all alike, if you show me not another way."

Shortly after this, many of the buccaneers broke away from L'Ollonais and
sailed under the command of Moses van Vin, the second in command.
L'Ollonais, in his big ship, sailed to the coast of Honduras, but ran his
vessel on a sand-bank and lost her. While building a new but small craft
on one of the Las Pertas Islands, they cultivated beans and other
vegetables, and also wheat, for which they baked bread in portable ovens
which these French buccaneers carried about with them. It took them six
months to build their long-boat, and when it was finished it would not
carry more than half the number of buccaneers. Lots were drawn to settle
who should sail and who remain behind. L'Ollonais steered the boat towards
Cartagena, but was caught by the Indians, as described by Esquemeling.
"Here suddenly his ill-fortune assailed him, which of a long time had been
reserved for him as a punishment due to the multitude of horrible crimes,
which in his licentious and wicked life he had committed. For God
Almighty, the time of His divine justice being now already come, had
appointed the Indians of Darien to be the instruments and executioners
thereof."

These "instruments of God," having caught L'Ollonais, tore him in pieces
alive, throwing his body limb by limb into the fire and his ashes into the
air, to the intent "no trace nor memory might remain of such an infamous
inhuman creature."

Thus died a monster of cruelty, who would, had he lived to-day, have been
confined in an asylum for lunatics.


NEAL.

A fisherman of Cork.

Mutinied in a French ship sailing from Cork to Nantes in 1721, and, under
the leadership of Philip Roche, murdered the captain and many of the crew
and became a pirate.


NEFF, WILLIAM.

Born at Haverhill, Massachusetts, in 1667.

A soldier, one of the guard at Fort Loyal, Falmouth, Maine. Deserted in
1689 and went to sea with the pirate Captain Pound.


NELSON, CAPTAIN.

Born on Prince Edward Island, where his father had a grant of land for
services rendered in the American war. He was a wealthy man, a member of
the Council and a Colonel of the Militia. In order to set his son up in
life he bought him a captaincy in the Militia and a fine farm, where young
Nelson married and settled down. Buying a schooner, he used to sail to
Halifax with cargoes of potatoes and fruit. He seems to have liked these
trips in which he combined business with pleasure, for we learn that on
these visits to Halifax he "was very wild, and drank and intrigued with
the girls in an extravagant manner." Getting into disgrace on Prince
Edward Island, and losing his commission, he went to live near Halifax,
and became a lieutenant in the Nova Scotia Fencibles, while his wife
remained on the island to look after his estates, which brought him in
£300 a year. Meeting with a Scotchman called Morrison, together they
bought a "pretty little New York battleship," mounting ten guns. Manning
this dangerous toy with a crew of ninety desperate characters, the
partners went "on the account," and began well by taking a brig belonging
to Mr. Hill, of Rotherhithe, which they took to New York, and there sold
both ship and cargo.

They next cruised in the West Indies, taking several English and Dutch
ships, the crews of which they treated with the greatest brutality.

Landing on St. Kitts Island, they burnt and plundered two Dutch
plantations, murdering the owners and slaves. Sailing north to
Newfoundland they took ten more vessels, which they sold in New York.
After further successful voyages in the West Indies and off the coast of
Brazil, Nelson felt the call of home ties becoming so strong that he
ventured to return to Prince Edward Island to visit his wife and family,
where no one dared to molest him.

By this time Nelson had been a pirate for three years and had, by his
industry, won for himself a fortune worth £150,000, but his Scotch
partner, Morrison, being a frugal soul, had in the meantime saved an even
larger sum. Eventually their ship was wrecked in a fog on a small barren
island near Prince Edward Island, and Morrison and most of the crew were
drowned, but Nelson and a few others were saved. At last he reached New
York, where he lived the rest of his life in peaceful happiness with his
wife and family.


NICHOLLS, THOMAS, _alias_ NICHOLAS.

Of London.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew in the _Royal James_. Tried for piracy at
Charleston on November 8th, 1718, and found "not guilty."


NONDRE, PEDRO.

Hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, in February, 1823. At the time of execution
it was observed that he was covered with the marks of deep wounds. On the
scaffold he wept bitterly. An immensely heavy man, he broke the rope, and
had to be hanged a second time.


NORMAN, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Served under Morgan in 1670, and after the fall of Chagres Fort, Norman
was left in charge with 500 men to hold it, while Morgan crossed the
isthmus to attack Panama. Norman soon "sent forth to sea two boats to
exercise piracy." These hoisted Spanish colours and met a big Spanish
merchant ship on the same day. They chased the ship, which fled for safety
into the Chagres River, only to be caught there by Norman. She proved a
valuable prize, being loaded with all kinds of provisions, of which the
garrison was in sore need.


NORTH, CAPTAIN NATHANIEL.

Born in Bermuda, and by profession a lawyer, Captain North was a man of
remarkable ability, and in his later calling of piracy he gained great
notoriety, and was a born leader of men. His history has been written
fully, and is well worth reading. He had many ups and downs in his early
seafaring life in the West Indies; being no less than three times taken by
the pressgang, each time escaping. He served in Dutch and Spanish
privateers, and eventually rose to being a pirate captain, making his
headquarters in Madagascar. From here he sailed out to the East Indies,
and preyed on the ships of the East India Company. Several times he was
wrecked, once he was the only survivor, and swam ashore at Madagascar
stark naked. The unusual sight of a naked Englishman spread terror amongst
the natives who were on the beach, and they all fled into the jungle
except one, a woman, who from previous personal experience knew that this
was but a human being and not a sea devil. She supplied him with clothes,
of a sort, and led him to the nearest pirate settlement, some six miles
away. On another occasion when the pirates were having a jollification
ashore, having left their Moorish prisoners on the ship at anchor, North
gave the prisoners a hint to clear off in the night with the ship,
otherwise they would all be made slaves. This friendly hint was acted
upon, and in the morning both ship and prisoners had vanished. The pirates
having lost their ship took to the peaceful and harmless life of planters,
with North as their ruler. He won the confidence of the natives, who
abided by his decision in all quarrels and misunderstandings. Occasionally
North and his men would join forces with a neighbouring friendly tribe and
go to war, North leading the combined army, and victory always resulted.
The call of piracy was too strong in his bones to resist, and after three
years planting he was back to sea and the Jolly Roger once more. On one
occasion he seized the opportunity, when in the neighbourhood of the
Mascarenhas Islands, to go ashore and visit the Catholic priest and
confess, and at the same time made suitable arrangements for his children
to be educated by the Church. North evidently truly repented his former
sins, for he returned to resume his simple life on his plantation. On
arriving home he found the settlement in an uproar. He soon settled all
the disputes, appeased the natives, and before long had this garden-city
of pirates back in its previous peaceful and happy state. Beyond an
occasional little voyage, taking a ship or two, or burning an Arab
village, North's career as a pirate may be considered to have terminated,
as, indeed, his life was shortly afterwards, being murdered in his bed by
a treacherous native. North's friends the pirates, shocked at this
cold-blooded murder, waged a ruthless war on the natives for seven years:
thus in their simple way thinking to revenge the loss of this estimable
man, who had always been the natives' best friend.


NORTON, GEORGE.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Tried for piracy in June, 1704, at the
Star Tavern at Boston.


NUTT, JOHN.

One of Captain John Phillip's original crew of five pirates in the
_Revenge_ in 1723. Nutt was made master or navigator.


OCHALI. Barbary renegade.

In 1511 he sailed from Algiers with a fleet of twenty-two vessels and
1,700 men to raid Majorca. The Moors landed at Soller and pillaged it.
Before they could get back to their ship, the pirates were attacked by the
Majorcans, headed by Miguel Angelats, and completely routed, 500 of them
being killed.


ODELL, SAMUEL.

Taken prisoner by the pirate Captain Teach on November 21st, 1718, and on
the very next day retaken by Lieutenant Maynard. Odell received no less
than seventy wounds in the fight, but recovered, and was carried to
Virginia to stand his trial for piracy, and was acquitted.


OUGHTERLAUNEY, THOMAS.

Acted as pilot in the _Royal Fortune_. Took an active part in taking and
plundering the _King Solomon_ on the West Coast of Africa in 1721.

Was tried for piracy with the rest of Roberts's crew, when one witness,
Captain Trahern, deposed that the prisoner dressed himself up in the
captain's best suit of clothes, his new tye wig, and called loudly for a
bottle of wine, and then, very arrogantly, gave orders as to the steering
of the captured ship.

Hanged at Cape Coast Castle in 1722.


PAIN, CAPTAIN.

A Bahaman privateer who in 1683 turned pirate and attacked St. Augustine
in Florida under French colours. Being driven off by the Spaniards, he had
to content himself with looting some neighbouring settlements. On
returning to New Providence, the Governor attempted, but without success,
to arrest Pain and his crew. Pain afterwards appeared in Rhode Island, and
when the authorities tried to seize him and his ship, he got off by
exhibiting an old commission to hunt for pirates given him a long while
before by Sir Thomas Lynch. When the West Indies became too hot for him,
Pain made the coast of Carolina his headquarters.


PAINE, CAPTAIN PETER, _alias_ LE PAIN. A French buccaneer.

He brought into Port Royal in 1684 a merchant ship, _La Trompeuse_.
Pretending to be the owner, he sold both ship and cargo, which brought
about great trouble afterwards between the French and English Governments,
because he had stolen the ship on the high seas. He was sent from Jamaica
under arrest to France the same year, to answer for his crimes.


PAINTER, PETER.

This Carolina pirate retired and lived at Charleston. In August, 1710, he
was recommended for the position of public powder-receiver, but was
rejected by the Upper House. "Mr. Painter Having committed Piracy, and
not having his Majesties Pardon for the same, Its resolved he is not fit
for that Trust." Which only goes to show how hard it was for a man to live
down a thing like piracy.


PARDAL, CAPTAIN MANUEL RIVERO.

Known to the Jamaicans as "the vapouring admiral of St. Jago," because in
July, 1670, he had nailed a piece of canvas to a tree on the Jamaican
coast with this curious challenge written both in English and Spanish:

"I, Captain Manuel Rivero Pardal, to the chief of the squadron of
privateers in Jamaica. I am he who this year have done that which follows.
I went on shore at Caimanos, and burnt 20 houses and fought with Captain
Ary, and took from him a catch laden with provisions and a canoe. And I am
he who took Captain Baines and did carry the prize to Cartagena, and now
am arrived to this coast, and have burnt it. And I come to seek General
Morgan, with 2 ships of 20 guns, and having seen this, I crave he would
come out upon the coast and seek me, that he might see the valour of the
Spaniards. And because I had no time I did not come to the mouth of Port
Royal to speak by word of mouth in the name of my king, whom God preserve.
Dated the 5th of July, 1670."


PARKER, CAPTAIN WILLIAM. Buccaneer.

Just after the city of Porto Bello had been made, as the Spanish thought,
impregnable, by the building of the massive stone fort of San Jerome, the
daring Parker, with but 200 English desperadoes, took the place by storm,
burning part of the town and getting quickly and safely away with a huge
amount of booty.


PARKINS, BENJAMIN.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew in the brigantine _Charles_. Tried at
Boston for piracy in 1704.


PARROT, JAMES.

One of Quelch's crew, who turned King's evidence at the trial at Boston in
1704, and thus escaped hanging.


PATTERSON, NEAL.

Of Aberdeen.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew in the _Royal James_. Hanged at
Charleston, South Carolina, on November 8th, 1718, and buried in the
marsh.


PATTISON, JAMES.

Tried for piracy at Boston in 1704.


PEASE, CAPTAIN.

A low down, latter-day South Sea pirate. Arrived in an armed ship with a
Malay crew at Apia in Samoa in June, 1870, and rescued the pirate Bully
Hayes, who was under arrest of the English Consul. He pleased the British
inhabitants of the island by his display of loyalty to Queen Victoria by
firing a salute of twenty-one guns on her Majesty's birthday.


PELL, IGNATIUS.

Boatswain of the _Royal James_, Major Stede Bonnet's ship. Turned King's
evidence at trial of Bonnet and his crew at Charleston, Carolina, in 1718.


PENNER, MAJOR.

We have been able to find out nothing of this pirate except that he was at
New Providence Island in 1718 and took the King's pardon for pirates. He
seems to have returned to the old life and was killed soon after, though
how this came about is not recorded.


PERKINS, BENJAMIN.

One of Quelch's crew. Captured at Marblehead in 1704.


PERRY, DANIEL.

Of Guernsey.

Tried for piracy in 1718 at Charleston, South Carolina, and found guilty.
Hanged on November 8th at White Point. Buried in the marsh below low-water
mark.


PETERSON, CAPTAIN.

Of Newport, Rhode Island.

In 1688 he arrived at Newport in a "barkalonga" armed with ten guns and
seventy men. The Governor prosecuted him for piracy, but the grand jury,
which consisted of friends and neighbours of Peterson, threw out the bill.
Among other charges, Peterson was accused of selling some hides and
elephants' teeth to a Boston merchant for £57, being part of the booty he
had previously taken out of prizes in the West Indies.


PETERSON, ERASMUS.

Tried for piracy with the rest of Captain Quelch's crew at Boston. Was
hanged there on June 30th, 1704. When standing on the gallows "He cryed of
injustice done him and said, 'It is very hard for so many lives to be
taken away for a little Gold.' He said his peace was made with God, yet he
found it extremely hard to forgive those who had wronged him. He told the
Executioner 'he was a strong man and Prayed to be put out of his misery
as soon as possible.'"


PETERSON, JOHN.

A Swedish pirate, one of Gow's crew. He was hanged at Wapping in June,
1725.


PETIT, CAPTAIN. French filibuster.

Of San Domingo.

In 1634 was in command of _Le Ruze_, crew of forty men and four guns.


PETTY, WILLIAM.

Born at Deptford.

A sailmaker in Captain Roberts's _Royal Fortune_ when the _King Solomon_
was taken and plundered in West Africa. Petty, as sailmaker, had to see
that all the sails and canvas aboard the prizes were removed to the pirate
ship. Hanged at the age of 30.


PHELIPP, CAPTAIN WILLIAM.

In 1533 a Portuguese merchant, Peter Alves, engaged Phelipp to pilot his
ship, the _Santa Maria Desaie_, from Tenby to Bastabill Haven. Off the
Welsh coast the ship was attacked by a pirate vessel called the
_Furtuskewys_, with a crew of thirty-five pirates. Alves was put ashore on
the Welsh coast, and the two ships then sailed to Cork, where the ship and
her cargo were sold to the mayor for 1,524 crowns.

Alves complained to the King of England, and orders were sent to the Mayor
of Cork, Richard Gowllys, to give up the ship, which he refused to do, but
by way of excusing his actions he explained that he thought the ship was a
Scotch one and not a Portuguese.


PHILLIPS, CAPTAIN.

In 1723 this noted pirate took a sloop, the _Dolphin_, of Cape Ann, on the
Banks of Newfoundland. The crew of the _Dolphin_ were compelled by
Phillips to join the pirates. Amongst the prisoners was a fisherman, John
Fillmore. Finding no opportunity to escape, Fillmore with another sailor,
Edward Cheesman, and an Indian, suddenly seized and killed Phillips and
the two other chief pirates. The rest of the crew agreeing, the ship was
taken to Boston.


PHILIPS, JAMES.

Of the Island of Antigua.

Formerly of the _Revenge_, and afterwards in the _Royal Fortune_ (Captain
Roberts). When the _Royal Fortune_ surrendered in 1722 to H.M.S.
_Swallow_, Philips seized a lighted match and attempted to blow up the
ship, swearing he would "send them all to Hell together," but was
prevented by the master, Glasby. Hanged at the age of 35.


PHILLIPS, JOHN.

A carpenter by trade, he sailed from the West Country for Newfoundland in
a ship that was captured by the pirate Anstis in the _Good Fortune_.
Phillips soon became reconciled to the life of a pirate, and, being a
brisk fellow, he was appointed carpenter to the ship. Returning to England
he soon found it necessary to quit the country again, and he shipped
himself on board a vessel at Topsham for Newfoundland. On arriving at
Peter Harbour he ran away, and hired himself as a splitter to the
Newfoundland cod fishery.

On the night of August 29th, 1723, with four others, he stole a vessel in
the harbour and sailed away. Phillips was chosen captain. Articles were
now drawn up and were sworn to upon a hatchet, because no Bible could be
found on board. Amongst other laws was the punishment of "40 stripes
lacking one, known as Moses's law, to be afflicted for striking a
fellow-pirate." The last law of the nine casts a curious light on these
murderers; it runs: "If at any time you meet with a prudent Woman, that
Man that offers to meddle with her, without her Consent, shall suffer
present Death." The pirates, fortified by these laws, met with instant
success, taking several fishing vessels, from which they augmented their
small crew by the addition of several likely and brisk seamen. Amongst
these they had the good fortune to take prisoner an old pirate called John
Rose Archer, who had served his pirate apprenticeship under the able
tuition of the famous Blackbeard, and who they at once promoted to be
quartermaster. This quick promotion caused trouble afterwards, for some of
the original crew, particularly carpenter Fern, resented it. The pirates
next sailed to Barbadoes, that happy hunting ground, but for three months
never a sail did they meet with, so that they were almost starving for
want of provisions, being reduced to a pound of dried meat a day amongst
ten of them.

At last they met with a French vessel, a Martinico ship, of twelve guns,
and hunger drove them to attack even so big a ship as this, but the sight
of the Black flag so terrified the French crew that they surrendered
without firing a shot. After this, they took several vessels, and matters
began to look much brighter. Phillips quickly developed into a most
accomplished and bloody pirate, butchering his prisoners on very little or
on no provocation whatever. But even this desperate pirate had an
occasional "qualm of conscience come athwart his stomach," for when he
captured a Newfoundland vessel and was about to scuttle her, he found out
that she was the property of a Mr. Minors of that island, from whom they
stole the original vessel in which they went a-pirating, so Phillips,
telling his companions "We have done him enough injury already," ordered
the vessel to be repaired and returned to the owner. On another occasion,
they took a ship, the master of which was a "Saint" of New England, by
name Dependance Ellery, who gave them a pretty chase before being
overhauled, and so, as a punishment, the "Saint" was compelled to dance
the deck until he fell down exhausted.

This pirate's career ended with a mutiny of his unruly crew, Phillips
being tripped up and then thrown overboard to drown off Newfoundland in
April, 1724.

During the nine months of Phillips's command as a pirate captain, he
accounted for more than thirty ships.


PHILLIPS, JOSEPH.

One of Teach's crew. Hanged in Virginia in 1718.


PHILLIPS, WILLIAM.

Born at Lower Shadwell.

Boatswain in the _King Solomon_, a Guinea merchant ship. This ship, while
lying at anchor in January, 1721, was attacked by a boatful of pirates
from Bartholomew Roberts's ship, the _Royal Fortune_. The captain of the
_King Solomon_ fired a musket at the approaching boat, and called upon his
crew to do the same, but Phillips called for quarter and persuaded the
rest of the crew to lay down their arms and surrender the ship. Phillips
eagerly joined the pirates and signed the articles, and was "very forward
and brisk" in helping to rob his own ship of provisions and stores.

At his trial at Cape Coast Castle, he pleaded, as nearly all the prisoners
did, that he was compelled to sign the pirates' articles, which were
offered to him on a dish, on which lay a loaded pistol beside the copy of
the articles.

Found guilty and hanged in April, 1722, within the flood marks at Cape
Coast Castle, in his 29th year.


PHIPS, RICHARD.

An English soldier who deserted from Fort Loyal, Falmouth, Maine, in 1689.
Wounded by a bullet in the head at Tarpaulin Cove. Taken to Boston Prison,
where he died.


PICKERING, CAPTAIN CHARLES.

Commanded the _Cinque Ports_ galley, sixteen guns, crew of sixty-three
men, and accompanied Dampier on his voyage in 1703. Died off the coast of
Brazil in the same year.


PIERSE, GEORGE.

Tried for piracy along with the rest of the crew of the brigantine
_Charles_, at Boston, in 1704.


PITMAN, JOHN.

One of Captain Quelch's crew. Tried for piracy at Boston in 1704.


POLEAS, PEDRO. Spanish pirate.

Co-commander with Captain Johnson of a pirate sloop, the _Two Brothers_.
In March, 1731, took a ship, the _John and Jane_ (Edward Burt, master),
south of Jamaica, on board of which was a passenger, John Cockburn, who
afterwards wrote a book relating his adventures on a journey on foot of
240 miles on the mainland of America.


PORTER, CAPTAIN.

A West Indian pirate, who commanded a sloop, and, in company with a
Captain Tuckerman in another sloop, came one day into Bennet's Key in
Hispaniola. The two captains were but beginners at piracy, and finding
the great Bartholomew Roberts in the bay, paid him a polite visit, hoping
to pick up a few wrinkles from the "master." This scene is described by
Captain Johnson, in his "Lives of the Pirates," when Porter and his friend
"addressed the Pyrate, as the Queen of Sheba did Solomon, to wit, That
having heard of his Fame and Achievements, they had put in there to learn
his Art and Wisdom in the Business of pyrating, being Vessels on the same
honourable Design with himself; and hoped with the Communication of his
Knowledge, they should also receive his Charity, being in want of
Necessaries for such Adventures. Roberts was won upon by the Peculiarity
and Bluntness of these two Men and gave them Powder, Arms, and what ever
else they had Occasion for, spent two or three merry Nights with them, and
at parting, said, he hoped the L---- would Prosper their handy Works."


POUND, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

On August 8th, 1689, this pirate, with five men and a boy, sailed out of
Boston Harbour as passengers in a small vessel. When off Lovell's Island,
five other armed men joined them. Pound now seized the craft and took
command, and declared his intention of going on a piratical cruise. The
first vessel they met with they decided to take. It was a fishing boat.
Pound ran his craft alongside, but at the last moment his heart failed
him, and he merely bought eight penn'o'th of mackerel from the surprised
fishermen.

He then sailed to Falmouth, Maine, where the corporal and soldiers of the
guard at the fort deserted in the night and sailed off with Pound and his
crew. Fortified by this addition to his crew, the pirate attacked a sloop,
the _Good Speed_, off Cape Cod, and a brigantine, the _Merrimack_, and
several other prizes. By this time, the Governor at Boston had heard of
Pound's escapades, and sent an armed sloop, the _Mary_, to search for him.
The pirate was discovered in Tarpaulin Cove, and a fierce and bloody fight
took place before the pirates struck their "Red flagg." The prisoners were
cast into Boston Gaol to await their trial. Pound had been wounded, being
shot in the arm and side. The trial took place on January 13th, 1690.
Pound was found guilty, but reprieved, and was sent to England, but was
later on liberated. Afterwards he got command of a ship. He died in
England in 1703.


POWELL, THOMAS.

Of Connecticut, New England.

One of Captain Charles Harris's crew. Hanged at Newport, Rhode Island, on
July 19th, 1723, at the age of 21.


POWER, JOHN.

Born in the West of England.

Served in a slave vessel, the _Polly_ (Captain Fox, commander), on a
voyage to the coast of West Africa. While the captain was on shore, the
crew ran away with the ship, turned pirates, called their vessel the
_Bravo_, and elected Power to be captain and sailed to the West Indies.
Arrived there, he tried to sell his cargo of slaves, but being suspected
of having stolen them, he thought it best to sail to New York. Here the
pirates got ashore, but the ship's surgeon informed the authorities, and
Power was arrested and sent to England, where he was tried, and hanged at
Execution Dock on March 10th, 1768.


PRICE, THOMAS.

Of Bristol.

Hanged at Charleston, South Carolina, on November 8th, 1718. One of Major
Stede Bonnet's crew.


PRIMER, MATTHEW.

One of Captain Quelch's crew. Turned King's evidence at the trial for
piracy held at the Star Tavern, Boston, in June, 1704.


PRINCE, CAPTAIN LAWRENCE.

In 1760 this buccaneer sacked the city of Granada in company with Captains
Harris and Ludbury. Late in the same year, Prince, with the rank of
Lieut.-Colonel, led the vanguard in the attack on Panama.


PRO, CAPTAIN.

This Dutch South Sea pirate owned a small plantation in Madagascar, and
was joined there by the pirate Williams after he had escaped from slavery.
Both were taken prisoner by an English frigate. In a fight with the
natives, the pirate crew was defeated, but Pro and Williams managed to
escape and to reach some friendly natives. Procuring a boat, they sailed
away to join some other pirates at Methulage in Madagascar.


PROWSE, CAPTAIN LAWRENCE.

A Devon man, a noted sea captain, and a terror to the Spaniards. Was
imprisoned by King James I. at the instance of the King of Spain for
piracy and was to have been executed, but English public feeling ran so
high that Prowse was discharged.


PULLING, CAPTAIN JOHN.

Commanded the _Fame_, which set out in 1703 in company with Dampier in the
_St. George_ on a plundering expedition to the South Seas. Their
commissions were to attack only Spanish and French ships. The two
captains quarrelled at the very beginning of the voyage, while lying off
the Downs, and Pulling slipped away by himself to go a-pirating amongst
the Canary Islands.


PURSSER, CAPTAIN.

In the sixteenth century this pirate became notorious for his piracies off
the coast of Wales, and with Calles and Clinton, two other pirates, "grew
famous, till Queene Elizabeth of blessed memory, hanged them at Wapping."


QUELCH, CAPTAIN JOHN.

A native of Massachusetts Colony.

In 1703 was one of the crew of the brigantine _Charles_, eighty tons,
owned by some leading citizens of Boston, and fitted out to go
privateering off the coasts of Arcadia and Newfoundland. On leaving
Marblehead the crew mutinied, locked the captain in his cabin, and elected
Quelch their commander. They sailed to the south, and shortly afterwards
threw the captain overboard. They hoisted a flag, the "Old Roger,"
described as having "in the middle of it an Anatomy with an Hourglars in
one hand and a dart in the Heart with three drops of Blood proceeding from
it in the other." They took nine Portuguese vessels off the coast of
Brazil, out of which they took plunder of very great value.

Quelch now had the audacity to sail back to Marblehead, where his crew
landed and quickly scattered with their plunder. Within a week Quelch was
in gaol, and was taken to Boston, where his trial began on June 17th,
1704, and he was found guilty. The days between the sentence and the
execution must have, indeed, been trying for the prisoner. We read in a
pamphlet published at the time: "The Ministers of the Town used more than
ordinary Endeavours to Instruct the Prisoners and bring them to
Repentance. There were Sermons Preached in their hearing Every Day, and
Prayer daily made with them. And they were Catechised, and they had many
occasional Exhortations. And nothing was left that could be done for their
Good."

On Friday, June 30th, 1704, Quelch and his companions marched on foot
through the town of Boston to Scarlil's Wharf with a strong armed guard of
musketeers, accompanied by various officials and two ministers, while in
front was carried a silver oar, the emblem of a pirate's execution. Before
the last act the minister gave a long and fervent harangue to the wretched
culprits, in all of whom were observed suitable signs of repentance except
Quelch, who, stepping forward on the platform, his hat in his hand, and
bowing left and right to the spectators, gave a short address, in which he
warned them "They should take care how they brought Money into New England
to be Hanged for it."


QUITTANCE, JOHN.

One of Captain Quelch's crew of the brigantine _Charles_. Tried with the
rest of that crew at the Star Tavern at Boston in June, 1704.


RACKAM, CAPTAIN JOHN, _alias_ CALICO JACK.

Served as quartermaster in Captain Vane's company. On one occasion Vane
refused to fight a big French ship, and in consequence was dismissed his
ship and marooned on an uninhabited island off the coast of America, while
the crew elected Rackam to be their captain in his place. This was on
November 24th, 1718, and on the very first day of his command he had the
good fortune to take and plunder several small vessels.

Off the Island of Jamaica they took a Madeira ship, and found an old
friend on board as a passenger--a Mr. Hosea Tisdell, who kept a tavern in
the island, and they treated him with great respect.

Christmas Day coming, the pirates landed on a small island to celebrate
this festival in a thorough manner, carousing and drinking as long as the
liquor lasted, when they sailed away to seek more. Their next prize was a
strange one. On coming alongside a ship, she surrendered, and the pirates
boarding her to examine her cargo, found it to consist of thieves from
Newgate on their way to the plantations. Taking two more vessels, Rackam
sailed to the Bahama Islands, but the Governor, Captain Woodes Rogers,
sent a sloop, which took away their prizes.

Rackam now sailed his ship to a snug little cove he knew of in Cuba, where
he had more than one lady acquaintance. Here the pirates were very happy
until all their provisions and money was spent. Just as they were about to
sail, in comes a Spanish Guarda del Costa with a small English sloop which
they had recently taken. Rackam was now in a very awkward position, being
unable to get past the Spaniard, and all he could do was to hide behind a
small island. Night came on, and when it was dark Rackam put all his crew
into a boat, rowed quietly up to the sloop, clambered aboard, threatening
instant death to the Spanish guards if they cried out, then cut the cables
and sailed out of the bay. As soon as it was light the Spanish ship
commenced a furious bombardment of Rackam's empty vessel, thinking he was
still aboard her.

In the summer of 1720 he took numbers of small vessels and fishing boats,
but nothing very rich, and was not above stealing the fishermen's nets and
landing and taking cattle. In October Rackam was chased near Nigril Bay by
a Government sloop commanded by a Captain Barret. After a short fight
Rackam surrendered, and was carried a prisoner to Port Royal.

On November 16th Rackam and his crew were tried at St. Jago de la Vega,
convicted and sentenced to death. Amongst the crew were two women dressed
as men, Anne Bonny and Mary Read. The former was married, in pirate
fashion, to Rackam.

On the morning of his execution Rackam was allowed, as a special favour,
to visit his Anne, but all the comfort he got from her was "that she was
sorry to see him there, but if he had fought like a man, he need not have
been hanged like a Dog."

Rackam was hanged on November 17th, 1720, at Gallows Point, at Port Royal,
Jamaica.


RAPHAELINA, CAPTAIN.

Much dreaded by the merchant sailors navigating the South Atlantic. In
1822 he controlled a fleet of pirate vessels in the vicinity of Cape
Antonio.


RAYNER, CAPTAIN.

In a letter to the Lords of Trade, dated from Philadelphia, February 28th,
1701, William Penn mentions that several of Captain Kidd's men had settled
as planters in Carolina with Rayner as their captain.


RAYNOR, WILLIAM.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Tried at Boston in 1704.


READ, CAPTAIN.

Commanded a brigantine which had its headquarters at Madagascar. Rescued
the pirate Thomas White. Read died at sea.


READ, MARY. Woman pirate.

Born in London of obscure parentage; all that is known for certain is that
her mother was a "young and airy widow." Mary was brought up as a boy, and
at the age of 13 was engaged as a footboy to wait on a French lady. Having
a roving spirit, Mary ran away and entered herself on board a man-of-war.
Deserting a few years later, she enlisted in a regiment of foot and fought
in Flanders, showing on all occasions great bravery, but quitted the
service to enlist in a regiment of horse. Her particular comrade in this
regiment was a Fleming, with whom she fell in love and disclosed to him
the secret of her sex. She now dressed as a woman, and the two troopers
were married, "which made a great noise," and several of her officers
attended the nuptials. She and her husband got their discharge and kept an
eating house or ordinary, the Three Horseshoes, near the Castle of Breda.
The husband died, and Mary once again donned male attire and enlisted in a
regiment in Holland. Soon tiring of this, she deserted, and shipped
herself aboard a vessel bound for the West Indies. This ship was taken by
an English pirate, Captain Rackam, and Mary joined his crew as a seaman.

She was at New Providence Island, Bahama, when Woodes Rogers came there
with the royal pardon to all pirates, and she shipped herself aboard a
privateer sent out by Rogers to cruise against the Spaniards. The crew
mutinied and again became pirates. She now sailed under Captain Rackam,
who had with him another woman pirate, Anne Bonny. They took a large
number of ships belonging to Jamaica, and out of one of these took
prisoner "a young fellow of engaging behaviour" with whom Mary fell deeply
in love. This young fellow had a quarrel with one of the pirates, and as
the ship lay at anchor they were to go to fight it out on shore according
to pirate law. Mary, to save her lover, picked a quarrel with the same
pirate, and managed to have her duel at once, and fighting with sword and
pistol killed him on the spot.

She now married the young man "of engaging behaviour," and not long after
was taken prisoner with Captain Rackam and the rest of the crew to
Jamaica. She was tried at St. Jago de la Vega in Jamaica, and on November
28th, 1720, was convicted, but died in prison soon after of a violent
fever.

That Mary Read was a woman of great spirit is shown by her reply to
Captain Rackam, who had asked her (thinking she was a young man) what
pleasure she could find in a life continually in danger of death by fire,
sword, or else by hanging; to which Mary replied "that as to hanging, she
thought it no great Hardship, for were it not for that, every cowardly
Fellow would turn Pirate and so unfit the Seas, that Men of Courage must
starve."


READ, ROBERT.

Tried for piracy with Gow's crew at Newgate in 1725, and acquitted.


READ, WILLIAM.

Of Londonderry, Ireland.

One of Captain Harris's crew. Was hanged at Newport, Rhode Island, in
1723, at the age of 35.


READHEAD, PHILIP.

One of Captain Heidon's crew of the pirate ship _John of Sandwich_,
wrecked on Alderney Island in 1564. Was arrested and hanged at St.
Martin's Point, Guernsey, in the same year.

[Illustration: ANN BONNY AND MARY READ, CONVICTED OF PIRACY, NOVEMBER 28,
1720, AT A COURT OF VICE-ADMIRALTY HELD AT ST. JAGO DE LA VEGA IN THE
ISLAND OF JAMAICA.

To face p. 256.]


RHOADE, CAPTAIN JOHN.

A Dutch coasting pilot of Boston.

In 1674 appointed chief pilot to the Curacao privateer _Flying Horse_, and
sailed along the coast of Maine and as far north as the St. John River.
Afterwards attacked and plundered several small English craft occupied in
bartering furs with the Indians. Condemned to be hanged at Cambridge,
Massachusetts, in June, 1675.


RICE, DAVID. Welsh pirate.

Of Bristol.

Taken out of the Cornwall galley by Captain Roberts, he served in the
_Royal Fortune_. Tried and found guilty of piracy and condemned to death,
but was reprieved and sold to the Royal African Company to serve for seven
years in their plantations.


RICE, OWEN. Welsh pirate.

Of South Wales.

Hanged at the age of 27 at Rhode Island in 1723. One of Captain Charles
Harris's crew.


RICHARDS, LIEUTENANT.

Lieutenant to Blackbeard on board the _Queen Ann's Revenge_. Cruised in
the West Indies and along the coast of Carolina and Virginia.

In 1717 Teach blockaded the harbour at Charleston and sent Richards with a
party of pirates to the Governor to demand a medicine chest and all
necessary medical supplies, with a threat that if these were not
forthcoming he would cut the throats of all his prisoners, many of them
the leading merchants of the town. While waiting for the Governor's reply,
Richards and his companions scandalized the towns-folk of Charleston by
their outrageous and swaggering conduct.


RICHARDSON, JOHN.

His father was a goldsmith at New York. John, tiring of the trade of
cooper, to which he was apprenticed, ran away to sea. For many years he
served both in men-of-war and in merchant ships. Although an unmitigated
blackguard, he did not commit piracy nor murder until some years later,
when, being at Ancona, he met a Captain Benjamin Hartley, who had come
there with a loading of pilchards. Richardson was taken on board to serve
as ship's carpenter, and sailed for Leghorn. With another sailor called
Coyle, Richardson concocted a mutiny, murdered the captain in the most
brutal manner, and was appointed mate in the pirate ship. As a pirate
Richardson was beneath contempt. His life ended on the gallows at
Execution Dock on January 25th, 1738.


RICHARDSON, NICHOLAS.

One of Captain Quelch's crew. Taken out of the brigantine _Charles_, and
tried for piracy at Boston in 1704.


RIDGE, JOHN.

Of London.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Hanged in 1718 at Charleston, South
Carolina.


RINGROSE, BASIL. Buccaneer, pirate, and author.

Sailed in 1679 to the West Indies. A year later Ringrose had joined the
buccaneers at their rendezvous in the Gulf of Darien, where they were
preparing for a bold enterprise on the Spanish Main. They landed and
marched to the town of Santa Maria, which they plundered and burnt.
Thence they travelled in canoes down the river to the Bay of Panama. After
attacking the Spanish fleet and laying siege to the city, the buccaneers
cruised up and down the West Coast of South America for eighteen months,
sacking towns and attacking Spanish ships. All this while Ringrose kept a
very full and graphic journal, in which he recorded not only their
exploits, but also their hardships and quarrels, and gave descriptions as
well of the various natives and their customs, and drew charts and
sketches.

In 1681 Ringrose was still with Captain Sharp, and sailed through the
Straits of Magellan, and on January 30th of the same year anchored off
Antigua. Here he got a passage in a ship to England, landing safely at
Dartmouth on March 26th.

A year later he published an account of his voyage, as a second volume to
Esquemeling's, "Bucaniers of America." In 1684 he went to sea again in the
_Cygnet_ (Captain Swan), to traffic with the Spanish colonies. But the
Spaniards refused to trade with them. In October, 1684, they met the
famous Captain Edward Davis at that favourite haunt of the buccaneers, the
Isle of Plate. The two captains agreed to join forces and to go together
"on the account," so all the cargo was thrown overboard the _Cygnet_, and
the ships set out to make war on any Spanish ships they might meet with.

In February, 1686, Ringrose with one hundred men took the town of Santiago
in Mexico, but while returning with the plunder to their ship were caught
by the Spaniards in an ambush, and Ringrose was killed.

Ringrose never attained any rank among the buccaneers beyond occasionally
being put in charge of a boat or a small company on shore, but as a
recorder of the doings of his companions he proved both careful and
painstaking. Dampier had a great regard for him, and in his book he
writes: "My ingenious friend Ringrose had no mind to this voyage, but was
necessitated to engage in it or starve."

The title of Ringrose's book, first published in 1685, is "The Dangerous
Voyage and Bold Assaults of Captain Bartholomew Sharp and Others."

Written by Mr. Basil Ringrose.

Printed for William Crooke, 1685.


ROACH, PETER.

When Captain Quelch was captured with his crew, Roach escaped near the
Cape by Snake Island. He was afterwards captured and thrown into the gaol
at Salem. Tried for piracy at the Star Tavern at Boston, and on June 30th,
1704, was hanged. At the place of execution Roach disappointed the
onlooking crowd, as, instead of the expected and hoped-for repentant
speech, "he seemed little concerned, and said but little or nothing at
all."


ROB, ALEXANDER.

One of Captain Gow's crew. Hanged at Execution Dock, Wapping, in June,
1724. He was not one of the original crew of the _George_ galley, but was
taken out of a prize and joined the pirates of his own free-will.


ROBBINS, JAMES.

Hanged in Virginia in 1718 along with the rest of Captain Teach's crew.


ROBBINS, JAMES.

Of London.

One of the crew of the _Royal James_. Hanged in 1718 at Charleston, South
Carolina.


ROBERTS, CAPTAIN BARTHOLOMEW. Welsh pirate.

Born 1682. Died 1722.

If a pirate is to be reckoned by the amount of damage he does and the
number of ships he takes there can be no doubt that Captain Roberts should
be placed at the very head of his profession, for he is said to have taken
over 400 vessels. The only man who can be said to rival him is Sir Henry
Morgan, but Morgan, although in some ways an unmitigated blackguard, was a
man of much greater breadth of outlook than Roberts ever was, and,
moreover, was a buccaneer rather than a pirate.

Roberts, like many other successful pirates, was born in Wales, not far
from Haverfordwest. He is described as being "a tall black man," and was
about 40 years of age at the time of his death. He was remarkable, even
among his remarkable companions, for several things. First of all, he only
drank tea--thus being the only total abstainer known to the fraternity.
Also he was a strict disciplinarian, and on board his ships all lights had
to be extinguished by 8 p.m., any of the crew who wished to continue
drinking after that hour had to do so on the open deck. But try as he
would this ardent apostle of abstemiousness was unable to put down
drinking. If Roberts had lived to-day, no doubt he would have been on the
council of the local vigilance committee. He would allow no women aboard
his ships, in fact he made it a law that any man who brought a woman on
board disguised as a man was to suffer death. Roberts allowed no games at
cards or dice to be played for money, as he strongly disapproved of
gambling. He was a strict Sabbatarian, and allowed the musicians to have a
rest on the seventh day. This was as well, for the post of musician on a
pirate ship was no sinecure, as every pirate had the right to demand a
tune at any hour of the day or night. He used to place a guard to protect
all his women prisoners, and it is sadly suspicious that there was always
the greatest competition amongst the worst characters in the ship to be
appointed sentinel over a good-looking woman prisoner. All quarrels had to
be settled on shore, pirate fashion, the duellists standing back to back
armed with pistol and cutlass. Roberts would have no fighting among the
crew on board his ship.

Bartholomew must have looked the very part of a pirate when dressed for
action. A tall, dark man, he used to wear a rich damask waistcoat and
breeches, a red feather in his cap, a gold chain round his neck with a
large diamond cross dangling from it, a sword in his hand, and two pairs
of pistols hanging at the end of a silk sling flung over his shoulders.

We first hear of Roberts as sailing, in honest employ, as master of the
_Princess_ (Captain Plumb), from London in November, 1719, bound for the
coast of Guinea to pick up a cargo of "black ivory" at Anamaboe. Here his
ship was taken by the Welsh pirate Howel Davis. At first Roberts was
disinclined for the pirate life, but soon changed his mind.

On the death of Davis there were several candidates for the post of
commander, all brisk and lively men, distinguished by the title of
"Lords," such as Sympson, Ashplant, Anstis, and others. One of these
"Lords," Dennis, concluded an eloquent harangue over a bowl of punch with
a strong appeal for Roberts to be the new chief. This proposal was
acclaimed with but one dissenting voice, that of "Lord" Sympson, who had
hopes of being elected himself, and who sullenly left the meeting swearing
"he did not care who they chose captain so it was not a papist." So
Roberts was elected after being a pirate only six weeks; thus was true
merit quickly appreciated and rewarded amongst them.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN BARTHOLOMEW ROBERTS.

To face p. 262.]

Roberts's speech to his fellow-pirates was short but to the point, saying
"that since he had dipped his hands in muddy water, and must be a pyrate,
it was better being a commander than a common man," not perhaps a graceful
nor grateful way of expressing his thanks, but one which was no doubt
understood by his audience.

Roberts began his career in a bright manner, for to revenge the perfectly
justifiable death of their late captain he seized and razed the fort,
bombarded the town, and setting on fire two Portuguese ships so as to act
as torches, sailed away the same night. Sailing to Brazil they found in
the Bay of Bahia a fleet of forty-two Portuguese ships ready laden and on
the point of leaving for Lisbon, and Roberts, with the most astounding
boldness, sailed right in amongst them until he found the deepest laden,
which he attacked and boarded, although his was a much smaller ship. He
sailed away with his prize from the harbour. This prize, amongst the
merchandise, contained 40,000 moidors and a cross of diamonds designed for
the King of Portugal.

He then took a Dutch ship, and two days later an English one, and sailed
back to Brazil, refitting and cleaning at the Island of Ferdinando.

In a work such as this is, it is impossible to recount all, or even a few,
of the daring adventures, or the piratical ups and downs of one pirate.
Roberts sailed to the West Indies devastating the commerce of Jamaica and
Barbadoes. When things grew too hot there, he went north to Newfoundland,
and played the very devil with the English and French fishing fleets and
settlements.

His first ship he called the _Fortune_, his next, a bigger ship, the
_Royal Fortune_, another the _Good Fortune_.

On two occasions Roberts had been very roughly handled, once by a ship
from Barbadoes and once by the inhabitants of Martinica, so when he
designed his new flag, he portrayed on it a huge figure of himself
standing sword in hand upon two skulls, and under these were the letters
A.B.H. and A.M.H., signifying a Barbadian's and a Martinican's head.

In April, 1721, Roberts was back again on the Guinea Coast, burning and
plundering. Amongst the prisoners he took out of one of his prizes was a
clergyman. The captain dearly wished to have a chaplain on board his ship
to administer to the spiritual welfare of his crew, and tried all he could
to persuade the parson to sign on, promising him that his only duties
should be to say prayers and make punch. But the prelate begged to be
excused, and was at length allowed to go with all his belongings, except
three prayer-books and a corkscrew--articles which were sorely needed
aboard the _Royal Fortune_.

The end of Roberts's career was now in sight. A King's ship, the _Swallow_
(Captain Chaloner Ogle), discovered Roberts's ships at Parrot Island, and,
pretending to fly from them, was followed out to sea by one of the
pirates. A fight took place, and after two hours the pirates struck,
flinging overboard their black flag "that it might not rise in Judgement
over them." The _Swallow_ returned in a few days to Parrot Island to look
for Roberts in the _Royal Fortune_. Roberts being at breakfast, enjoying a
savoury dish of solomongundy, was informed of the approach of the ship,
but refused to take any notice of it. At last, thoroughly alarmed, he cut
his cables and sailed out, but most of his crew being drunk, even at this
early hour, the pirates did not make as good a resistance as if they had
been sober. Early in the engagement Roberts was hit in the throat by a
grape-shot and killed; this being on February 10th, 1722. His body, fully
dressed, with his arms and ornaments, was thrown overboard according to
his repeated request made during his lifetime. Thus the arch-pirate died,
as he always said he wished to die, fighting. His motto had always been "A
short life and a merry one." One good word can be said for Roberts, that
he never forced a man to become a pirate against his wish.


ROBERTS, OWEN. Welsh pirate.

Carpenter in the _Queen Ann's Revenge_, and killed on November 22nd, 1718,
off the North Carolina Coast.


ROBINSON, EDWARD.

Of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Hanged at Charleston, South Carolina, in 1718.


ROCHE, CAPTAIN PHILIP, _alias_ JOHN EUSTACE.

In company with three other mariners--Cullen, Wife, and Neale--this Irish
pirate shipped himself on board a French snow at Cork in November, 1721,
for a passage to Nantes. Owing to Roche's briskness, genteel manners, and
knowledge of navigation, the master used occasionally to place him in
charge of the vessel. One night a few days out a pre-arranged mutiny took
place, the French crew being butchered and thrown overboard. The captain,
who pleaded for mercy, was also thrown into the sea. Driven by bad weather
to Dartmouth, the new captain, Roche, had the ship repainted and
disguised, and renamed her the _Mary_. Then sailing to Rotterdam he sold
the cargo of beef and took on a fresh cargo with the owner, Mr. Annesly.
The first night out of port they threw Mr. Annesly overboard, and he swam
alongside for some while pleading to be taken in. On going into a French
port, and hearing that an enquiry was being made about his ship, Roche ran
away. The crew took the ship to Scotland, and there landed and
disappeared, and the ship was seized and taken to the Thames.

Later on Roche was arrested in London and committed to Newgate Prison,
found guilty of piracy, and hanged on August 5th, 1723, at Execution Dock,
at the age of 30. The hanging was not, from the public spectators point of
view, a complete success, for the culprit "was so ill at the time that he
could not make any public declaration of his abhorrence of the crime for
which he suffered."


RODERIGO, PETER.

A "Flanderkin."

Commanded a Dutch vessel, the _Edward and Thomas_, that sailed from Boston
in 1674, and took several small English vessels along the coast of Maine.
Tried for piracy at Cambridge, Massachusetts, and condemned to be hanged,
but was afterwards pardoned.


ROGERS, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

Commanded a ship, the _Forlorn_. Routed the Spaniards at Venta Cruz in
1671. One of Morgan's captains in his attack on Panama.


ROGERS, CAPTAIN WOODES.

As the life of this famous navigator and privateer is, very justly,
treated fully in the "Dictionary of National Biography" it is unnecessary
to mention more than a few incidents in his adventurous career. Woodes
Rogers was not only a good navigator, for on many occasions he showed a
remarkable gift for commanding mutinous crews in spite of having many
officers on whom he could place little reliance. On leaving Cork in 1708,
after an incompetent pilot had almost run his ship on two rocks off
Kinsale called "The Sovereigne's Bollacks," Rogers describes his crew
thus: "A third were foreigners, while of Her Majestie's subjects many were
taylors, tinkers, pedlars, fiddlers, and hay-makers, with ten boys and one
negro." It was with crews such as these that many of the boldest and most
remarkable early voyages were made, and they required a man of Woodes
Rogers stamp to knock them into sailors. Rogers had a gift for inspiring
friendship wherever he went. On arriving at the coast of Brazil, his boat
was fired on when trying to land at Angre de Reys. This settlement had but
lately received several hostile visitors in the way of French pirates. But
before a week was passed Woodes Rogers had so won the hearts of the
Portuguese Governor and the settlers that he and his "musick" were invited
to take part in an important religious function, or "entertainment," as
Rogers calls it, "where," he says, "we waited on the Governour, Signior
Raphael de Silva Lagos, in a body, being ten of us, with two trumpets and
a hautboy, which he desir'd might play us to church, where our musick did
the office of an organ, but separate from the singing, which was by the
fathers well perform'd. Our musick played 'Hey, boys, up go we!' and all
manner of noisy paltry tunes. And after service, our musicians, who were
by that time more than half drunk, march'd at the head of the company;
next to them an old father and two fryars carrying lamps of incense, then
an image dressed with flowers and wax candles, then about forty priests,
fryars, etc., followed by the Governor of the town, myself, and Capt.
Courtney, with each of us a long wax candle lighted. The ceremony held
about two hours; after which we were splendidly entertained by the
fathers of the Convent, and then by the Governour. They unanimously told
us they expected nothing from us but our Company, and they had no more but
our musick."

What a delightful picture this calls to the mind--the little Brazilian
town, the tropical foliage, the Holy Procession, "wax figure" and priests,
followed by the Governor with an English buccaneer on either side, and
headed by a crew of drunken Protestant English sailors playing "Hey, boys,
up go we!"

Rogers, not to be outdone in hospitality, next day entertained the
Governor and fathers on board the _Duke_, "when," he says, "they were very
merry, and in their cups propos'd the Pope's health to us. But we were
quits with 'em by toasting the Archbishop of Canterbury; and to keep up
the humour, we also proposed William Pen's health, and they liked the
liquor so well, that they refused neither." Alas! the good Governor and
the fathers were not in a fit state to leave the ship when the end came to
the entertainment, so slept on board, being put ashore in the morning,
"when we saluted 'em with a huzza from each ship, because," as Rogers
says, "we were not overstocked with powder."

It was in March, 1710, that Rogers brought his little fleet into the
harbour of Guam, one of the Ladrone Islands. Although at war with Spain,
the captain soon became on his usual friendly terms with the Governor of
this Spanish colony, and gave an entertainment on board his ship to him
and four other Spanish gentlemen, making them "as welcome as time and
place would afford, with musick and our sailors dancing." The Governor
gave a return party on shore, to which Rogers and all his brother officers
were invited, partaking of "sixty dishes of various sorts." After this
feast Rogers gave his host a present, consisting of "two negro boys
dress'd in liveries." One other instance of Woodes Rogers adaptability
must suffice. In the year 1717 he was appointed Governor to the Bahama
Islands, at New Providence, now called Nassau. His chief duty was to stamp
out the West India pirates who had made this island their headquarters for
many years, and were in complete power there, and numbered more than 2,000
desperadoes, including such famous men as Vane and Teach. Rogers's only
weapon, besides the man-of-war he arrived in, was a royal proclamation
from King George offering free pardon to all pirates or buccaneers who
would surrender at once to the new Governor. At first the pirates were
inclined to resist his landing, but in the end the tactful Rogers got his
own way, and not only landed, but was received by an armed guard of
honour, and passed between two lines of pirates who fired salutes with
their muskets.

Most of the pirates surrendered and received their pardons, but some, who
reverted shortly afterwards to piracy and were captured and brought back
to New Providence, were tried and actually hanged by Rogers's late
buccaneer subjects.

Woodes Rogers eventually died in Nassau in the year 1729.

He was the author of a delightful book entitled "A Cruising Voyage Round
the World, begun in 1708 and finish'd in 1711, by Captain Woodes Rogers,
Commander-in-Chief on this Expedition, with the ships _Duke_ and _Duchess_
of Bristol."

This was published in London in 1712.


ROLLSON, PETER.

Captain Gow's gunner in the _Revenge_. Hanged at Execution Dock, Wapping,
in June, 1725.


ROSS, GEORGE, or ROSE.

Of Glasgow.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew of the _Royal James_. Was hanged at
Charleston, South Carolina, on November 8th, 1718, and buried in the marsh
below low-water mark.


ROSSOE, FRANCIS.

In June, 1717, in company with four other Carolina pirates, was placed on
trial for his life. Convicted with De Cossey, De Mont, and Ernandos, of
piratically taking the vessels the _Turtle Dove_, the _Penelope_, and the
_Virgin Queen_ in July of the previous year, and, after being sentenced to
death by Judge Trott, Rossoe and his fellow-pirates were promptly
executed.


ROUNDSIVEL, CAPTAIN GEORGE.

Of the Bahama Islands.

He refused to avail himself of King George's pardon to all pirates in
1717, and went off again on the "main chance" till captured.


ROW, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

In 1679, at the Boca del Toro, was with the buccaneer fleet that attacked
and sacked Santa Maria. Row commanded a small vessel of twenty tons, a
crew of twenty-five men, and no guns.


RUIZ.

One of Captain Gilbert's crew in the pirate schooner _Panda_, which
plundered the Salem brig _Mexican_ in 1834. Tried in Boston and condemned
to be hanged. Pleading insanity, he was respited for sixty days and then
hanged on September 12th, 1835.


RUPERT. Prince of the Rhine.

After an adventurous life as a soldier on the Continent, he sailed from
Ireland in 1648 with seven ships. His own ship was the _Swallow_. He was a
man of boundless energy, who was never happy if not engaged in some
enterprise, and as legitimate warfare gave him few opportunities he turned
pirate. He spent five years at sea, largely in the West Indies, meeting
with every kind of adventure.

In 1653 he was caught in a storm in the Virgin Islands, and his fleet was
wrecked. His brother, Prince Maurice, was lost with his ship, the
_Defiance_, the only ship saved being the _Swallow_. Prince Rupert
returned in the _Swallow_ to France in the same year. Hitherto the prince
had been a restless, clever man, "very sparkish in his dress," but this
catastrophe to his fleet and the loss of his brother broke his spirit, and
he retired to England, where he died in his bed in 1682 at Spring Gardens.


LE SAGE, CAPTAIN. French filibuster.

In 1684 was at San Domingo, in command of the _Tigre_, carrying thirty
guns and a crew of 130 men.


SALTER, EDWARD.

Hanged in Virginia in 1718 with the rest of Captain Teach's crew.


SAMPLE, CAPTAIN RICHARD. Buccaneer.

Was at New Providence Island in 1718, and received the royal pardon from
King George, offered to those pirates who surrendered themselves to
Governor Woodes Rogers. Like many another, he fell again into his former
wicked ways, and ended his life by being hanged.


SAMPLE, CAPTAIN ROBERT.

One of England's crew in the _Royal James_. In 1720 they took a prize, the
_Elizabeth and Katherine_, off the coast of West Africa. Fitting her out
for a pirate, they named her the _Flying King_, and Sample was put in
command. In company with Captain Low, he sailed to Brazil and did much
mischief amongst the Portuguese shipping. In November of the same year the
two pirate ships were attacked by a very powerful man-of-war. Lane got
away, but Sample was compelled to run his ship ashore on the coast. Of his
crew of seventy men, twelve were killed and the rest taken prisoners, of
whom the Portuguese hanged thirty-eight. Of these, thirty-two were
English, three Dutch, two French, and one Portuguese.


SANDERS, THOMAS.

An Elizabethan mariner who was taken prisoner by the Moors. He wrote a
narrative of his life as a slave on a Barbary pirate galley.

"I and sixe more of my fellowes," he wrote, "together with four-score
Italians and Spaniards, were sent foorth in a Galeot to take a Greekish
Carmosell, which came into Africa to steale Negroes. We were chained three
and three to an oare, and we rowed naked above the girdle, and the
Boteswaine of the Galley walked abaft the masts, and his Mate afore the
maste ... and when their develish choller rose, they would strike the
Christians for no cause. And they allowed us but halfe a pound of bread a
man in a day without any other kind of sustenance, water excepted.... We
were then so cruelly manackled in such sort, that we could not put our
hands the length of one foote asunder the one from the other, and every
night they searched our chains three times, to see if they were fast
riveted."


SAWKINS, CAPTAIN RICHARD. Buccaneer.

We know little of the early career of this remarkable buccaneer. He was
loved by his crew, and had great influence over them. It is recorded that
one Sunday morning, finding some of his men gambling, he threw the dice
overboard, saying "he would have no gambling aboard his ship."

We know that on one occasion he was caught in his vessel by H.M.S.
_Success_ and brought to Port Royal, Jamaica, and that on December 1st,
1679, he was in prison awaiting trial for piracy. Apparently he got off,
for this brilliant young buccaneer is soon afterwards heard of as
commanding a small vessel of sixteen tons, armed with but one gun and a
crew of thirty-five men. He was one of a party of 330 buccaneers who,
under the leadership of Coxon and Sharp, landed on the coast of Darien and
marched through the jungle to attack and plunder the town of Santa Maria.
The remainder of the journey across the isthmus was done in canoes, in
which the pirates travelled down the Santa Maria River until they found
themselves in the Pacific. On this expedition each captain had his company
and had his own colours, Sawkins's flag being a red one with yellow
stripes. Arrived at the sea, they captured two small Spanish vessels, and,
the rest of the company being in the canoes, they boldly sailed towards
Panama City. Meeting with the Spanish fleet of eight ships, the buccaneers
attacked it, and, after a most furious battle, came off victorious. This
was one of the most gallant episodes in the whole history of the "brethren
of the coast," and was afterwards known as the Battle of Perico. Sawkins
fought in the most brave and desperate manner, and took a large share in
the successful enterprise. After this action some quarrelling took place,
which ended by Captain Coxon going off with some seventy men, to return
across the isthmus on foot. The company that remained in the Pacific
elected Sawkins to be their leader, as Captain Sharp, a much older man,
was away in his ship.

The buccaneers, ever since they defeated the Spanish fleet, had blockaded
the harbour, and a correspondence took place between the Governor of
Panama and Sawkins, the former wishing to know what the pirates had come
there for. To this message Sawkins sent back answer "that we came to
assist the King of Darien, who was the true Lord of Panama and all the
country thereabouts. And that since we were come so far, there was no
reason but that we should have some satisfaction. So that if he pleased to
send us five hundred pieces of eight for each man, and one thousand for
each commander, and not any farther to annoy the Indians, but suffer them
to use their own power and liberty, as became the true and natural lords
of the country, that then we would desist from all further hostilities,
and go away peaceably; otherwise that we should stay there, and get what
we could, causing to them what damage was possible."

This message was just bluff on Sawkins's part, but having heard that the
Bishop of Santa Martha was in the city, Sawkins sent him two loaves of
sugar as a present, and reminded the prelate that he had been his prisoner
five years before, when Sawkins took that town. Further messengers
returned from Panama next day, bringing a gold ring for Sawkins from the
well-disposed Bishop, and a message from the Governor, in which he
inquired "from whom we had our commission and to whom he ought to complain
for the damage we had already done them?" To this Sawkins sent back answer
"that as yet all his company were not come together; but that when they
were come up we would come and visit him at Panama, and bring our
commissions on the muzzles of our guns, at which time he should read them
as plain as the flame of gunpowder could make them."

After lying off Panama for some while without meeting with any plunder,
and their victuals running short, the crews began to grumble, and
persuaded Sawkins to sail south along the coast. This he did, and,
arriving off the town of Puebla Nueva on May 22nd, 1679, Sawkins landed a
party of sixty men and led them against the town. But the Spaniards had
been warned in time, and had built up three strong breastworks.

Sawkins, who never knew what fear meant, stormed the town at the head of
his men, but was killed by a musket-ball.

Basil Ringrose, the buccaneer who wrote the narrative of this voyage,
describes Sawkins as being "a man who was as valiant and courageous as any
man could be, and the best beloved of all our company"; and on another
occasion he speaks of him as "a man whom nothing on earth could terrifie."


SAWNEY, CAPTAIN.

A pirate of New Providence Island in the Bahamas. In this pirate republic
this old man lived in the best hut, and was playfully known as "Governor
Sawney."


DE SAYAS, FRANCISCO.

A Spanish pirate hanged at Kingston, Jamaica, in 1823.


SCOT, LEWIS.

Distinguished as being the first pirate to carry on the trade on land as
well as at sea. Before this time pirates were never known to be anything
but harmless drunkards when on shore, whatever they might be on board
their ships. Scot changed all this when he sacked and pillaged the city of
Campeachy. So successful was he that his example was quickly followed by
Mansfield, John Davis, and other pirates.


SCOT, ROGER.

Born at Bristol.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Tried for piracy in April, 1722, at Cape
Coast Castle, West Africa, after the great defeat of the pirates by H.M.S.
_Swallow_. On this occasion no less than 267 pirates were accounted for.
The finding of the Honourable the President and Judges of the Court of
Admiralty for trying of pirates was as follows:

  Acquitted                                 74
  Executed                                  52
  Respited                                   2
  To Servitude                              20
  To the Marshallsea                        17 for tryal

The rest were accounted for as follows:

  Killed { In the _Ranger_                  10
         { In the _Fortune_                  3
    Dy'd { In the passage to Cape Corso     15
         { Afterwards in the castle          4
  Negroes in both ships                     70
                                          ----
                                           267
                                          ----

A number of the prisoners signed a "humble petition" begging that, as
they, being "unhappily and unwisely drawn into that wretched and
detestable Crime of Piracy," they might be permitted to serve in the Royal
African Company in the country for seven years, in remission of their
crimes. This clemency was granted to twenty of the prisoners, of which
Scot was one.

A very impressive indenture was drawn up, according to which the prisoners
were to become the slaves of the Company for seven years, and this was
signed by the prisoners and by the President.


SCOTT, WILLIAM.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew in the _Royal James_. Tried for piracy in
1718 at Charleston, South Carolina, and hanged at White Point on November
8th.


SCUDAMORE, CHRISTOPHER.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew. Tried for piracy at the Star Tavern in
Hanover Street, Boston, in 1704, and hanged on Charles River, Boston Side,
on June 30th. A report of the trial and execution of these pirates,
describing Scudamore's conduct on the gallows, says: "He appeared very
Penitent since his Condemnation, was very diligent to improve his time
going to, and at the place of Execution."


SCUDAMORE, PETER.

Belonging to Bristol.

Surgeon in the _Mercy_ galley, and taken by Captain Roberts in 1721. It
was a rule on all pirate vessels for the surgeon to be excused from
signing the ship's articles. When the next prize was taken, if she carried
a surgeon, he was taken in place of their present one, if the latter
wished to leave. But when Scudamore came on board the _Royal Fortune_ he
insisted on signing the pirate articles and boasted that he was the first
surgeon that had ever done so, and he hoped, he said, to prove as great a
rogue as any of them.

When the African Company's Guinea ship, the _King Solomon_, was taken,
Scudamore came aboard and helped himself to their surgeon's instruments
and medicines. He also took a fancy for a backgammon board, but only kept
it after a violent quarrel with another pirate. It came out at his trial
that on a voyage from the Island of St. Thomas, in a prize, the _Fortune_,
in which was a cargo of slaves, Scudamore had tried to bring about a
mutiny of the blacks to kill the prize crew which was on board, and he was
detected in the night going about amongst the negroes, talking to them in
the Angolan language. He said that he knew enough about navigation to sail
the ship himself, and he was heard to say that "this were better than to
be taken to Cape Corso to be hanged and sun dried."

The same witness told how he had approached the prisoner when he was
trying to persuade a wounded pirate, one James Harris, to join him in his
scheme, but fearing to be overheard, Scudamore turned the conversation to
horse-racing.

Scudamore was condemned to death, but allowed three days' grace before
being hanged, which he spent in incessant prayers and reading of the
Scriptures. On the gallows he sang, solo, the Thirty-first Psalm. Died at
the age of 35.


SEARLES, CAPTAIN ROBERT.

In 1664 he brought in two Spanish prizes to Port Royal, but as orders had
only lately come from England to the Governor to do all in his power to
promote friendly relations with the Spanish islands, these prizes were
returned to their owners. To prevent Searle's doing such things again, he
was deprived of his ship's rudder and sails. In 1666, Searle, in company
with a Captain Stedman and a party of only eighty men, took the Island of
Tobago, near Trinidad, from the Dutch, destroying everything they could
not carry away.


SELKIRK, ALEXANDER. The original Robinson Crusoe.

Born in 1676 at Largo in Fifeshire, he was the seventh son of John
Selcraig, a shoemaker. In 1695 he was cited to appear before the Session
for "indecent conduct in church," but ran away to sea. In 1701 he was back
again in Largo, and was rebuked in the face of the congregation for
quarrelling with his brothers. A year later Selkirk sailed to England, and
in 1703 joined Dampier's expedition to the South Seas. Appointed
sailing-master to the _Cinque Ports_, commanded by Captain Stradling.

In September, 1704, he arrived at the uninhabited island of Juan
Fernandez, in the South Pacific. Selkirk, having quarrelled with the
captain, insisted on being landed on the island with all his belongings.
He lived alone here for nearly four years, building himself two cabins,
hunting the goats which abounded, and taming young goats and cats to be
his companions.

On the night of January 31st, 1709, seeing two ships, Selkirk lit a fire,
and a boat was sent ashore. These ships were the _Duke_ and _Duchess_ of
Bristol, under the command of Captain Woodes Rogers, while his old friend
Dampier was acting as pilot. Selkirk was at once appointed sailing-master
of the _Duchess_, and eventually arrived back in the Thames on October
14th, 1711, with booty worth £800, having been away from England for eight
years. While in England he met Steele, who described Selkirk as a "man of
good sense, with strong but cheerful expression." Whether Selkirk ever met
Defoe is uncertain, though the character of Robinson Crusoe was certainly
founded on his adventures in Juan Fernandez. In 1712 he returned to Largo,
living the life of a recluse, and we must be forgiven for suspecting that
he rather acted up to the part, since it is recorded that he made a cave
in his father's garden in which to meditate. This life of meditation in an
artificial cave was soon rudely interrupted by the appearance of a certain
Miss Sophia Bonce, with whom Selkirk fell violently in love, and they
eloped together to Bristol, which must have proved indeed a sad scandal to
the elders and other godly citizens of Largo. Beyond the fact that he was
charged at Bristol with assaulting one Richard Nettle, a shipwright, we
hear no more of Selkirk until his first will was drawn up in 1717, in
which he leaves his fortune and house to "my loving friend Sophia Bonce,
of the Pall Mall, London, Spinster." Shortly after this, Alexander basely
deserted his loving friend and married a widow, one Mrs. Francis Candis,
at Oarston in Devon.

In 1720 he was appointed mate to H.M.S. _Weymouth_, on board of which he
died a year later at the age of 45.

Selkirk is immortalized in literature, not only by Defoe, but by Cowper in
his "Lines on Solitude," beginning: "I am monarch of all I survey."


SHARP, ROWLAND.

Of Bath Town in North Carolina.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Tried for piracy at Charleston in 1718
and found "not guilty."


SHASTER, ROGER.

One of Captain Heidon's crew of the pirate ship _John of Sandwich_, which
was wrecked on the coast of Alderney. Shaster was arrested and hanged at
St. Martin's Point, Guernsey, in 1564.


SHAW, JOHN.

One of Captain Lowther's crew. Hanged at St. Kitts on March 11th, 1722.


SHERGALL, HENRY, or SHERRAL. Buccaneer.

A seaman with Captain Bartholomew Sharp in his South Sea voyage. One
October day he fell into the sea while going into the spritsail-top and
was drowned. "This incident several of our company interpreted as a bad
omen, which proved not so, through the providence of the Almighty."


SHIRLEY, SIR ANTHONY.

In January, 1597, headed an expedition to the Island of Jamaica. He met
with little opposition from the Spaniards, and seized and plundered St.
Jago de la Vega.


SHIVERS, CAPTAIN.

This South Sea pirate cruised in company with Culliford and Nathaniel
North in the Red Sea, preying principally on Moorish ships, and also
sailed about the Indian Ocean as far as the Malacca Islands. He accepted
the royal pardon to pirates, which was brought out to Madagascar by
Commodore Littleton, and apparently gave up his wicked ways thereafter.


SHUTFIELD, WILLIAM.

Of Lancaster.

Hanged at Rhode Island in July, 1723, at the age of 40.


SICCADAM, JOHN.

Of Boston.

One of Captain Pound's crew. Found guilty of piracy, but pardoned.


SIMMS, HENRY, _alias_ "GENTLEMAN HARRY." Pickpocket, highwayman, pirate,
and Old Etonian.

Born in 1716 at St. Martin's-in-the-Fields. Sent while quite young to
school at Eton, where he "shewed an early inclination to vice," and at the
age of 14 was taken from school and apprenticed to a breeches-maker. No
Old Etonian, either then or now, would stand that kind of treatment, so
Simms ran away, becoming a pickpocket and later a highwayman. After
numerous adventures and escapes from prison, he was pressed on board
H.M.S. _Rye_, but he deserted his ship at Leith. After an "affair" at
Croydon, Simms was transplanted with other convicts to Maryland, in the
_Italian Merchant_. On the voyage he attempted, but without success, to
raise a mutiny. On his arrival in America he was sold to the master of the
_Two Sisters_, which was taken a few days out from Maryland by a Bayonne
pirate. Carried to Spain, Simms got to Oporto, and there was pressed on
board H.M.S. _King Fisher_. Eventually he reached Bristol, where he
bought, with his share of booty, a horse and two pistols, with which to go
on the highway.

Hanged on June 17th, 1747, for stealing an old silver watch and 5s. from
Mr. Francis Sleep at Dunstable.


SKIPTON, CAPTAIN.

Commanded a pirate ship, in which he sailed in company with Captain
Spriggs. Being chased by H.M.S. _Diamond_ off the coast of Cuba, Skipton
ran his sloop on to the Florida Reef. Escaping with his crew to an island,
they were attacked by the Indians, and many of them were captured and
eaten. The survivors, embarking in a canoe, were caught by the man-of-war
and taken prisoner.


SKYRM, CAPTAIN JAMES. Welsh pirate.

Hanged at the advanced age--for a pirate--of 44.

Commanded the _Ranger_, one of Captain Roberts's ships that cruised in
1721 and 1722 off the West Coast of Africa. In the fight with the King's
ship that took him he was very active with a drawn sword in his hand, with
which he beat any of his crew who were at all backward. One of his legs
was shot away in this action, but he refused to leave the deck and go
below as long as the action lasted. He was condemned to death and hanged
in chains.


SMITH, GEORGE. Welsh pirate.

One of Captain Roberts's pirates. Hanged at the age of 25.


SMITH, JOHN.

One of the mutinous crew of the _Antonio_. Hanged at Boston in 1672.


SMITH, JOHN WILLIAMS.

Of Charleston, Carolina.

Hanged in 1718 for piracy, at Charleston.


SMITH, MAJOR SAMUEL. Buccaneer.

At one time a buccaneer with the famous Mansfield.

In 1641 he was sent, by the Governor of Jamaica, with a party to reinforce
the troops which under Mansfield had recaptured the New Providence Island
from the Spanish. In 1660 he was taken prisoner by the Spanish and carried
to Panama and there kept in chains in a dungeon for seventeen months.


DE SOTO, BERNADO.

One of the crew of the schooner _Panda_ that took and plundered the Salem
brig _Mexican_. The crew of the _Panda_ were captured by an English
man-of-war and taken to Boston. De Soto was condemned to death, but
eventually fully pardoned owing to his heroic conduct in rescuing the crew
of an American vessel some time previously.


DE SOTO, CAPTAIN BENITO.

A Portuguese.

A most notorious pirate in and about 1830.

In 1827 he shipped at Buenos Ayres as mate in a slaver, named the
_Defenser de Pedro_, and plotted to seize the ship off the African coast.
The pirates took the cargo of slaves to the West Indies, where they sold
them. De Soto plundered many vessels in the Caribbean Sea, then sailed to
the South Atlantic, naming his ship the _Black Joke_. The fear of the
_Black Joke_ became so great amongst the East Indiamen homeward bound that
they used to make up convoys at St. Helena before heading north.

In 1832 de Soto attacked the _Morning Star_, an East Indiaman, and took
her, when he plundered the ship and murdered the captain. After taking
several more ships, de Soto lost his own on the rocky coast of Spain, near
Cadiz. His crew, although pretending to be honest shipwrecked sailors,
were arrested, but de Soto managed to escape to Gibraltar. Here he was
recognized by a soldier who had seen de Soto when he took the _Morning
Star_, in which he had been a passenger. The pirate was arrested, and
tried before Sir George Don, the Governor of Gibraltar, and sentenced to
death. He was sent to Cadiz to be hanged with the rest of his crew. The
gallows was erected at the water's edge, and de Soto, with his coffin, was
conveyed there in a cart. He died bravely, arranging the noose around his
own neck, stepping up into his coffin to do so; then, crying out, "Adios
todos," he threw himself off the cart.

This man must not be confused with one Bernado de Soto, who was tried for
piracy at Boston in 1834.


SOUND, JOSEPH.

Of the city of Westminster.

Hanged, at the age of 28, at Newport, Rhode Island, in 1723.


SPARKS, JAMES.

A Newfoundland fisherman.

In August, 1723, with John Phillips and three others, ran away with a
vessel to go "on the account." Sparks was appointed gunner.


SPARKES, JOHN.

A member of Captain Avery's crew, and described by one of his shipmates as
being "a true cock of the game." A thief, he robbed his fellow-shipmates,
and from one, Philip Middleton, he stole 270 pieces of gold.

Hanged at Execution Dock in 1696.


SPRATLIN, ROBERT.

Was one of Dampier's party which in 1681 crossed the Isthmus of Darien,
when he was left behind in the jungle with Wafer. Spratlin was lost when
the little party attempted to ford the swollen Chagres River. He
afterwards rejoined Wafer.


SPRIGGS, CAPTAIN FRANCIS FARRINGTON.

An uninteresting and bloody pirate without one single redeeming character.

He learnt his art with the pirate Captain Lowther, afterwards serving as
quartermaster with Captain Low and taking an active part in all the
barbarities committed by the latter.

About 1720 Low took a prize, a man-of-war called the _Squirrel_. This he
handed over to some of the crew, who elected Spriggs their captain. The
ship they renamed the _Delight_, and in the night altered their course and
left Low. They made a flag, bearing upon it a white skeleton, holding in
one hand a dart striking a bleeding heart, and in the other an hourglass.
Sailing to the West Indies, Spriggs took several prizes, treating the
crews with abominable cruelty. On one occasion the pirates chased what
they believed to be a Spanish ship, and after a long while they came
alongside and fired a broadside into her. The ship immediately
surrendered, and turned out to be a vessel the pirate had plundered only a
few days previously. This infuriated Spriggs and his crew, who showed
their disappointment by half murdering the captain. After a narrow escape
from being captured by a French man-of-war near the Island of St. Kitts,
Spriggs sailed north to the Summer Isles, or Bermudas. Taking a ship
coming from Rhode Island, they found her cargo to consist of horses.
Several of the pirates mounted these and galloped up and down the deck
until they were thrown. While plundering several small vessels of their
cargo of logwood in the Bay of Honduras, Spriggs was surprised and
attacked by an English man-of-war, and the pirates only escaped by using
their sweeps. Spriggs now went for a cruise off the coast of South
Carolina, returning again to Honduras. This was a rash proceeding on
Spriggs's part, for as he was sailing off the west end of Cuba he again
met the man-of-war which had so nearly caught him before in the bay.
Spriggs clapped on all sail, but ran his ship on Rattan Island, where she
was burnt by the _Spence_, while Captain Spriggs and his crew escaped to
the woods.


SPRINGER, CAPTAIN.

He fought gallantly with Sawkins and Ringrose in the Battle of Perico off
Panama on St. George's Day in 1680. He gave his name to Springer's Cay,
one of the Samballoes Islands. This was the rendezvous chosen by the
pirates, where Dampier and his party found the French pirate ship that
rescued them after their famous trudge across the Isthmus of Darien.


STANLEY, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

With a few other buccaneers in their stronghold at New Providence Island
in 1660, withstood an attack by a Spanish fleet for five days. The three
English captains, Stanley, Sir Thomas Whetstone, and Major Smith, were
carried to Panama and there cast into a dungeon and bound in irons for
seventeen months.


STEDMAN, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

In 1666, with Captain Searle and a party of only eighty men, he took and
plundered the Dutch island of Tobago. Later on, after the outbreak of war
with France, he was captured by a French frigate off the Island of
Guadeloupe. Stedman had a small vessel and a crew of only 100 men, and
found himself becalmed and unable to escape, so he boldly boarded the
Frenchman and fought for two hours, being finally overcome.


STEPHENS, WILLIAM.

Died on January 14th, 1682, on board of Captain Sharp's ship a few days
before their return to the Barbadoes from the South Seas. His death was
supposed to have been caused by indulging too freely in mancanilla while
ashore at Golfo Dulce. "Next morning we threw overboard our dead man and
gave him two French vollies and one English one."


STEPHENSON, JOHN.

Sailed as an honest seaman in the _Onslow_ (Captain Gee) from Sestos.
Taken in May, 1721, by the pirate Captain Roberts, he willingly joined the
pirates. When Roberts was killed on board the _Royal Fortune_, Stephenson
burst into tears, and declared that he wished the next shot might kill
him. Hanged in 1722.


STILES, RICHARD.

Hanged in Virginia in 1718 with the rest of Captain Teach's crew.


STOREY, THOMAS.

One of William Coward's crew which stole the ketch _Elinor_ in Boston
Harbour. Condemned to be hanged on January 27th, 1690, but afterwards
reprieved.


ST. QUINTIN, RICHARD.

A native of Yorkshire.

One of M'Kinlie's crew that murdered Captain Glass and his family in the
Canary ship. Afterwards arrested at Cork and hanged in chains near Dublin
on March 19th, 1765.


STURGES, CAPTAIN.

An Elizabethan pirate, who had his headquarters at Rochelle. In company
with the notorious pirate Calles, he in one year pillaged two Portuguese,
one French, one Spanish, and also a Scotch ship. His end is not known.


O'SULLIVAN, LORD. Receiver of pirate plunder.

The Sulivan Bere, of Berehaven in Ireland.

A notorious friend of the English pirates, he bought their spoils, which
he stored in his castle. He helped to fit out pirate captains for their
cruises, and protected them when Queen Elizabeth sent ships to try and
arrest them.


SUTTON, THOMAS.

Born at Berwick in 1699.

Gunner in Roberts's ship the _Royal Fortune_. At his trial he was proved
to have been particularly active in helping to take a Dutch merchantman,
the _Gertruycht_. Hanged in chains at Cape Coast Castle in April, 1722, at
the age of 23.


SWAN, CAPTAIN.

Commanded the _Nicholas_, and met Dampier when in the _Batchelor's
Delight_ at the Island of Juan Fernandez in 1684. The two captains cruised
together off the west coast of South America, the _Nicholas_ leaving
Dampier, who returned to England by way of the East Indies.


SWAN, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Of the _Cygnet_. Left England as an honest trader. Rounded the Horn and
sailed up to the Bay of Nicoya, there taking on a crew of buccaneers who
had crossed the Isthmus of Darien on foot. Dampier was appointed pilot or
quartermaster to the _Cygnet_, a post analogous to that of a navigating
officer on a modern man-of-war, while Ringrose was appointed supercargo.
Swan had an adventurous and chequered voyage, sometimes meeting with
successes, but often with reverses. Eventually he sailed to the Philippine
Islands, where the crew mutinied and left Swan and thirty-six of the crew
behind. After various adventures the _Cygnet_, by now in a very crazy
state, just managed to reach Madagascar, where she sank at her anchorage.


SWITZER, JOSEPH.

Of Boston in New England.

Tried for piracy at Rhode Island in 1723, but found to be "not guilty."


SYMPSON, DAVID.

Born at North Berwick.

One of Roberts's crew. Tried and hanged at Cape Coast Castle in 1722. On
the day of execution Sympson was among the first six prisoners to be
brought up from the ship's hold to have their fetters knocked off and to
be fitted with halters, and it was observed that none of the culprits
appeared in the least dejected, except Sympson, who "spoke a little faint,
but this was rather imputed to a Flux that had seized him two or three
days before, than Fear." There being no clergyman in the colony, a kindly
surgeon tried to take on the duties of the ordinary, but with ill-success,
the hardened ruffians being quite unmoved by his attempts at exhortation.
In fact, the spectators were considerably shocked, as indeed they well
might be, by Sympson, suddenly recognizing among the crowd a woman whom he
knew, calling out "he had lain with that B----h three times, and now she
was come to see him hanged."

Sympson died at the age of 36, which was considerably above the average
age to which a pirate might expect to live.


TAYLOR, CAPTAIN.

This formidable South Sea pirate must indeed have looked, as well as
acted, the part, since his appearance is described by Captain Johnson as
follows: "A Fellow with a terrible pair of Whiskers, and a wooden Leg,
being stuck round with Pistols, like the Man in the Almanack with Darts."

This man Taylor it was who stirred up the crew of the _Victory_ to turn
out and maroon Captain England, and elect himself in his place. He was a
villain of the deepest dye, and burnt ships and houses and tortured his
prisoners.

The pirates sailed down the West Coast of India from Goa to Cochin, and
returned to Mauritius. Thence sailing to the Island of Mascarine they
found a big Portuguese ship, which they took. In her they discovered the
Conde de Eviceira, Viceroy of Goa, and, even better, four million dollars
worth of diamonds.

Taylor, now sailing in the _Cassandra_, heard that there were four
men-of-war on his tracks, so he sailed to Delagoa Bay and spent the
winter of the year 1722 there. It was now decided that as they had a huge
amount of plunder they had better give up piracy, so they sailed away to
the West Indies and surrendered themselves to the Governor of Porto Bello.
The crew broke up and each man, with a bag of diamonds, went whither he
would; but Captain Taylor joined the Spanish service, and was put in
command of a man-of-war, which was sent to attack the English logwood
cutters in the Bay of Honduras.


TAYLOR, WILLIAM.

One of Captain Phillips's crew. Wounded in the leg while attempting to
desert. There being no surgeon on board, a consultation was held over the
patient by the whole crew, and these learned men were unanimous in
agreeing that the leg should be amputated. Some dispute then arose as to
who should act the part of surgeon, and at length the carpenter was chosen
as the most proper person. "Upon which he fetch'd up the biggest saw, and
taking the limb under his Arm, fell to Work, and separated it from the
Body of the Patient in as little Time as he could have cut a Deal Board in
two." This surgeon-carpenter evidently appreciated the importance of
aseptics, for, "after that he had heated his Ax red hot in the Fire,
cauteriz'd the Wound but not with so much Art as he perform'd the other
Part for he so burnt the Flesh distant from the Place of Amputation that
it had like to have mortify'd." Taylor was tried and condemned to death at
Boston on May 12th, 1714, but for some reason not explained was reprieved.


TEACH, CAPTAIN EDWARD, or THATCH, or THACH, _alias_ DRUMMOND, _alias_
BLACKBEARD. Arch-pirate.

A Bristol man who settled in Jamaica, sailing in privateers, but not in
the capacity of an officer.

In 1716, Teach took to piracy, being put in command of a sloop by the
pirate Benjamin Hornigold. In 1717, Hornigold and Teach sailed together
from Providence towards the American coast, taking a billop from Havana
and several other prizes. After careening their vessels on the coast of
Virginia, the pirates took a fine French Guineaman bound to Martinico;
this ship they armed with forty guns, named her the _Queen Ann's Revenge_,
and Blackbeard went aboard as captain. Teach now had a ship that allowed
him to go for larger prizes, and he began by taking a big ship called the
_Great Allen_, which he plundered and then set fire to. A few days later,
Teach was attacked by H.M.S. _Scarborough_, of thirty guns, but after a
sharp engagement lasting some hours, the pirate was able to drive off the
King's ship.

The next ship he met with was the sloop of that amateur pirate and
landsman, Major Stede Bonnet. Teach and Bonnet became friends and sailed
together for a few days, when Teach, finding that Bonnet was quite
ignorant of maritime matters, ordered the Major, in the most high-handed
way, to come aboard his ship, while he put another officer in command of
Bonnet's vessel. Teach now took ship after ship, one of which, with the
curious name of the _Protestant Cæsar_, the pirates burnt out of spite,
not because of her name, but because she belonged to Boston, where there
had lately been a hanging of pirates.

Blackbeard now sailed north along the American coast, arriving off
Charleston, South Carolina. Here he lay off the bar for several days,
seizing every vessel that attempted to enter or leave the port, "striking
great Terror to the whole Province of Carolina," the more so since the
colony was scarcely recovered from a recent visit by another pirate, Vane.

Being in want of medicines, Teach sent his lieutenant, Richards, on shore
with a letter to the Governor demanding that he should instantly send off
a medicine chest, or else Teach would murder all his prisoners, and
threatening to send their heads to Government House; many of these
prisoners being the chief persons of the colony.

Teach, who was unprincipled, even for a pirate, now commanded three
vessels, and he wanted to get rid of his crews and keep all the booty for
himself and a few chosen friends. To do this, he contrived to wreck his
own vessel and one of his sloops. Then with his friends and all the booty
he sailed off, leaving the rest marooned on a small sandy island. Teach
next sailed to North Carolina, and with the greatest coolness surrendered
with twenty of his men to the Governor, Charles Eden, and received the
Royal pardon. The ex-pirate spent the next few weeks in cultivating an
intimate friendship with the Governor, who, no doubt, shared Teach's booty
with him.

A romantic episode took place at this time at Bath Town. The pirate fell
in love, not by any means for the first time, with a young lady of 16
years of age. To show his delight at this charming union, the Governor
himself married the happy pair, this being the captain's fourteenth wife;
though certain Bath Town gossips were heard to say that there were no
fewer than twelve Mrs. Teach still alive at different ports up and down
the West India Islands.

In June, 1718, the bridegroom felt that the call of duty must be obeyed,
so kissing good-bye to the new Mrs. Teach, he sailed away to the Bermudas,
meeting on his way half a dozen ships, which he plundered, and then
hurried back to share the spoils with the Governor of North Carolina and
his secretary, Mr. Knight.

For several months, Blackbeard remained in the river, exacting a toll from
all the shipping, often going ashore to make merry at the expense of the
planters. At length, things became so unbearable that the citizens and
planters sent a request to the Governor of the neighbouring colony of
Virginia for help to rid them of the presence of Teach. The Governor,
Spotswood, an energetic man, at once made plans for taking the pirate, and
commissioned a gallant young naval officer, Lieutenant Robert Maynard, of
H.M.S. _Pearl_, to go in a sloop, the _Ranger_, in search of him. On
November 17, 1718, the lieutenant sailed for Kicquetan in the James River,
and on the 21st arrived at the mouth of Okerecock Inlet, where he
discovered the pirate he was in search of. Blackbeard would have been
caught unprepared had not his friend, Mr. Secretary Knight, hearing what
was on foot, sent a letter warning him to be on his guard, and also any of
Teach's crew whom he could find in the taverns of Bath Town. Maynard lost
no time in attacking the pirate's ship, which had run aground. The fight
was furious, Teach boarding the sloop and a terrific hand-to-hand struggle
taking place, the lieutenant and Teach fighting with swords and pistols.
Teach was wounded in twenty-five places before he fell dead, while the
lieutenant escaped with nothing worse than a cut over the fingers.

Maynard now returned in triumph in his sloop to Bath Town, with the head
of Blackbeard hung up to the bolt-spit end, and received a tremendous
ovation from the inhabitants.

During his meteoric career as a pirate, the name of Blackbeard was one
that created terror up and down the coast of America from Newfoundland to
Trinidad. This was not only due to the number of ships Teach took, but in
no small measure to his alarming appearance. Teach was a tall, powerful
man, with a fierce expression, which was increased by a long, black beard
which grew from below his eyes and hung down to a great length. This he
plaited into many tails, each one tied with a coloured ribbon and turned
back over his ears. When going into action, Teach wore a sling on his
shoulders with three pairs of pistols, and struck lighted matches under
the brim of his hat. These so added to his fearful appearance as to strike
terror into all beholders. Teach had a peculiar sense of humour, and one
that could at times cause much uneasiness amongst his friends. Thus we are
told that one day on the deck of his ship, being at the time a little
flushed with wine, Blackbeard addressed his crew, saying: "Come let us
make a Hell of our own, and try how long we can bear it," whereupon Teach,
with several others, descended to the hold, shut themselves in, and then
set fire to several pots of brimstone. For a while they stood it, choking
and gasping, but at length had to escape to save themselves from being
asphyxiated, but the last to give up was the captain, who was wont to
boast afterwards that he had outlasted all the rest.

Then there was that little affair in the cabin, when Teach blew out the
candle and in the dark fired his pistols under the table, severely
wounding one of his guests in the knee, for no other reason, as he
explained to them afterwards, than "if he did not shoot one or two of them
now and then they'd forget who he was."

Teach kept a log or journal, which unfortunately is lost, but the entries
for two days have been preserved, and are worth giving, and seem to smack
of Robert Louis Stevenson in "Treasure Island." The entries, written in
Teach's handwriting, run as follows:

"1718. Rum all out--Our Company somewhat sober--A damn'd Confusion amongst
us!--Rogues a plotting--great Talk of Separation--so I look'd sharp for a
Prize.

"1718. Took one, with a great deal of Liquor on Board, so kept the Company
hot, damned hot, then all Things went well again."


TEAGUE, ROBERT.

A Scotch pirate, one of Captain Gow's crew. On May 26th, 1725, the crew
were tried in London and found guilty and sentenced to death, except
Teague and two others who were acquitted.


TEMPLETON, JOHN.

One of Captain John Quelch's crew of the ship _Charles_. Tried for piracy
at Boston in 1704, but, being discovered to be not yet 14 years of age and
only a servant on board the pirate ship, was acquitted.


TEW, Captain THOMAS, or Too.

A famous pirate, whose headquarters were at Madagascar. He was mentioned
by name in King William III.'s Royal Warrant to Captain Kidd to go hunting
for pirates, as a specially "wicked and ill-disposed person."

He sailed with Captain Dew from the Barbadoes with a Commission from the
Governor to join with the Royal African Company in an attack on the French
factory at Goori, at Gambia. Instead of going to West Africa, Tew and his
crew turned pirates, and sailed to the Red Sea. Here he met with a great
Indian ship, which he had the hardiness to attack, and soon took her, and
each of his men received as his share £3,000, and with this booty they
sailed to Madagascar. He was already held in high esteem by the pirates
who resided in that favourite stronghold. At one time he joined Misson,
the originator of "piracy-without-tears" at his garden city of Libertatia.
A quarrel arose between Misson's French followers and Tew's English
pirates. A duel was arranged between the two leaders, but by the tact of
another pirate--an unfrocked Italian priest--all was settled amicably, Tew
being appointed Admiral and the diplomatic ex-priest suitably chosen as
Secretary of State to the little republic. Such a reputation for kindness
had Tew that ships seldom resisted him, but on knowing who their assailant
was they gave themselves up freely. Some of Tew's men started a daughter
colony on their own account, and the Admiral sailed after them to try and
persuade them to return to the fold at Libertatia. The men refused, and
while Tew was arguing and trying to persuade them to change their minds,
his ship was lost in a sudden storm. Tew was soon rescued by the ship
_Bijoux_ with Misson on board, who, with a few men, had escaped being
massacred by the natives. Misson, giving Tew an equal share of his gold
and diamonds, sailed away, while Tew managed to return to Rhode Island in
New England, where he settled down for a while. To show the honesty of
this man, being now affluent, he kept a promise to the friends in Bermuda
who originally set him up with a ship, by sending them fourteen times the
original cost of the sloop as their just share of the profits.

At last, Tew found the call of the sea and the lure of the "grand account"
too great to resist, and he consented to take command of a pirate ship
which was to go on a cruise in the Red Sea. Arrived there, Tew attacked a
big ship belonging to the Great Mogul, and during the battle was mortally
wounded.

His historian tells us "a shot carried away the rim of Tew's belly, who
held his bowels with his hands for some space. When he dropped, it struck
such terror to his men that they suffered themselves to be taken without
further resistance." Thus fell fighting a fine sailor, a brave man, and a
successful pirate, and one who cheated the gallows awaiting him at
Execution Dock.


THOMAS, CAPTAIN, _alias_ STEDE BONNET.


THOMAS, JOHN.

Of Jamaica.

This Welsh pirate was one of Major Stede Bonnet's crew of the _Royal
James_. Hanged at Charleston, South Carolina, in 1718.


THOMPSON, CAPTAIN.

A renegade pirate who joined the Barbary corsairs, becoming a Mohammedan.
Commanded a pirate vessel, and was taken prisoner off the coast of Ireland
by an Elizabethan ship. Hanged at Wapping.


THURBAR, RICHARD.

Tried for piracy at Boston in 1704.


THURSTON, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Of Tortuga Island.

Refused to accept the Royal offer of pardon of 1670, when all commissions
to privateer on the Spanish were revoked. Thurston, with a mulatto, Diego,
using obsolete commissions issued by the late Governor of Jamaica,
Modyford, continued to prey upon Spanish shipping, carrying their prizes
to Tortuga.


THWAITES, CAPTAIN JOSEPH.

Coxswain to Captain Hood, he was promoted in 1763 to be a midshipman in
H.M.S. _Zealous_, cruising in the Mediterranean. Putting into Algiers,
Thwaites was sent ashore by the captain to buy some sheep, but did not
return to the boat and, it being supposed he had been assassinated, the
ship sailed without him. The fact was that young Thwaites, who spoke
Turkish and Greek, had accepted an invitation to enter the Ottoman
service. Embracing the Mohammedan religion, Thwaites was put in command of
a forty-four gun frigate.

His first engagement was with the flagship of the Tunisian Admiral, which
he took and carried to Algiers. He soon brought in another prize, and so
pleased the Dey that he presented him with a scimitar, the hilt of which
was set with diamonds.

Thwaites, having soiled his hands with blood, now became the pirate
indeed, taking vessels of any nation, and drowning all his prisoners by
tying a double-headed shot round their necks and throwing them overboard.

He stopped at no atrocity--even children were killed, and one prisoner, an
English lieutenant and an old shipmate of his, called Roberts, he murdered
without a second thought. When Thwaites happened to be near Gibraltar, he
would go ashore and through his agents, Messrs. Ross and Co., transmit
large sums of money to his wife and children in England. But Thwaites had
another home at Algiers fitted with every luxury, including three Armenian
girls.

For several years this successful pirate plundered ships of all nations
until such pressure was brought to bear on the Dey of Algiers that
Thwaites thought it best to collect what valuables he could carry away and
disappear.

Landing at Gibraltar in 1796, dressed in European clothes, he procured a
passage to New York in an American frigate, the _Constitution_. Arriving
in the United States, he purchased an estate not far from New York and
built himself a handsome mansion, but a year later retribution came from
an unlooked-for quarter, for he was bitten by a rattlesnake and died in
the most horrible agonies both of mind and body.


TOMKINS, JOHN.

Of Gloucestershire.

Hanged at the age of 23 at Rhode Island in 1723. One of Charles Harris's
crew.


TOPPING, DENNIS.

He shipped on board the sloop _Buck_ at Providence in 1718, in company
with Anstis and other famous pirates. Was killed at the taking of a rich
Portuguese ship off the coast of Brazil.


TOWNLEY, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

A buccaneer who in the year 1684 was one of the mixed English and French
fleet blockading Panama. On this occasion, he commanded a ship with a crew
of 180 men. By the next year the quarrels between the English had reached
such a pitch that Townley and Swan left Davis and sailed in search of
their French friends. In May, 1685, Townley was amongst the company that
took and sacked Guayaquil. In January, 1686, Townley rescued the French
pirate Grogniet and some 350 Frenchmen who, when attacking the town of
Quibo, were surprised by a Spanish squadron, which burnt their vessels
while the crews were on shore. Townley then sailed north with his French
comrades and sacked Granada.

His next adventure was to take the town of Lavelia, near to Panama, where
he found a rich cargo which the Viceroy had placed on shore because he was
afraid to send it to sea when so many pirates were about.

In August of the same year, Townley's ship was attacked by three Spanish
men-of-war. A furious fight took place, which ended by two of the Spanish
ships being captured and the third burnt. In this action the gallant
Townley was gravely wounded, and died shortly afterwards.


TRISTRIAN, CAPTAIN. French buccaneer.

In the year 1681 Dampier, with other malcontents, broke away from Captain
Sharp and marched on foot across the Isthmus of Darien. After undergoing
terrible hardships for twenty-two days, the party arrived on the Atlantic
seaboard, to find Captain Tristrian with his ship lying in La Sounds Cay.

The buccaneers bought red, blue, and green beads, and knives, scissors,
and looking-glasses from the French pirates to give to their faithful
Indian guides as parting gifts.


TRYER, MATTHEW.

A Carolina pirate, accused and acquitted on a charge of having captured a
sloop belonging to Samuel Salters, of Bermuda, in 1699.


TUCKER, ROBERT.

Of the Island of Jamaica.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew. Tried, condemned, and hanged at
Charleston, South Carolina, on November 8th, 1718. The prisoners were not
defended by counsel, because the members of the South Carolina Bar still
deemed it "a base and vile thing to plead for money or reward." We
understand that the barristers of South Carolina have since persuaded
themselves to overcome this prejudice. The result was that, with the
famous Judge Trott, a veritable terror to pirates, being President of the
Court of Vice-Admiralty, the prisoners had short and ready justice, and
all but four of the thirty-five pirates tried were found guilty.


TUCKERMAN, CAPTAIN.

Sailed with Captain Porter in the West Indies. Captain Johnson gives an
account of the meeting between these two pirate novices and the great
Captain Roberts at Hispaniola.


TURNLEY, CAPTAIN RICHARD.

A New Providence pirate who received the general pardon from Captain
Woodes Rogers in 1718. When, a little later, the scandal of Captain
Rackam's infatuation for Anne Bonny was causing such gossip among the two
thousand ex-pirates who formed the population of the settlement, it was
Turnley who brought news of the affair to the notice of the Governor. In
revenge for this action, Rackam and his lady, one day hearing that Turnley
had sailed to a neighbouring island to catch turtles, followed him. It
happened that Turnley was on shore hunting wild pigs and so escaped, but
Rackam sank his sloop and took his crew away with him as prisoners.


TYLE, CAPTAIN ORT VAN.

A Dutchman from New York.

A successful pirate in the days of the Madagascan sea-rovers. For some
time he sailed in company with Captain James, taking several prizes in the
Indian Ocean.

Van Tyle had a plantation at Madagascar and used to put his prisoners to
work there as slaves, one in particular being the notorious Welsh pirate,
David Williams, who toiled with Van Tyles's other slaves for six months
before making his escape to a friendly tribe in the neighbourhood.


UPTON, BOATSWAIN JOHN.

Born in 1679 of honest parents at Deptford.

Apprenticed to a waterman, he afterwards went to sea, serving on different
men-of-war as a petty officer. Until July, 1723, when 40 years of age,
Upton lived a perfectly honest life, but his wife dying, Upton found she
had contracted various debts and that he was in danger of being arrested
by the creditors. Leaving his four orphans, Upton hurried to Poole in
Dorsetshire, and was taken on as boatswain in the _John and Elizabeth_
(Captain Hooper), bound for Bonavista in Newfoundland. He seems to have
continued to sail as an honest seaman until November 14th, 1725, when
serving as boatswain in the _Perry_ galley, on a voyage between Barbadoes
and Bristol, the vessel was taken by a pirate, Cooper, in the _Night
Rambler_. At his subsequent trial witnesses declared that Upton willingly
joined the pirates, signed their articles, and was afterwards one of their
most active and cruel men.

Upton kept a journal, which was his only witness for his defence, in which
he described how he was forced to sign the pirates' articles under threats
of instant death. If his journal is to be believed, Upton escaped from the
pirates at the first opportunity, landing on the Mosquito coast. After
being arrested by the Spaniards as a spy, he was sent from one prison to
another in Central America, at last being put on board a galleon at Porto
Bello, to be sent to Spain. Escaping, he got aboard a New York sloop and
arrived at Jamaica in December, 1726. While at Port Royal he was pressed
on board H.M.S. _Nottingham_, serving in her for more than two years as
quartermaster, until one day he was accused of having been a pirate. Under
this charge he was brought a prisoner to England in 1729, tried in London,
and hanged, protesting his innocence to the last.


URUJ. See BARBAROSSA.


VALLANUEVA, CAPTAIN.

A Dominican.

Commanded in 1831 a small gaff-topsail schooner, the _General Morazan_,
armed with a brass eight-pounder and carrying a mixed crew of forty-four
men, French, Italian, English, and Creoles of St. Domingo.


VANCLEIN, CAPTAIN MOSES. Dutch filibuster.

Was serving with L'Ollonais's fleet off the coast of Yucatan when a mutiny
broke out, of which Vanclein was the ringleader. He persuaded the
malcontents to sail with him along the coast till they came to Costa Rica.
There they landed and marched to the town of Veraguas, which they seized
and pillaged. The pirates got little booty, only eight pounds of gold, it
proving to be a poor place.


VANE, CAPTAIN CHARLES.

Famous for his piratical activities off the coast of North America,
specially the Carolinas.

In 1718, when Woodes Rogers was sent by the English Government to break up
the pirate stronghold in the Bahama Islands, all the pirates at New
Providence Island surrendered to Rogers and received the King's pardon
except Vane, who, after setting fire to a prize he had, slipped out of the
bay as Rogers with his two men-of-war entered. Vane sailed to the coast of
Carolina, as did other West Indian pirates who found their old haunts too
warm for them.

Vane is first heard of as being actively engaged in stealing from the
Spaniards the silver which they were salving from a wrecked galleon in the
Gulf of Florida. Tiring of this, Vane stole a vessel and ranged up and
down the coast from Florida to New York, taking ship after ship, until at
last the Governor of South Carolina sent out a Colonel Rhet in an armed
sloop to try and take him. On one occasion Vane met the famous Blackbeard,
whom he saluted with his great guns loaded with shot. This compliment of
one pirate chief to another was returned in like kind, and then "mutual
civilities" followed for several days between the two pirate captains and
their crews, these civilities taking the form of a glorious debauch in a
quiet creek on the coast.

Vane soon had a change of fortune, when, meeting with a French man-of-war,
he decided to decline an engagement and to seek safety in flight, greatly
to the anger of his crew. For this he was obliged to stand the test of the
vote of the whole crew, who passed a resolution against his honour and
dignity, and branded him a coward, deprived him of his command, and packed
him off with a few of his adherents in a small sloop. Vane, not
discouraged by this reverse of fortune, rose again from the bottom rung of
the ladder to success, and quickly increased in strength of ships and
crew, until one day, being overcome by a sudden tornado, he lost
everything but his life, being washed up on a small uninhabited island off
the Honduras coast. Here he managed to support life by begging food from
the fishermen who occasionally came there in their canoes.

At last a ship put in for water, commanded by one Captain Holford, who
happened to be an old friend of Vane's. Vane naturally was pleased at this
piece of good fortune, and asked his dear old friend to take him off the
island in his ship, to which Holford replied: "Charles, I shan't trust you
aboard my ship, unless I carry you as a prisoner, for I shall have you
caballing with my men, knock me on the head, and run away with my ship
a-pirating." No promises of good behaviour from Vane would prevail on his
friend to rescue him; in fact, Captain Holford's parting remark was that
he would be returning in a month, and that if he then found Vane still on
the island he would carry him to Jamaica to be hanged.

Soon after Holford's departure another ship put in for water, none of the
crew of which knew Vane by sight, and he was too crafty to let them find
out the notorious pirate he was. They consented to take off the
shipwrecked mariner, when, just as all seemed to be going well, back came
the ship of friend Holford. Holford, who seems to have been a sociable
kind of man, was well acquainted with the captain who was befriending
Vane, and Holford was invited to dine on board his ship. As the guest was
passing along the deck of his host's ship on his way to the great cabin he
chanced to glance down the open hold, and there who should he see but his
dear old friend Vane hard at work; for he had already won his new master's
good graces by being a "brisk hand." Holford at once informed his host
that he was entertaining a notorious pirate, and with his consent clapped
Vane in irons, and removed him to his own ship, and when he arrived in
Jamaica handed his old friend to the justices, who quickly tried,
convicted, and hanged him.


VANHORN, CAPTAIN NICHOLAS. A Dutch filibuster.

Of Hispaniola.

Sailed from England in 1681 in command of the _Mary and Martha_, _alias_
the _St. Nicholas_, a merchant ship. Vanhorn soon showed his hand by
putting two of his merchants ashore at Cadiz and stealing four Spanish
guns. Next he sailed to the Canary Islands, and then to the Guinea coast,
plundering ships and stealing negroes, until November, 1682, when he
arrived at the city of San Domingo. In April, 1683, he picked up some 300
buccaneers at Petit Goave, and joined the filibuster Laurens in the Gulf
of Honduras with six other buccaneer captains, who were planning an attack
on the rich city of Vera Cruz. The fleet arrived off the city in May, and
the pirates, hearing that the Spaniards were expecting the arrival of two
ships from Caracas, they crowded a landing party of 800 men into two
ships, and, displaying Spanish colours, stood in boldly for the city. The
inhabitants, imagining these were the ships they were expecting, actually
lit bonfires to pilot them into the harbour. Landing on May 17th two miles
away, they soon found themselves masters of the town and forts, all the
sentinels being asleep. For four days they plundered the churches,
convents, and houses, and threatened to burn the cathedral, in which they
had put all the prisoners, unless more booty was forthcoming. An
Englishman found the Governor hiding in some hay in a loft, and he was
ransomed for 70,000 pieces of eight. While this was taking place a Spanish
fleet of fourteen ships had arrived from Cadiz, and anchored just outside
the harbour, but would not venture to land nor to attack the buccaneer
ships. The buccaneers, feeling it was time to depart, sailed right past
the fleet without opposition to a cay not far off, and there divided the
spoils; each of the 1,000 sailors getting 800 pieces of eight as his
share, while Vanhorn's own share, was 24,000 pieces of eight. This
division of the spoil did not take place without some bickering, and the
two leaders, Vanhorn and Laurens, came to blows, and Vanhorn was wounded
in the wrist. Although the wound was little more than a scratch, he died
of gangrene a fortnight later.

It is significant that Vanhorn had originally been sent out by the
Governor of Hispaniola to hunt for pirates, but once out of sight of land
and away from authority the temptation to get rich quickly was too great
to resist, so that he joined the pirates in the expedition to sack Vera
Cruz.


VEALE, CAPTAIN.

On July 1st, 1685, he arrived at New London in a sloop, but was compelled
to hurry away, being recognized as a pirate by one of the crew of a ship
he had previously taken in Virginia.


VEALE, THOMAS.

One of four New England pirates who in the middle of the seventeenth
century rowed up the Saugus river and landed at a place called Lynn Woods.
The boat contained, besides the pirates, a quantity of plunder and a
beautiful young woman. They built a hut on Dungeon Rock, dug a well, and
lived there until the woman died. Three of the pirates were captured, and
ended their days on the gallows in England.

Thomas Veale escaped and went to live in a cave, where he is supposed to
have hidden his booty, but he continued to work as a cordwainer. In the
earthquake of 1658 the cave was blocked up by pieces of rock, and Veale
was never seen again.


VERPRE, CAPTAIN. French filibuster.

His ship _Le Postillion_ carried a crew of twenty-five men and was armed
with two guns.


VIGERON, CAPTAIN. French filibuster.

Of San Domingo.

Commanded a bark, _La Louse_, thirty men and four guns.


VILLA RISE.

In the year 1621 this Moorish pirate commanded a small squadron of five
vessels which took an English ship, the _George Bonaventure_ (Captain John
Rawlins, Plymouth), in the Straits of Gibraltar. One of the finest deeds
ever achieved by English sailors was the escape of Rawlins and some of his
crew from the Moors at Alexandria in a stolen ship.


VAN VIN, MOSES. Buccaneer.

One of L'Ollonais's officers. After burning Puerto Cavallo and torturing
and murdering the inhabitants, L'Ollonais marched away to attack the town
of San Pedro with 300 of his crew, leaving van Vin as his lieutenant to
govern the rest of his men during his absence.


VIRGIN, HENRY.

Of Bristol.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew of the _Royal James_. Hanged for piracy
at White Point, Charleston, South Carolina, on November 8th, 1718, and
buried in the marsh below low-water mark.


VIVON, CAPTAIN M. LA. French filibuster.

Commanded the _Cour Valant_ of La Rochelle. In December, 1668, his ship
was seized by Captain Collier for having robbed an English ship of
provisions.


WAFER, LIONEL. Surgeon, buccaneer, and author.

Believed to have been born about the year 1660.

He could speak Gaelic and also Erse, which languages he had learnt during
his childhood, which was spent partly in the Highlands of Scotland and
partly in Ireland.

In 1677 he sailed as mate to the surgeon of the _Great Ann_, of London
(Captain Zachary Browne), bound for Java.

Two years later, he again sailed as surgeon's mate on a voyage to the West
Indies. He deserted his ship at Jamaica and set himself up as a surgeon at
Port Royal, but one day meeting with two noted buccaneers, Captain Linch
and Captain Cook, he agreed to sail with them as ship's surgeon.

Wafer's subsequent adventures are recounted by Basil Ringrose in his
"Dangerous Voyage and Bold Assaults of Captain Bartholomew Sharp and
Others," and by William Dampier in his "New Voyage Round the World."
After taking part in 1679 in the futile expedition of the buccaneers to
Panama, Wafer joined the party of malcontents who left Captain Sharp and
returned on foot across the Isthmus of Darien. Wafer was accidentally
wounded in the knee by an explosion of gunpowder on May 5th, 1681, which
he recounts in his narrative as follows: "I was sitting on the ground near
one of our Men, who was drying of Gunpowder in a Silver Plate: But not
managing it as he should, it blew up and scorch'd my knee to that degree,
that the bone was left bare, the Flesh being torn away, and my Thigh burnt
for a great way above it. I applied to it immediately such Remedies as I
had in my knapsack: and being unwilling to be left behind by my
companions, I made hard shift to jog on."

The whole story of these adventures is told by Wafer in a book he wrote,
and which was published in London in 1699. It is called "A New Voyage and
Description of the Isthmus of America, giving an Account of the Author's
Abode there," and is illustrated by some quaint copperplates.

Wafer and his companions suffered extreme hardships as they struggled
through the dense tropical jungle during the wettest season of the year.

On one occasion when in danger of his life, Wafer was spared by the
Indians owing to his skill as a phlebotomist, after he had been allowed to
exhibit his skill to an Indian chief called Lacentra, when he bled one of
his wives so successfully that the chief made Wafer his inseparable
companion, to the no little discomfort of the buccaneer, who wished to
reach the Atlantic and rejoin his companions who had left him behind.

Wafer described the birds, animals, fishes, and insects with considerable
minuteness, although it is obvious that he had no special training in, or
great gift for, natural history. Wafer eventually reached Philadelphia,
where he availed himself of King James's general pardon to pirates.


WAKE, CAPTAIN THOMAS.

A notorious pirate, one of those particularly named in the Royal Warrant
issued in 1695 to Captain Kidd, authorizing him to go in search of the
American pirates.


WALDEN, JOHN, _alias_ "MISS NANNEY."

Born in Somersetshire.

Taken in the _Blessing_, of Lymington, by Roberts in Newfoundland, he
joined the pirates, and was later on hanged at the age of 24 in West
Africa. Walden was one of Captain Roberts's most active men. On taking
Captain Traher's ship, Walden carried a pole-axe with which he wrenched
open locked doors and boxes. He was a bold and daring man, of violent
temper, and was known amongst his shipmates by the nickname of Miss
Nanney. He lost a leg during the attack on the _Swallow_. After the
pirates took the _King Solomon_, Walden had to get up the anchor, but he
cut the cable, explaining to the captain that the weather was too hot to
go straining and crying "Yo Hope," and he could easily buy another anchor
when he got to London.


WANSLEY, THOMAS.

A negro steward on the brig _Vineyard_, he mutinied and assisted to murder
the captain and mate, afterwards becoming one of Captain Charles Gibbs's
crew. Hanged at New York in February, 1831.


WANT, CAPTAIN.

A Carolina pirate who was referred to at the trial of Captain Avery's crew
at London in 1696.


WARD.

One of the first English pirates to establish himself on the Barbary coast
in North Africa. By the year 1613 some thirty others had their
headquarters at the mouth of the Sebu River.


WARD, CAPTAIN.

As a poor English sailor he went to Barbary, turned Mohammedan, offered
his services to the Moors, and became captain of a galley. He grew to be
very rich, and "lived like a Bashaw in Barbary."


WARREN, WILLIAM.

Joined Captain Pound's crew from Lovell's Island.


WATERS, JOHN.

Of Devonshire.

Quartermaster to Captain Charles Harris. Tried and hanged at Newport,
Rhode Island, on July 19th, 1734. Aged 35.


WATKINS, JOHN.

An English soldier stationed at Fort Loyal, Falmouth, Maine. Deserted and
sailed with the pirate Pound. Killed at Tarpaulin Cove in 1689.


WATLING, CAPTAIN JOHN. Buccaneer.

When Bartholomew Sharp's crew mutinied on New Year's Day in 1681 on the
_Most Holy Trinity_, they clapped their captain in irons and put him down
below on the ballast, and elected an old pirate and a "stout seaman," John
Watling, in his place. One of the reasons for the revolt was said to be
the ungodliness of Captain Sharp.

Watling began his command by giving orders for the strict keeping of the
Sabbath Day, and on January 9th the buccaneers observed Sunday as a day
apart, the first for many months. One of the first acts of this godly
Captain Watling was to cruelly shoot an old man, a prisoner, whom he
suspected, quite wrongly, of not telling the truth.

On January 30th Watling headed a surprise attack on the town of Arica in
North Chile, but it turned out later that the Spaniards had three days'
warning of the intended attack, and had gathered together no less than
2,000 defenders. A furious attack was made, with great slaughter of the
Spanish defenders and considerable loss amongst the pirates. In one attack
Watling placed 100 of his prisoners in front of his storming party, hoping
this would prevent the enemy firing at them. After taking the town, the
buccaneers were driven out owing to the arrival of a number of Lima
soldiers. During the retreat from the town Watling was shot in the liver
and died. Perhaps he gave his name to Watling Island in the Bahama
Islands, the first spot of America that Christopher Columbus ever saw, and
a great resort of the buccaneers.


WATSON, HENRY.

One of Captain Lowther's crew in the _Happy Delivery_. Hanged at St. Kitts
on March 11th, 1722.


WATTS, EDWARD.

Born at Dunmore.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Hanged in 1722 at the age of 22.


WATTS, SAMUEL.

Of Lovell's Island.

One of Captain Pound's crew.


WATTS, WILLIAM.

An Irishman.

Hanged, at the age of 23, along with the rest of Roberts's crew.


WAY, JOHN.

Tried at Boston in 1704 for piracy with the rest of the crew of the
_Charles_ brigantine.


WEAVER, CAPTAIN BRIGSTOCK.

Of Hereford, England.

One of Captain Anstis's crew in the _Good Fortune_ when he took the
_Morning Star_. After the prize had been converted for Anstis's use,
Weaver was given command of the _Good Fortune_. He proved himself to be a
capable pirate captain, taking between fifty and sixty sailing ships in
the West Indies and on the Banks of Newfoundland.

Here are particulars of a few of his prizes:

In August, 1722, he took a Dutch ship, and out of her got 100 pieces of
holland, value £800, and 1,000 pieces of eight. On November 20th in the
same year he plundered the _Dolphin_, of London (Captain William Haddock),
of 300 pieces of eight and forty gallons of rum.

Out of the _Don Carlos_ (Lot Neekins, master) he stole 400 ounces of
silver, fifty gallons of rum, 1,000 pieces of eight, 100 pistols, and
other valuable goods.

Out of the _Portland_, ten pipes of wine valued at £250.

This period of prosperity came to an end, for in May, 1723, Weaver,
dressed in rags, was begging charity at the door of a Mr. Thomas Smith in
Bristol, telling a plausible tale of how he had been taken and robbed by
some wicked pirates, but had lately managed to escape from them. The
kindly Mr. Smith, together with a Captain Edwards, gave Weaver £10 and
provided him with a lodging at the Griffin Inn. Being now dressed in good
clothes, Weaver enjoyed walking about the streets of Bristol, until one
day he met with a sea-captain who claimed former acquaintance and invited
him into a neighbouring tavern to share a bottle of wine with him. Over
this the captain reminded the pirate that he had been one of his victims,
and that Weaver had once stolen from him a considerable quantity of
liquor; but at the same time he had not forgotten that the pirate had used
him very civilly, and that therefore, if he would give him four hogsheads
of cider, nothing further would be said about the matter. Weaver would
not, or could not, produce these, and was apprehended, brought to London,
and there tried and sentenced to death, and hanged at Execution Dock.


WELLS, LIEUTENANT JOSEPH.

An officer on board Captain John Quelch's _Charles_ galley. Attempted to
escape at Gloucester, Massachusetts, in the _Larimore_, but was captured
by Major Sewell and brought to Salem, and there secured in the town gaol
until tried for piracy at Boston in June, 1704.


WEST, RICHARD.

One of Captain Lowther's crew. Hanged at St. Kitts in March, 1722.


WETHERLEY, TEE.

A Massachusetts pirate, with only one eye. Captured in 1699 with the
pirate Joseph Bradish and put in prison. They escaped two months later. A
reward of £200 was offered for the recapture of Wetherley, which was
gained by a Kennekeck Indian called Essacambuit, who brought him back to
prison. He was taken, in irons, to England in H.M.S. _Advice_ in 1700,
and tried and hanged in London.


WHETSTONE, SIR THOMAS, or WHITSTONE. Buccaneer.

In 1663 he commanded a ship, a Spanish prize, armed with seven guns and
carrying a crew of sixty men. In August, 1666, Sir Thomas was with a small
English garrison of some sixty men in the buccaneer stronghold of New
Providence in the Bahama Islands. Suddenly a Spanish fleet arrived from
Porto Bello, and after a siege of three days the garrison capitulated. The
three English captains were carried prisoners to Panama and there cast
into a dungeon and bound in irons for seventeen months.


WHITE, CAPTAIN THOMAS. South Sea pirate. An Englishman. Born at Plymouth.

As a young man he was taken prisoner by a French pirate off the coast of
Guinea. The French massacred their prisoners by painting targets on their
chests and using them for rifle practice. White alone was saved by an
heroic Frenchman throwing himself in front of him and receiving the volley
in his own body. White sailed with the French pirates, who were wrecked on
the coast of Madagascar. White himself managed to escape, and found safety
with a native, King Bavaw, but the French pirates were all massacred.
White not very long afterwards joined another pirate ship, commanded by a
Captain Read, with whom he sailed, helping to take several prizes, amongst
others a slave ship, the _Speaker_. White soon found himself possessed of
a considerable fortune, and settled down with his crew at a place called
Methelage in Madagascar, marrying a native woman, and leading the peaceful
life of a planter. The call of piracy at length proving irresistible, he
sailed before the mast with Captain Halsey, then returned to his native
wife and home, shortly afterwards to die of fever.

In his will, he left legacies to various relatives and friends, and
appointed three guardians for his son, all of different nationalities,
with instructions that the boy should be taken to England to be educated,
which was duly done.

White was buried with the full ceremonies of the Church of England, his
sword and pistols being carried on his coffin, and three English and one
French volley fired over his grave.


WHITE, JAMES.

Hanged in Virginia in 1718 along with the rest of Captain Edward Teach's
crew.


WHITE, ROBERT.

One of Captain George Lowther's crew. Hanged on March 22nd, 1722, at St.
Kitts.


WHITE, WILLIAM.

A Newfoundland fish-splitter. With John Phillips and three others, he
stole a fishing-boat at St. Peter's Harbour in Newfoundland in August,
1723. The other four were made officers in the pirate craft, White having
the distinction of being the only private man in the crew of five. He
appears to have been a man lacking in ambition, as he never showed any
desire to become even a petty officer amongst the pirates; in fact, we
hear no more of William until June 2nd, 1724, when he was hanged at Boston
and "dy'd very penitently, with the Assistance of two grave Divines that
attended him."


WHITTING, WILLIAM.

One of Captain Quelch's crew. In 1704 we read that he "lyes sick, like to
dye, not yet examined" in the gaol at Marblehead, when awaiting trial for
piracy.


WIFE, FRANCIS.

An unwilling mutineer with Philip Roche in a French vessel sailing from
Cork in 1721.


WILES, WILLIAM.

One of John Quelch's crew of the brigantine _Charles_. Tried at Boston in
1704.


WILGRESS, CAPTAIN. Buccaneer.

Of Jamaica.

Sent by the Governor of Jamaica in 1670 to search for, and capture or
sink, a Dutchman called Captain Yallahs, who had entered the Spanish
service to cruise against the English logwood cutters. But Wilgress,
instead of carrying out his orders, went a-buccaneering on his own
account, chasing a Spanish vessel ashore, stealing logwood, and burning
Spanish houses along the coast.


WILLIAMS, CAPTAIN JOHN, _alias_ "YANKY." Buccaneer.

In 1683, when the pirate Hamlin in his famous ship, _La Trompeuse_, was
playing havoc with the English shipping around Jamaica, Governor Lynch
offered Williams a free pardon, men, victuals, and naturalization, and
£200 as well if he would catch the Frenchman.


WILLIAMS, CAPTAIN MORRIS. Buccaneer.

In November, 1664, he applied to Governor Modyford to be allowed to bring
into Port Royal, Jamaica, a rich prize of logwood, indigo, and silver,
and, in spite of the Governor's refusal, he brought the ship in. The goods
were seized and sold in the interest of the Spanish owner. At this time
the English Government was doing all it could to stamp out the pirates and
buccaneers.


WILLIAMS, CAPTAIN PAUL.

A Carolina pirate, who began as a wrecker with the pirate Bellamy in the
West Indies. He later on took to piracy and ended a not too glorious
career by being hanged at Eastman, Massachusetts. Williams was one of the
pirates who accepted King George's offer of pardon at New Providence
Island in 1718.


WILLIAMS, DAVID.

This son of a Welsh farmer was a poor pirate but a born soldier. He was
described by one who knew him as being morose, sour, unsociable, and
ill-tempered, and that he "knew as little of the sea or of ships as he did
of the Arts of Natural Philosophy." But it is recorded to his credit that
he was not cruel. He started life in a merchant ship bound for India, and
was accidentally left behind in Madagascar. Taken care of by friendly
natives, he fought so well on the side of his benefactors in an
inter-tribal battle that the King made him his intimate friend. A little
later this tribe was wiped out and Williams taken prisoner. The King of
this hostile tribe, knowing Williams to be a brave man, put him in charge
of his army, for his success as a leader was known far and wide. He was
next seized by a very powerful King, Dempaino, who made him
Commander-in-Chief over his army of 6,000 men, and supplied him with
slaves, clothes, and everything he could want. After several years as
commander of Dempaino's army, a pirate ship, the _Mocha_ (Captain
Culliford), arrived on the coast, and Williams escaped in her and went for
a cruise. He was afterwards captured by the Dutch pirate Ort Van Tyle of
New York, and made to work as a slave on his plantation. After six months
he escaped and sought safety with a Prince Rebaiharang, with whom he lived
for a year. He next joined a Dutchman, Pro, who had a small settlement,
to be again taken prisoner by an English frigate. In a skirmish between
the crew and some natives, Williams and Pro managed to escape, and,
procuring a boat, joined Captain White's pirates at Methalage, in
Madagascar.

Williams now spent his time pirating, unsuccessfully, until one day in a
sloop he attempted a raid on an Arab town at Boyn. This attempt proved a
fiasco, and Williams was caught by the Arabs, cruelly tortured, and
finally killed by a lance thrust. He was so loved and admired by the
Madagascar natives that his friend and benefactor, King Dempaino, seized
the Arab chief of Boyn and executed him in revenge for the death of
Williams. Williams seems to have been as much beloved by the natives as he
was hated by men of his own colour. As a pirate he was a failure, but as a
soldier of fortune with the native tribes he was a great success.


WILLIAMS, JOHN.

A Cornish pirate, who sailed from Jamaica with Captain Morrice, and was
captured by the Dutch. Eventually he reached Boston, and sailed with
Captain Roderigo in 1674 in the _Edward and Thomas_, a Boston vessel.

Tried for piracy, but acquitted.


WILLIAMS, LIEUTENANT JAMES. Welsh pirate.

Sailed as a hand on board the _George_ galley from Amsterdam in 1724.
Conspiring with Gow to bring about a mutiny, he took an active part in
murdering the captain, the chief mate, super cargo, and surgeon. Gow
promoted him to be his mate. He was a violent, brutal man, and a bully. On
one occasion, he accused Gow of cowardice, and snapped his pistol in Gow's
face, but the weapon failed to go off, and two seamen standing by shot
Williams, wounding him in the arm and belly. The next day Gow sent away a
crew of prisoners in a sloop he had taken and plundered, and Williams,
heavily manacled, was cast into the hold of this vessel, with orders that
he should be given up as a pirate to the first English man-of-war they
should meet with. He was taken to Lisbon and there put on board H.M.S.
_Argyle_, and carried to London. When Gow and his crew eventually arrived
in irons at the Marshalsea Prison, they found Williams already there
awaiting trial. Hanged at Newgate on June 11th, 1725, his body being
hanged in chains at Blackwall.


WILLIAMS, WILLIAM.

"Habitation--nigh Plymouth."

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Deserted the pirates at Sierra Leone, but
was delivered up by the negroes, and as a punishment received two lashes
from the whole ship's company. Hanged at the age of 40.


WILLIS, ROBERT.

One of Captain George Lowther's crew. Tried for piracy at St. Kitts in
March, 1722, and acquitted.


WILSON, ALEXANDER.

One of the mutineers of the ship _Antonio_. Hanged at Boston in 1672.


WILSON, GEORGE. Surgeon and pirate.

Originally he sailed as surgeon in a Liverpool ship, the _Tarlton_, which
was taken by the pirate Bartholomew Roberts. Wilson voluntarily joined the
pirates. One day, being accidentally left on shore, he had to remain
amongst the negroes at Sestos on the West Coast of Africa for five
months, until he was eventually rescued by a Captain Sharp, of the
_Elizabeth_, who ransomed Wilson for the value of £3 5s. in goods. Wilson
was again captured by Roberts, and served with him as surgeon. At his
trial for piracy at Cape Coast Castle in 1722, witnesses proved that
Wilson was "very alert and cheerful at meeting with Roberts, hailed him,
told him he was glad to see him, and would come on board presently,
borrowing a clean Shirt and Drawers" from the witness "for his better
Appearance and Reception: signed the Articles willingly," and tried to
persuade him, the witness, to sign also, as then they would each get £600
or £700 a man in the next voyage to Brazil.

When the election of senior surgeon took place, Wilson wanted to be
appointed, as then he would receive a bigger share of the booty. Wilson
became very intimate with Captain Roberts, and told him that if ever they
were taken by one of the "Turnip-Man's ships"--_i.e.,_ a man-of-war--they
would blow up their ship and go to hell together. But the surgeon proved
such a lazy ruffian, neglecting to dress the wounded crew, that Roberts
threatened to cut his ears off.

At the trial Wilson was found guilty and condemned to be hanged, but his
execution was withheld until the King's pleasure was known, because it was
believed that owing to information given by Wilson a mutiny of the
prisoners was prevented.


WILSON, JAMES.

Of Dublin.

One of Major Stede Bonnet's crew in the _Royal James_. Hanged at
Charleston, South Carolina, on November 8th, 1718, and buried in the marsh
below low-water mark.


WILSON, JOHN.

Of New London County.

Tried for piracy in 1723 at Newport, Rhode Island, and acquitted.


WINTER, CAPTAIN CHRISTOPHER.

Of New Providence Island.

He took a sloop off the coast of Jamaica, the mate on board which was one
Edward England, who, on Winter's persuasion, turned pirate and soon
reached the summit of his new profession.

In 1718 Winter accepted the King's offer of pardon to all pirates who
surrendered. Winter soon afterwards not only returned to piracy, but did
even worse, for he surrendered to the Spanish Governor of Cuba, and turned
Papist. From Cuba he carried on piracy, chiefly preying on English
vessels, and made raids on the coast of Jamaica, stealing slaves, which he
took away to Cuba. The Governor of Jamaica, Sir Nicholas Laws, sent
Lieutenant Joseph Laws, in H.M.S. _Happy_ snow, to demand the surrender of
Winter and another renegade, Nicholas Brown, but nothing resulted but an
exchange of acrimonious letters between the Lieutenant and the Governor of
Cuba.


WINTER, JOHN.

One of Gow's crew in the _Revenge_. Hanged in 1725 at Wapping.


WINTER, WILLIAM, _alias_ MUSTAPHA.

A renegade English sailor amongst the Algiers pirates. Taken prisoner in
the _Exchange_, on which vessel he was carpenter.


WINTHROP.

One of Fly's crew. Took an active part in the mutiny aboard the
_Elizabeth_. Winthrop it was who chopped off the hand of Captain Green,
and in a fight with Jenkins, the mate, severed his shoulder with an axe
and then threw the still living officer overboard. He was hanged at Boston
on July 4th, 1726.


WITHERBORN, CAPTAIN FRANCIS.

Captured, with his ship, by Major Beeston and brought to Jamaica. Tried
for piracy at Port Royal, he was condemned to death, and sent a prisoner
to England.


WOLLERVY, CAPTAIN WILLIAM.

A New England pirate who sailed in company with a Captain Henley in 1683
off the Island of Elenthera. He burnt his vessel near Newport, Rhode
Island, where he and his crew disappeared with their plunder.


WOOD, WILLIAM.

Native of York.

One of Captain Roberts's crew. Hanged in April, 1722, at the age of 27.


WORLEY, CAPTAIN.

His reign was short, lasting but six months from start to finish. He was
first heard of in September, 1718, when he set out, in company with eight
other desperadoes, from New York in a small open boat "upon the account."
They were provided with a few biscuits, a dried tongue, and a keg of
water, half a dozen old muskets and some ammunition. They sailed down the
coast for 150 miles, entered the river Delaware, and rowed up to
Newcastle, and there seized a shallop. The news of this enterprise was
quickly spread abroad, and roused the whole coast. Going down the river
again, still in their open boat, they took another sloop belonging to a
mulatto called Black Robbin. They changed into this sloop, and next day
met with another sloop from Hull, which suited their purpose better. By
now the country was much alarmed, and the Government sent out H.M.S.
_Phoenix_, of twenty guns, to cruise in search of the pirates. In the
meantime the latter sailed to the Bahama Islands and took another sloop
and a brigantine. Worley now commanded a tidy craft of six guns and a crew
of twenty-five men, and flew a black ensign with a white death's head upon
it. So far all had gone well with the pirates, but one day, when cruising
off the Cape of Virginia, Worley sighted two sloops as he thought making
for the James River, but which were really armed vessels sent in search of
him. Worley stood in to cut them off, little dreaming what they really
were. The two sloops and the pirate ship all standing in together, Worley
hoisted his black flag. This terrified the inhabitants of Jamestown, who
thought that three pirates were about to attack them. Hurried preparations
for defence were made, when all of a sudden the people on shore were
surprised to see the supposed pirates fighting amongst themselves. No
quarter was asked, and the pirates were all killed in hand-to-hand
fighting except Captain Worley and one other pirate, who were captured
alive but desperately wounded. The formalities were quickly got through
for trying these two men, so that next day they were hanged before death
from their wounds could save them from their just punishment. "Thus,"
writes Captain Johnson, "Worley's beginning was bold and desperate, his
course short and prosperous, and his end bloody and disgraceful."


WORMALL, DANIEL.

Master on the brigantine _Charles_, commanded by Captain John Quelch.
Attempted to escape from Gloucester, Massachusetts, by sailing off in the
_Larimore_ galley, but was followed and caught by Major Sewell and taken
to Salem. Here he was kept in the town gaol until sent to Boston to be
tried for piracy in June, 1704.


YALLAHS, CAPTAIN, or YELLOWS. A Dutch buccaneer.

In 1671 fled from Jamaica to Campeachy, there selling his frigate to the
Spanish Governor for 7,000 pieces of eight. He entered the Spanish service
to cruise against the English logwood cutters, at which business he was
successful, taking more than a dozen of these vessels off the coast of
Honduras.


YEATES, CAPTAIN.

In 1718 this Carolina pirate commanded a sloop which acted as tender to
Captain Vane. When at Sullivan Island, Carolina, Yeates, finding himself
master of a fine sloop armed with several guns and a crew of fifteen men,
and with a valuable cargo of slaves aboard, slipped his anchor in the
middle of the night and sailed away.

Yeates thought highly of himself as a pirate and had long resented the way
Vane treated him as a subordinate, and was glad to get a chance of sailing
on his own account. Yeates, having escaped, came to North Edisto River,
some ten leagues off Charleston. There, sending hurried word to the
Governor to ask for the Royal pardon, he surrendered himself, his crew,
and two negro slaves. Yeates was pardoned, and his negroes were returned
to Captain Thurston, from whom they had been stolen.


ZEKERMAN, ANDREW.

A Dutch pirate, one of Peter M'Kinlie's gang, who murdered Captain Glass
and his family on board a ship sailing from the Canary Islands to England.
Zekerman was the most brutal of the whole crew of mutineers.

He was hanged in chains near Dublin on December 19th, 1765.















